作使徒的保罗，（不是由于人，也不是借着人，乃是借着耶稣基督，与叫他从死里复活的父神）
Paul, an Apostle (not from men, and not through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who made him come back from the dead),

和一切与我同在的众弟兄，写信给加拉太的各教会。
And all the brothers who are with me, to the churches of Galatia:

愿恩惠平安，从父神与我们的主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ,

基督照我们父神的旨意为我们的罪舍己，要救我们脱离这罪恶的世代。
Who gave himself for our sins, so that he might make us free from this present evil world, after the purpose of our God and Father:

但愿荣耀归于神直到永永远远。阿们。
To whom be the glory for ever and ever. So be it.

我希奇你们这么快离开那借着基督之恩召你们的，去从别的福音。
I am surprised that you are being so quickly turned away from him whose word came to you in the grace of Christ, to good news of a different sort;

那并不是福音不过有些人搅扰你们，要把基督的福音更改了。
Which is not another sort: only there are some who give you trouble, desiring to make changes in the good news of Christ.

但无论是我们，是天上来的使者，若传福音给你们，与我们所传给你们的不同，他就应当被咒诅。
But even if we, or an angel from heaven, were to be a preacher to you of good news other than that which we have given you, let there be a curse on him.

我们已经说了，现在又说，若有人传福音给你们，与你们所领受的不同，他就应当被咒诅。
As we have said before, so say I now again, If any man is a preacher to you of any good news other than that which has been given to you, let there be a curse on him.

我现在是要得人的心呢？还是要得神的心呢？我岂是讨人的喜欢吗？若仍旧讨人的喜欢，我就不是基督的仆人了。
Am I now using arguments to men, or God? or is it my desire to give men pleasure? if I was still pleasing men, I would not be a servant of Christ.

弟兄们，我告诉你们，我素来所传的福音，不是出于人的意思。
Because I say to you, my brothers, that the good news of which I was the preacher is not man's.

因为我不是从人领受的，也不是人教导我的，乃是从耶稣基督启示来的。
For I did not get it from man, and I was not given teaching in it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.

你们听见我从前在犹太教中所行的事，怎样极力逼迫残害神的教会。
For news has come to you of my way of life in the past in the Jews' religion, how I was cruel without measure to the church of God, and did great damage to it:

我又在犹太教中，比我本国许多同岁的人更有长进，为我祖宗的遗传更加热心。
And I went farther in the Jews' religion than a number of my generation among my countrymen, having a more burning interest in the beliefs handed down from my fathers.

然而那把我从母腹里分别出来，又施恩召我的神，
But when it was the good pleasure of God, by whom I was marked out even from my mother's body, through his grace,

既然乐意将他儿子启示在我心里，叫我把他传在外邦人中，我就没有与属血气的人商量，
To give the revelation of his Son in me, so that I might give the news of him to the Gentiles; then I did not take the opinion of flesh and blood,

也没有上耶路撒冷去，见那些比我先作使徒的。惟独往亚拉伯去。后又回到大马色。
And I went not up to Jerusalem to those who were Apostles before me; but I went away into Arabia, and again I came back to Damascus.

过了三年，才上耶路撒冷去见矶法，和他同住了十五天。
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to see Cephas, and was there with him fifteen days.

至于别的使徒，除了主的兄弟雅各，我都没有看见。
But of the other Apostles I saw only James, the Lord's brother.

我写给你们的，不是谎话，这是我在神面前说的。
Now God is witness that the things which I am writing to you are true.

以后我到了叙利亚和基利家境内。
Then I came to the parts of Syria and Cilicia.

那时，犹太信基督的各教会都没有见过我的面。
And the churches of Judaea which were in Christ still had no knowledge of my face or person:

不过听说，那从前逼迫我们的，现在传扬他原先所残害的真道。
Only it came to their ears that he who at one time was cruel to us is now preaching the faith which before had been attacked by him;

他们就为我的缘故，归荣耀给神。
And they gave glory to God in me.

过了十四年，我同巴拿巴又上耶路撒冷去，并带着提多同去。
Then after the space of fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus with me.

我是奉启示上去的，把我在外邦人中所传的福音，对弟兄们陈说。却是背地里对那有名望之人说的。惟恐我现在，或是从前，徒然奔跑。
And I went up by revelation; and I put before them the good news which I was preaching among the Gentiles, but privately before those who were of good name, so that the work which I was or had been doing might not be without effect.

但与我同去的提多，虽是希利尼人，也没有勉强他受割礼。
But not even Titus who was with me, being a Greek, was made to undergo circumcision:

因为有偷着引进来的假弟兄，私下窥探我们在基督耶稣里的自由，要叫我们作奴仆。
And that because of the false brothers let in secretly, who came searching out our free condition which we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might make servants of us;

我们就是一刻的工夫，也没有容让顺服他们，为要叫福音的真理仍存在你们中间。
To whom we gave way not even for an hour; so that the true words of the good news might still be with you.

至于那些有名望的，不论他是何等人，都与我无干。神不以外貌取人。那些有名望的，并没有加增我什么。
But from those who seemed to be important (whatever they were has no weight with me: God does not take man's person into account): those who seemed to be important gave nothing new to me;

反倒看见了主托我传福音给那未受割礼的人，正如托彼得传福音给那受割礼的人。
But, quite the opposite, when they saw that I had been made responsible for preaching the good news to those without circumcision, even as Peter had been for those of the circumcision

（那感动彼得，叫他为受割礼之人作使徒的，也感动我，叫我为外邦人作使徒）
(Because he who was working in Peter as the Apostle of the circumcision was working no less in me among the Gentiles);

又知道所赐给我的恩典，那称为教会柱石的雅各，矶法，约翰，就向我和巴拿巴用右手行相交之礼，叫我们往外邦人那里去，他们往受割礼的人那里去。
When they saw the grace which was given to me, James and Cephas and John, who had the name of being pillars, gave to me and Barnabas their right hands as friends so that we might go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision;

只是愿意我们记念穷人。这也是我本来热心去行的。
Only it was their desire that we would give thought to the poor; which very thing I had much in mind to do.

后来矶法到了安提阿，因他有可责之处，我就当面抵挡他。
But when Cephas came to Antioch, I made a protest against him to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong.

从雅各那里来的人，未到以先，他和外邦人一同吃饭。及至他们来到，他因怕奉割礼的人，就退去与外邦人隔开了。
For before certain men came from James, he did take food with the Gentiles: but when they came, he went back and made himself separate, fearing those who were of the circumcision.

其余的犹太人，也都随着他装假。甚至连巴拿巴也随伙装假。
And the rest of the Jews went after him, so that even Barnabas was overcome by their false ways.

但我一看见他们行得不正，与福音的真理不合，就在众人面前对矶法说，你既是犹太人，若随外邦人行事，不随犹太人行事，怎么还勉强外邦人随犹太人呢？
But when I saw that they were not living uprightly in agreement with the true words of the good news, I said to Cephas before them all, If you, being a Jew, are living like the Gentiles, and not like the Jews, how will you make the Gentiles do the same as the Jews?

我们这生来的犹太人，不是外邦的罪人，
We being Jews by birth, and not sinners of the Gentiles,

既知道人称义，不是因行律法，乃是因信耶稣基督，连我们也信了基督耶稣，使我们因信基督称义，不因行律法称义，因为凡有血气的，没有一人因行律法称义。
Being conscious that a man does not get righteousness by the works of the law, but through faith in Jesus Christ, we had faith in Christ Jesus, so that we might get righteousness by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law: because by the works of the law will no flesh get righteousness.

我们若求在基督里称义，却仍旧是罪人，难道基督是叫人犯罪的吗？断乎不是。
But if, while we were desiring to get righteousness through Christ, we ourselves were seen to be sinners, is Christ a servant of sin? In no way!

我素来所拆毁的，若重新建造，这就证明自己是犯罪的人。
For if I put up again those things which I gave to destruction, I am seen to be a wrongdoer.

我因律法就向律法死了，叫我可以向神活着。
For I, through the law, have become dead to the law, so that I might be living to God.

我已经与基督同钉十字架。现在活着的，不再是我，乃是基督在我里面活着。并且我如今在肉身活着，是因信神的儿子而活，他是爱我，为我舍己。
I have been put to death on the cross with Christ; still I am living; no longer I, but Christ is living in me; and that life which I now am living in the flesh I am living by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who in love for me, gave himself up for me.

我不废掉神的恩。义若是借着律法得的，基督就是徒然死了。
I do not make the grace of God of no effect: because if righteousness is through the law, then Christ was put to death for nothing.

无知的加拉太人哪，耶稣基督钉十字架，已经活画在你们眼前，谁又迷惑了你们呢？
O foolish Galatians, by what strange powers have you been tricked, to whom it was made clear that Jesus Christ was put to death on the cross?

我只要问你们这一件，你们受了圣灵，是因行律法呢？是因听信福音呢？
Give me an answer to this one question, Did the Spirit come to you through the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

你们既靠圣灵入门，如今还靠肉身成全吗？你们是这样的无知吗？
Are you so foolish? having made a start in the Spirit, will you now be made complete in the flesh?

你们受苦如此之多，都是徒然的吗？难道果真是徒然的吗？
Did you undergo such a number of things to no purpose? if it is in fact to no purpose.

那赐给你们圣灵，又在你们中间行异能的，是因你们行律法呢？是因你们听信福音呢？
He who gives you the Spirit, and does works of power among you, is it by the works of law, or by the hearing of faith?

正如，亚伯拉罕信神，这就算为他的义。
Even as Abraham had faith in God, and it was put to his account as righteousness.

所以你们要知道那以信为本的人，就是亚伯拉罕的子孙。
Be certain, then, that those who are of faith, the same are sons of Abraham.

并且圣经既然预先看明，神要叫外邦人因信称义，就早已传福音给亚伯拉罕，说，万国都必因你得福。
And the holy Writings, seeing before the event that God would give the Gentiles righteousness by faith, gave the good news before to Abraham, saying, In you will all the nations have a blessing.

可见那以信为本的人，和有信心的亚伯拉罕一同得福。
So then those who are of faith have a part in the blessing of Abraham who was full of faith.

凡以行律法为本的，都是被咒诅的。因为经上记着，凡不常照律法书上所记一切之事去行的，就被咒诅。
For all who are of the works of the law are under a curse: because it is said in the Writings, A curse is on everyone who does not keep on doing all the things which are ordered in the book of the law.

没有一个人靠着律法在神面前称义，这是明显的。因为经上说，义人必因信得生。
Now that no man gets righteousness by the law in the eyes of God, is clear; because, The upright will be living by faith.

律法原不本乎信，只说，行这些事的，就必因此活着。
And the law is not of faith; but, He who does them will have life by them.

基督既为我们受了咒诅，（受原文作成）就赎出我们脱离律法的咒诅。因为经上记着，凡挂在木头上都是被咒诅的。
Christ has made us free from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us: because it is said in the Writings, A curse on everyone who is put to death by hanging on a tree:

这便叫亚伯拉罕的福，因基督耶稣可以临到外邦人，使我们因信得着所应许的圣灵。
So that on the Gentiles might come the blessing of Abraham in Christ Jesus; in order that we through faith might have the Spirit which God had undertaken to give.

弟兄们，我且照着人的常话说，虽然是人的文约，若已经立定了，就没有能废弃或加增的。
Brothers, as men would say, even a man's agreement, when it has been made certain, may not be put on one side, or have additions made to it.

所应许的原是向亚伯拉罕和他子孙说的。神并不是说众子孙，指着许多人，乃是说你那一个子孙，指着一个人，就是基督。
Now to Abraham were the undertakings given, and to his seed. He says not, And to seeds, as of a great number; but as of one, he says, And to your seed, which is Christ.

我是这么说，神预先所立的约，不能被那四百三十年以后的律法废掉，叫应许归于虚空。
Now this I say: The law, which came four hundred and thirty years after, does not put an end to the agreement made before by God, so as to make the undertaking without effect.

因为承受产业，若本乎律法，就不本乎应许。但神是凭着应许，把产业赐给亚伯拉罕。
Because if the heritage is by the law, it is no longer dependent on the word of God; but God gave it to Abraham by his word.

这样说来，律法是为什么有的呢？原是为过犯添上的，等候那蒙应许的子孙来到。并且是借天使经中保之手设立的。
What then is the law? It was an addition made because of sin, till the coming of the seed to whom the undertaking had been given; and it was ordered through angels by the hand of a go-between.

但中保本不是为一面作的。神却是一位。
Now a go-between is not a go-between of one; but God is one.

这样，律法是与神的应许反对吗？断乎不是。若曾传一个能叫人得生的律法，义就诚然本乎律法了。
Is the law then against the words of God? in no way; because if there had been a law which was able to give life, truly righteousness would have been by the law.

但圣经把众人都圈在罪里，使所应许的福因信耶稣基督，归给那信的人。
However, the holy Writings have put all things under sin, so that that for which God gave the undertaking, based on faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those who have such faith.

但这因信得救的理，还未来以先，我们被看守在律法之下，直圈到那将来的真道显明出来。
But before faith came, we were kept in prison under the law, waiting for the revelation of the faith which was to come.

这样律法是我们训蒙的师傅，引我们到基督那里，使我们因信称义。
So the law has been a servant to take us to Christ, so that we might have righteousness by faith.

但这因信得救的理，既然来到，我们从此就不在师傅的手下了。
But now that faith is come, we are no longer under a servant.

所以你们因信基督耶稣，都是神的儿子。
Because you are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.

你们受洗归入基督的，都是披戴基督了。
For all those of you who were given baptism into Christ did put on Christ.

并不分犹太人，希利尼人，自主的，为奴的，或男或女。因为你们在基督耶稣里都成为一了。
There is no Jew or Greek, servant or free, male or female: because you are all one in Jesus Christ.

你们既属乎基督，就是亚伯拉罕的后裔，是照着应许承受产业的了。
And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's seed, and yours is the heritage by the right of God's undertaking given to Abraham.

我说那承受产业的，虽然是全业的主人，但为孩童的时候，却与奴仆毫无分别。
But I say that as long as the son is a child, he is in no way different from a servant, though he is lord of all;

乃在师傅和管家的手下，直等他父亲预定的时候来到。
But is under keepers and managers till the time fixed by the father.

我们为孩童的时候，受管于世俗小学之下，也是如此。
So we, when we were young, were kept under the first rules of the world;

及至时候满足，神就差遣他的儿子，为女子所生，且生在律法以下，
But when the time had come, God sent out his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,

要把律法以下的人赎出来，叫我们得着儿子的名分。
That he might make them free who were under the law, and that we might be given the place of sons.

你们既为儿子，神就差他儿子的灵，进入你们（原文作我们）的心，呼叫阿爸，父。
And because you are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, saying, Abba, Father.

可见，从此以后，你不是奴仆，乃是儿子了。既是儿子，就靠着神为后嗣。
So that you are no longer a servant, but a son; and if a son, then the heritage of God is yours.

但从前你们不认识神的时候，是给那些本来不是神的作奴仆。
But at that time, having no knowledge of God, you were servants to those who by right are no gods:

现在你们既然认识神，更可说是被神所认识的，怎么还要归回那懦弱无用的小学，情愿再给它作奴仆呢？
But now that you have come to have knowledge of God, or more truly, God has knowledge of you, how is it that you go back again to the poor and feeble first things, desiring to be servants to them again?

你们谨守日子，月分，节期，年分。
You keep days, and months, and fixed times, and years.

我为你们害怕。惟恐我在你们身上是枉费了工夫。
I am in fear of you, that I may have been working for you to no purpose.

弟兄们，我劝你们要象我一样，因为我也象你们一样。你们一点没有亏负我。
My desire for you, brothers, is that you may be as I am, because I am as you are. You have done me no wrong;

你们知道我头一次传福音给你们，是因为身体有疾病。
But you have knowledge that with a feeble body I was preaching the good news to you the first time;

你们为我身体的缘故受试炼，没有轻看我，也没有厌弃我。反倒接待我，如同神的使者，如同基督耶稣。
And you did not have a poor opinion of me because of the trouble in my flesh, or put shame on it; but you took me to your hearts as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

你们当日所夸的福气在哪里呢？那时你们若能行，就是把自己的眼睛剜出来给我，也都情愿。这是我可以给你们作见证的。
Where then is that happy condition of yours? because I give you witness, that, if possible, you would have taken out your eyes and given them to me.

如今我将真理告诉你们，就成了你们的仇敌吗？
So then am I no longer your friend, because I give you true words?

那些人热心待你们，却不是好意，是要离间（原文作把你们关在外面）你们，叫你们热心待他们。
Their interest in you is not good; but their desire is that you may be shut out, so that you may go after them.

在善事上，常用热心待人，原是好的，却不单我与你们同在的时候才这样。
But it is good to have an interest in a good cause at all times, and not only when I am present with you.

我小子阿，我为你们再受生产之苦，直等到基督成形在你们心里。
My children, of whom I am again in birth-pains till Christ is formed in you,

我巴不得现今在你们那里，改换口气，因我为你们，心里作难。
Truly my desire is to be present with you now, using a changed voice; for I am troubled about you.

你们这愿意在律法以下的人，请告诉我，你们岂没有听见律法吗？
Say, you whose desire it is to be under the law, do you not give ear to the law?

因为律法上记着，亚伯拉罕有两个儿子，一个是使女生的，一个是自主之妇人生的。
Because it is in the Writings, that Abraham had two sons, one by the servant-woman, and one by the free woman.

然而那使女所生的，是按着血气生的。那自主之妇人所生的，是凭着应许生的。
Now the son by the servant-woman has his birth after the flesh; but the son by the free woman has his birth through the undertaking of God.

这都是比方。那两个妇人，就是两约。一约是出于西乃山，生子为奴，乃是夏甲。
Which things have a secret sense; because these women are the two agreements; one from the mountain of Sinai, giving birth to servants, which is Hagar.

这夏甲二字是指着亚拉伯的西乃山，与现在的耶路撒冷同类。因耶路撒冷和她的儿女都是为奴的。
Now this Hagar is the mountain Sinai in Arabia, and is the image of the Jerusalem which now is: which is a servant with her children.

但那在上的耶路撒冷是自主的，她是我们的母。
But the Jerusalem on high is free, which is our mother.

因为经上记着，不怀孕不生养的，你要欢乐。未曾经过产难的，你要高声欢呼，因为没有丈夫的，比有丈夫的儿女更多。
For it is in the Writings, You who have never given birth, be glad; give cries of joy, you who have had no birth-pains; for the children of her who has been given up by her husband are more than those of the woman who has a husband.

弟兄们，我们是凭着应许作儿女，如同以撒一样。
Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are the children of the undertaking of God.

当时那按着血气生的，逼迫了那按着圣灵生的。现在也是这样。
But as in those days he who had birth after the flesh was cruel to him who had birth after the Spirit, even so it is now.

然而经上是怎么说的呢？是说，把使女和她儿子赶出去，因为使女的儿子，不可与自主妇人的儿子一同承受产业。
What then do the Writings say? Send away the servant-woman and her son; for the son of the servant-woman will not have a part in the heritage with the son of the free woman.

弟兄们，这样看来，我们不是使女的儿女，乃是自主妇人的儿女了。
So, brothers, we are not children of the servant-woman, but of the free woman.

基督释放了我们，叫我们得以自由，所以要站立得稳，不要再被奴仆的轭挟制。
Christ has truly made us free: then keep your free condition and let no man put a yoke on you again.

我保罗告诉你们，若受割礼，基督就与你们无益了。
See, I Paul say to you, that if you undergo circumcision, Christ will be of no use to you.

我再指着凡受割礼的人确实地说，他是欠着行全律法的债。
Yes, I give witness again to every man who undergoes circumcision, that he will have to keep all the law.

你们这要靠律法称义的，是与基督隔绝，从恩典中坠落了。
You are cut off from Christ, you who would have righteousness by the law; you are turned away from grace.

我们靠着圣灵，凭着信心，等候所盼望的义。
For we through the Spirit by faith are waiting for the hope of righteousness.

原来在基督耶稣里，受割礼不受割礼，全无功效。惟独使人生发仁爱的信心，才有功效。
Because in Christ Jesus, having circumcision or not having circumcision are equally of no profit; but only faith working through love.

你们向来跑得好。有谁拦阻你们，叫你们不顺从真理呢？
You were going on well; who was the cause of your not giving ear to what is true?

这样的劝导，不是出于那召你们的。
This ready belief did not come from him who had made you his.

一点面酵能使全团都发起来。
A little leaven makes a change in all the mass.

我在主里很信你们必不怀别样的心，但搅扰你们的，无论是谁，必担当他的罪名。
I am certain about you in the Lord, that you will be of no other mind; but he who is troubling you will have his punishment, whoever he is.

弟兄们，我若仍旧传割礼，为什么还受逼迫呢？若是这样，那十字架讨厌的地方就没有了。
But I, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still attacked? then has the shame of the cross been taken away.

恨不得那搅乱你们的人，把自己割绝了。
My desire is that they who give you trouble might even be cut off themselves.

弟兄们，你们蒙召，是要得自由。只是不可将你们的自由当作放纵情欲的机会。总要用爱心互相服事。
Because you, brothers, were marked out to be free; only do not make use of your free condition to give the flesh its chance, but through love be servants one to another.

因为全律法都包在爱人如己这一句话之内了。
For all the law is made complete in one word, even in this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.

你们要谨慎。若相咬相吞，只怕要彼此消灭了。
But if you are given to fighting with one another, take care that you are not the cause of destruction one to another.

我说，你们当顺着圣灵而行，就不放纵肉体的情欲了。
But I say, Go on in the Spirit, and you will not come under the rule of the evil desires of the flesh.

因为情欲和圣灵相争，圣灵和情欲相争。这两个是彼此相敌，使你们不能作所愿意作的。
For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; because these are opposite the one to the other; so that you may not do the things which you have a mind to do.

但你们若被圣灵引导，就不在律法以下。
But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.

情欲的事，都是显而易见的。就如奸淫，污秽，邪荡，
Now the works of the flesh are clear, which are these: evil desire, unclean things, wrong use of the senses,

拜偶像，邪术，仇恨，争竞，忌恨，恼怒，结党，纷争，异端，
Worship of images, use of strange powers, hates, fighting, desire for what another has, angry feelings, attempts to get the better of others, divisions, false teachings,

嫉妒，（有古卷在此有凶杀二字）醉酒，荒宴等类，我从前告诉你们，现在又告诉你们，行这样事的人，必不能承受神的国。
Envy, uncontrolled drinking and feasting, and such things: of which I give you word clearly, even as I did in the past, that they who do such things will have no part in the kingdom of God.

圣灵所结的果子，就是仁爱，喜乐，和平，忍耐，恩慈，良善，信实，
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, a quiet mind, kind acts, well-doing, faith,

温柔，节制。这样的事，没有律法禁止。
Gentle behaviour, control over desires: against such there is no law.

凡属基督耶稣的人，是已经把肉体，连肉体的邪情私欲，同钉在十字架上了。
And those who are Christ's have put to death on the cross the flesh with its passions and its evil desires.

我们若是靠圣灵得生，就当靠圣灵行事。
If we are living by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us be guided.

不要贪图虚名，彼此惹气，互相嫉妒。
Let us not be full of self-glory, making one another angry, having envy of one another.

弟兄们，若有人偶然被过犯所胜，你们属灵的人，就当用温柔的心，把他挽回过来。又当自己小心，恐怕也被引诱。
Brothers, if a man is taken in any wrongdoing, you who are of the Spirit will put such a one right in a spirit of love; keeping watch on yourself, for fear that you yourself may be tested.

你们各人的重担要互相担当，如此就完全了基督的律法。
Take on yourselves one another's troubles, and so keep the law of Christ.

人若无有，自己还以为有，就是自欺了。
For if a man has an idea that he is something when he is nothing, he is tricked by himself.

各人应当察验自己的行为，这样，他所夸的就专在自己，不在别人了。
But let every man make test of his work, and then will his cause for glory be in himself only, and not in his neighbour.

因为各人必担当自己的担子。
Because every man is responsible for his part of the work.

在道理上受教的，当把一切需用的供给施教的人。
But let him who gets teaching in the word give a part in all good things to his teacher.

不要自欺，神是轻慢不得的。人种的是什么，收的也是什么。
Be not tricked; God is not made sport of: for whatever seed a man puts in, that will he get back as grain.

顺着情欲撒种的，必从情欲收败坏顺着圣灵撒种的，必从圣灵收永生。
Because he who puts in the seed of the flesh will of the flesh get the reward of death; but he who puts in the seed of the Spirit will of the Spirit get the reward of eternal life.

我们行善，不可丧志。若不灰心，到了时候，就要收成。
And let us not get tired of well-doing; for at the right time we will get in the grain, if we do not give way to weariness.

所以有了机会，就当向众人行善。向信徒一家的人更当这样。
So then, as we have the chance, let us do good to all men, and specially to those who are of the family of the faith.

请看我亲手写给你们的字，是何等的大呢。
See the size of the handwriting which I myself have made use of in writing to you.

凡希图外貌体面的人，都勉强你们受割礼。无非是怕自己为基督的十字架受逼迫。
Those who have the desire to seem important in the flesh, put force on you to undergo circumcision; only that they may not be attacked because of the cross of Christ.

他们那些受割礼的，连自己也不守律法。他们愿意你们受割礼，不过要借着你们的肉体夸口。
Because even those who undergo circumcision do not themselves keep the law; but they would have you undergo circumcision, so that they may have glory in your flesh.

但我断不以别的夸口，只夸我们主耶稣基督的十字架。因这十字架，就我而论，世界已经钉在十字架上。就世界而论，我已经钉在十字架上。
But far be it from me to have glory in anything, but only in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which this world has come to an end on the cross for me, and I for it.

受割礼不受割礼都无关紧要，要紧的就是作新造的人。
For having circumcision is nothing, and not having circumcision is nothing, but only a new order of existence.

凡照此理而行的，愿平安怜悯加给他们，和神的以色列民。
And on all who are guided by this rule be peace and mercy, and on the Israel of God.

从今以后，人都不要搅扰我。因为我身上带着耶稣的印记。
From this time on let no man be a trouble to me; because my body is marked with the marks of Jesus.

弟兄们，愿我主耶稣基督的恩常在你们心里。阿们。
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. So be it.

