基督耶稣的仆人保罗，和提摩太，写信给凡住腓立比，在基督耶稣里的众圣徒，和诸位监督，诸位执事。
Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons of the church:

愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父，并主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

我每逢想念你们，就感谢我的神。
I give praise to my God at every memory of you,

（每逢为你们众人祈求的时候，常是欢欢喜喜地祈求）
And in all my prayers for you all, making my request with joy,

因为从头一天直到如今，你们是同心合意地兴旺福音。
Because of your help in giving the good news from the first day till now;

我深信那在你们心里动了善工的，必成全这工，直到耶稣基督的日子。
For I am certain of this very thing, that he by whom the good work was started in you will make it complete till the day of Jesus Christ:

我为你们众人有这样的意念，原是应当的。因你们常在我心里，无论我是在捆锁之中，是辩明证实福音的时候，你们都与我一同得恩。
So it is right for me to take thought for you all in this way, because I have you in my heart; for in my chains, and in my arguments before the judges in support of the good news, making clear that it is true, you all have your part with me in grace.

我体会基督耶稣的心肠，切切地想念你们众人。这是神可以给我作见证的。
For God is my witness, how my love goes out to you all in the loving mercies of Christ Jesus.

我所祷告的，就是要你们的爱心，在知识和各样见识上，多而又多。
And my prayer is that you may be increased more and more in knowledge and experience;

使你们能分别是非，（或作喜爱那美好的事）作诚实无过的人，直到基督的日子。
So that you may give your approval to the best things; that you may be true and without wrongdoing till the day of Christ;

并靠着耶稣基督结满了仁义的果子，叫荣耀称赞归与神。
Being full of the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.

弟兄们，我愿意你们知道，我所遭遇的事，更是叫福音兴旺。
Now it is my purpose to make clear to you, brothers, that the cause of the good news has been helped by my experiences;

以致我受的捆锁，在御营全军，和其余的人中，已经显明是为基督的缘故。
So that it became clear through all the Praetorium, and to all the rest, that I was a prisoner on account of Christ;

并且那在主里的弟兄，多半因我受的捆锁，就笃信不疑，越发放胆传神的道，无所惧怕。
And most of the brothers in the Lord, taking heart because of my chains, are all the stronger to give the word of God without fear.

有的传基督，是出于嫉妒分争。也有的是出于好意。
Though some are preaching Christ out of envy and competition, others do it out of a good heart:

这一等是出于爱心，知道我是为辩明福音设立的。
These do it from love, conscious that I am responsible for the cause of the good news:

那一等传基督是出于结党，并不诚实，意思要加增我捆锁的苦楚。
But those are preaching Christ in a spirit of competition, not from their hearts, but with the purpose of giving me pain in my prison.

这有何妨呢？或是假意，或是真心，无论怎样，基督究竟被传开了。为此我就欢喜，并且还要欢喜。
What then? only that in every way, falsely or truly, the preaching of Christ goes on; and in this I am glad, and will be glad.

因为我知道这事借着你们的祈祷，和耶稣基督之灵的帮助，终必叫我得救。
For I am conscious that this will be for my salvation, through your prayer and the giving out of the stored wealth of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,

照着我所切慕所盼望的，没有一事叫我羞愧，只要凡事放胆。无论是生，是死，总叫基督在我身上照常显大。
In the measure of my strong hope and belief that in nothing will I be put to shame, but that without fear, as at all times, so now will Christ have glory in my body, by life or by death.

因我活着就是基督，我死了就有益处。
For to me life is Christ and death is profit.

但我在肉身活着，若成就我工夫的果子，我就不知道该挑选什么。
But if I go on living in the flesh--if this is the fruit of my work--then I do not see what decision to make.

我正在两难之间，情愿离世与基督同在。因为这是好得无比的。
I am in a hard position between the two, having a desire to go away and be with Christ, which is very much better:

然而我在肉身活着，为你们更是要紧的。
Still, to go on in the flesh is more necessary because of you.

我既然这样深信，就知道仍要住在世间，且与你们众人同住，使你们在所信的道上又长进又喜乐。
And being certain of this, I am conscious that I will go on, yes, and go on with you all, for your growth and joy in the faith;

叫你们在基督耶稣里的欢乐，因我再到你们那里去，就越发加增。
So that your pride in me may be increased in Christ Jesus through my being present with you again.

只要你们行事为人与基督的福音相称。叫我或来见你们，或不在你们那里，可以听见你们的景况，知道你们同有一个心志，站立得稳，为所信的福音齐心努力。
Only let your behaviour do credit to the good news of Christ, so that if I come and see you or if I am away from you, I may have news of you that you are strong in one spirit, working together with one soul for the faith of the good news;

凡事不怕敌人的惊吓。这是证明他们沉沦，你们得救，都是出于神。
Having no fear of those who are against you; which is a clear sign of their destruction, but of your salvation, and that from God;

因为你们蒙恩，不但得以信服基督，并要为他受苦。
Because to you it has been given in the cause of Christ not only to have faith in him, but to undergo pain on his account:

你们的争战，就与你们在我身上从前所看见，现在所听见的一样。
Fighting the same fight which you saw in me, and now have word of in me.

所以在基督里若有什么劝勉，爱心有什么安慰，圣灵有什么交通，心中有什么慈悲怜悯，
If then there is any comfort in Christ, any help given by love, any uniting of hearts in the Spirit, any loving mercies and pity,

你们就要意念相同，爱心相同，有一样的心思，有一样的意念，使我的喜乐可以满足。
Make my joy complete by being of the same mind, having the same love, being in harmony and of one mind;

凡事不可结党，不可贪图虚浮的荣耀。只要存心谦卑，各人看别人比自己强。
Doing nothing through envy or through pride, but with low thoughts of self let everyone take others to be better than himself;

各人不要单顾自己的事，也要顾别人的事。
Not looking everyone to his private good, but keeping in mind the things of others.

你们当以基督耶稣的心为心。
Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus,

他本有神的形像，不以自己与神同等为强夺的。
To whom, though himself in the form of God, it did not seem that to take for oneself was to be like God;

反倒虚己，取了奴仆的形像，成为人的样式。
But he made himself as nothing, taking the form of a servant, being made like men;

既有人的样子，就自己卑微，存心顺服，以至于死，且死在十字架上。
And being seen in form as a man, he took the lowest place, and let himself be put to death, even the death of the cross.

所以神将他升为至高，又赐给他那超乎万名之上的名，
For this reason God has put him in the highest place and has given to him the name which is greater than every name;

叫一切在天上的，地上的，和地底下的，因耶稣的名，无不屈膝，
So that at the name of Jesus every knee may be bent, of those in heaven and those on earth and those in the underworld,

无不口称耶稣基督为主，使荣耀归与父神。
And that every tongue may give witness that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

这样看来，我亲爱的弟兄你们既是常顺服的，不但我在你们那里，就是我如今不在你们那里，更是顺服的，就当恐惧战兢，作成你们得救的工夫。
So then, my loved ones, as you have at all times done what I say, not only when I am present, but now much more when I am not with you, give yourselves to working out your salvation with fear in your hearts;

因为你们立志行事，都是神在你们心里运行，为要成就他的美意。
For it is God who is the cause of your desires and of your acts, for his good pleasure.

凡所行的，都不要发怨言，起争论，
Do all things without protests and arguments;

使你们无可指摘，诚实无伪，在这弯曲悖谬的世代，作神无瑕疵的儿女。你们显在这世代中，好像明光照耀，
So that you may be holy and gentle, children of God without sin in a twisted and foolish generation, among whom you are seen as lights in the world,

将生命的道表明出来，叫我在基督的日子，好夸我没有空跑，也没有徒劳。
Offering the word of life; so that I may have glory in you in the day of Christ, because my running was not for nothing and my work was not without effect.

我以你们的信心为供献的祭物。我若被浇奠在其上，也是喜乐，并且与你们众人一同喜乐。
And even if I am offered like a drink offering, giving myself for the cause and work of your faith, I am glad and have joy with you all:

你们也要照样喜乐，并且与我一同喜乐。
And in the same way do you be glad and have a part in my joy.

我靠主耶稣指望快打发提摩太去见你们，叫我知道你们的事，心里就得着安慰。
But I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you before long, so that I may be comforted when I have news of you.

因为我没有别人与我同心，实在挂念你们的事。
For I have no man of like mind who will truly have care for you.

别人都求自己的事，并不求耶稣基督的事。
For they all go after what is theirs, not after the things of Christ.

但你们知道提摩太的明证，他兴旺福音与我同劳，待我像儿子待父亲一样。
But his quality is clear to you; how, as a child is to its father, so he was a help to me in the work of the good news.

所以我一看出我的事要怎样了结，就盼望立刻打发他去。
Him then I am hoping to send as quickly as possible, when I am able to see how things will go for me:

但我靠着主，自信我也必快去。
But I have faith in the Lord that I myself will come before long.

然而我想必须打发以巴弗提到你们那里去。他是我的兄弟，与我一同作工，一同当兵，是你们所差遣的，也是供给我需用的。
But it seemed to me necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, who has taken part with me in the work and in the fight, and your servant, sent by you for help in my need;

他很想念你们众人，并且极其难过，因为你们听见他病了。
Because his heart was with you all, and he was greatly troubled because you had news that he was ill:

他实在是病了，几乎要死。然而神怜恤他，不但怜恤他，也怜恤我，免得我忧上加忧。
For in fact he was ill almost to death: but God had mercy on him; and not only on him but on me, so that I might not have grief on grief.

所以我越发急速打发他去，叫你们再见他，就可以喜乐，我也可以少些忧愁。
I have sent him, then, the more gladly, so that when you see him again, you may be happy and I may have the less sorrow.

故此你们要在主里欢欢乐乐地接待他。而且要尊重这样的人。
So take him to your hearts in the Lord with all joy, and give honour to such as he is:

因他为作基督的工夫，几乎至死，不顾性命，要补足你们供给我的不及之处。
Because for the work of Christ he was near to death, putting his life in danger to make your care for me complete.

弟兄们，我还有话说，你们要靠主喜乐。我把这话再写给你们，于我并不为难，于你们却是妥当。
For the rest, my brothers, be glad in the Lord. Writing the same things to you is no trouble to me, and for you it is safe.

应当防备犬类，防备作恶的，防备妄自行割的。
Be on the watch against dogs, against the workers of evil, against those of the circumcision:

因为真受割礼的，乃是我们这以神的灵敬拜，在基督耶稣里夸口，不靠着肉体的。
For we are the circumcision, who give worship to God and have glory in Jesus Christ, and have no faith in the flesh:

其实我也可以靠肉体。若是别人想他可以靠肉体，我更可以靠着了。
Even though I myself might have faith in the flesh: if any other man has reason to have faith in the flesh, I have more:

我第八天受割礼，我是以色列族，便雅悯支派的人，是希伯来人所生的希伯来人。就律法说，我是法利赛人。
Being given circumcision on the eighth day, of the nation of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; in relation to the law, a Pharisee:

就热心说，我是逼迫教会的。就律法上的义说，我是无可指摘的。
In bitter hate I was cruel to the church; I kept all the righteousness of the law to the last detail.

只是我先前以为与我有益的，我现在因基督都当作有损的。
But those things which were profit to me, I gave up for Christ.

不但如此，我也将万事当作有损的，因我以认识我主基督耶稣为至宝。我为他已经丢弃万事，看作粪土，为要得着基督。
Yes truly, and I am ready to give up all things for the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, which is more than all: for whom I have undergone the loss of all things, and to me they are less than nothing, so that I may have Christ as my reward,

并且得以在他里面，不是有自己因律法而得的义，乃是有信基督的义，就是因信神而来的义。
And be seen in him, not having my righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:

使我认识基督，晓得他复活的大能，并且晓得和他一同受苦，效法他的死。
That I may have knowledge of him, and of the power of his coming back from the dead, and a part with him in his pains, becoming like him in his death;

或者我也得以从死里复活。
If in any way I may have the reward of life from the dead.

这不是说，我已经得着了，已经完全了。我乃是竭力追求，或者可以得着基督耶稣所以得着我的。（所以得着我的或作所要我得的）
Not as if I had even now got the reward or been made complete: but I go on in the hope that I may come to the knowledge of that for which I was made the servant of Christ Jesus.

弟兄们，我不是以为自己已经得着了。我只有一件事，就是忘记背后努力面前的，
Brothers, it is clear to me that I have not come to that knowledge; but one thing I do, letting go those things which are past, and stretching out to the things which are before,

向着标竿直跑，要得神在基督耶稣里从上面召我来得的奖赏。
I go forward to the mark, even the reward of the high purpose of God in Christ Jesus.

所以我们中间凡是完全人，总要存这样的心。若在什么事上，存别样的心，神也必以此指示你们。
Then let us all, who have come to full growth, be of this mind: and if in anything you are of a different mind, even this will God make clear to you:

然而我们到了什么地步，就当照着什么地步行。
Only, as far as we have got, let us be guided by the same rule.

弟兄们，你们要一同效法我，也当留意看那些照我们榜样行的人。
Brothers, take me as your example, and take note of those who are walking after the example we have given.

因为有许多人行事，是基督十字架的仇敌。我屡次告诉你们，现在又流泪地告诉你们。
For there are those, of whom I have given you word before, and do so now with sorrow, who are haters of the cross of Christ;

他们的结局就是沉沦，他们的神就是自己的肚腹，他们以自己的羞辱为荣耀，专以地上的事为念。
Whose end is destruction, whose god is the stomach, and whose glory is in their shame, whose minds are fixed on the things of the earth.

我们却是天上的国民。并且等候救主，就是主耶稣基督，从天上降临。
For our country is in heaven; from where the Saviour for whom we are waiting will come, even the Lord Jesus Christ:

他要按着那能叫万有归服自己的大能，将我们这卑贱的身体改变形状，和他自己荣耀的身体相似。
By whom this poor body of ours will be changed into the image of the body of his glory, in the measure of the working by which he is able to put all things under himself.

我所亲爱所想念的弟兄们，你们就是我的喜乐，我的冠冕。我亲爱的弟兄，你们应当靠主站立得稳。
So my brothers, well loved and very dear to me, my joy and crown, be strong in the Lord, my loved ones.

我劝友阿爹和循都基，要在主里同心。
I make request to Euodias and Syntyche to be of the same mind in the Lord.

我也求你这真实同负一轭的，帮助这两个女人，因为她们在福音上曾与我一同劳苦。还有革利免，并其余和我一同作工的。他们的名字都在生命册上。
And I make request to you, true helper in my work, to see to the needs of those women who took part with me in the good news, with Clement and the rest of my brother-workers whose names are in the book of life.

你们要靠主常常喜乐。我再说，你们要喜乐。
Be glad in the Lord at all times: again I say, Be glad.

当叫众人知道你们谦让的心。主已经近了。
Let your gentle behaviour be clear to all men. The Lord is near.

应当一无挂虑，只要凡事借着祷告，祈求，和感谢，将你们所要的告诉神。
Have no cares; but in everything with prayer and praise put your requests before God.

神所赐出人意外的平安，必在基督耶稣里，保守你们的心怀意念。
And the peace of God, which is deeper than all knowledge, will keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

弟兄们，我还有未尽的话。凡是真实的，可敬的，公义的，清洁的，可爱的，有美名的。若有什么德行，若有什么称赞，这些事你们都要思念。
For the rest, my brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things have honour, whatever things are upright, whatever things are holy, whatever things are beautiful, whatever things are of value, if there is any virtue and if there is any praise, give thought to these things.

你们在我身上所学习的，所领受的，所听见的，所看见的，这些事你们都要去行。赐平安的神，就必与你们同在。
The things which came to you by my teaching and preaching, and which you saw in me, these things do, and the God of peace will be with you.

我靠主大大地喜乐，因为你们思念我的心，如今又发生。你们向来就思念我，只是没得机会。
But I am very glad in the Lord that your care for me has come to life again; though you did in fact take thought for me, but you were not able to give effect to it.

我并不是因缺乏说这话，我无论在什么景况，都可以知足，这是我已经学会了。
But I will not say anything about my needs, for I am able, wherever I am, to be dependent on myself.

我知道怎样处卑贱，也知道怎样处丰富，或饱足，或饥饿，或有余，或缺乏，随事随在，我都得了秘诀。
It is the same to me if I am looked down on or honoured; everywhere and in all things I have the secret of how to be full and how to go without food; how to have wealth and how to be in need.

我靠着那加给我力量的，凡事都能作。
I am able to do all things through him who gives me strength.

然而你们和我同受患难，原是美事。
But you did well to have care for me in my need.

腓立比人哪，你们也知道我初传福音，离了马其顿的时候，论到授受的事，除了你们以外，并没有别的教会供给我。
And you have knowledge, Philippians, that when the good news first came to you, when I went away from Macedonia, no church took part with me in the business of giving to the saints, but you only;

就是我在帖撒罗尼迦，你们也一次两次的，打发人供给我的需用。
Because even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to me in my need.

我并不求什么馈送，所求的就是你们的果子渐渐增多，归在你们的账上。
Not that I am looking for an offering, but for fruit which may be put to your credit.

但我样样都有，并且有余。我已经充足，因我从以巴弗提受了你们的馈送，当作极美的香气，为神所收纳所喜悦的祭物。
I have all things and more than enough: I am made full, having had from Epaphroditus the things which came from you, a perfume of a sweet smell, an offering well pleasing to God.

我的神必照他荣耀的丰富，在基督耶稣里，使你们一切所需用的都充足。
And my God will give you all you have need of from the wealth of his glory in Christ Jesus.

愿荣耀归给我们的父神，直到永永远远。阿们。
Now to God our Father be glory for ever and ever. So be it.

请问在基督耶稣里的各位圣徒安。在我这里的众弟兄都问你们安。
Give words of love to every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send you their love.

众圣徒都问你们安。在该撒家里的人特特的问你们安。
All the saints send their love to you, specially those who are of Caesar's house.

愿主耶稣基督的恩常在你们心里。
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.

