提阿非罗大人哪，有好些人提笔作书，述说在我们中间所成就的事，是照传道的人，从起初亲眼看见，又传给我们的。
As a number of attempts have been made to put together in order an account of those events which took place among us,


As they were handed down to us by those who saw them from the first and were preachers of the word,

这些事我既从起头都详细考察了，就定意要按着次序写给你，
It seemed good to me, having made observation, with great care, of the direction of events in their order, to put the facts in writing for you, most noble Theophilus;

使你知道所学之道都是确实的。
So that you might have certain knowledge of those things about which you were given teaching.

当犹太王希律的时候，亚比雅班里有一个祭司，名叫撒迦利亚。他妻子是亚伦的后人，名叫以利沙伯。
In the days of Herod, king of Judaea, there was a certain priest, by name Zacharias, of the order of Abijah; and he had a wife of the family of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.

他们二人，在神面前都是义人，遵行主的一切诫命礼仪，没有可指摘的。
They were upright in the eyes of God, keeping all the rules and orders of God, and doing no wrong.

只是没有孩子，因为以利沙伯不生育，两个人又年纪老迈了。
And they were without children, because Elisabeth had never given birth, and they were at that time very old.

撒迦利亚按班次，在神面前供祭司的职分，
Now it came about that in his turn he was acting as priest before God,

照祭司的规矩掣签，得进主殿烧香。
And as was the way of the priests, he had to go into the Temple to see to the burning of perfumes.

烧香的时候，众百姓在外面祷告。
And all the people were offering prayers outside, at the time of the burning of perfumes.

有主的使者站在香坛的右边，向他显现。
And he saw an angel of the Lord in his place on the right side of the altar.

撒迦利亚看见，就惊慌害怕。
And Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear came on him.

天使对他说，撒迦利亚，不要害怕。因为你的祈祷已经被听见了，你的妻子以利沙伯要给你生一个儿子，你要给他起名叫约翰。
But the angel said, Have no fear, Zacharias, for your prayer has come to the ears of God, and your wife Elisabeth will have a son, and his name will be John.

你必欢喜快乐，有许多人因他出世，也必喜乐。
And you will be glad and have great delight; and numbers of people will have joy at his birth.

他在主面前将要为大，淡酒浓酒都不喝，从母腹里就被圣灵充满了。
For he will be great in the eyes of the Lord; he will not take wine or strong drink; and he will be full of the Spirit of God from his birth.

他要使许多以色列人回转，归于主他们的神。
And through him great numbers of the children of Israel will be turned to the Lord their God.

他必有以利亚的心志能力，行在主的前面，叫为父的心转向儿女，叫悖逆的人转从义人的智慧。又为主预备合用的百姓。
And he will go before his face in the spirit and power of Elijah, turning the hearts of fathers to their children, and wrongdoers to the way of righteousness; to make ready a people whose hearts have been turned to the Lord.

撒迦利亚对天使说，我凭着什么可知道这事呢？我已经老了，我的妻子也年纪老迈了。
And Zacharias said to the angel, How may I be certain of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is far on in years.

天使回答说，我是站在神面前的加百列，奉差而来，对你说话，将这好信息报给你。
And the angel, answering, said, I am Gabriel, whose place is before God; I have been sent to say these words to you and to give you this good news.

到了时候，这话必然应验。只因你不信，你必哑吧不能说话，直到这事成就的日子。
Now, see, you will be without voice or language till the day when these things come about, because you had not faith in my words, which will have effect at the right time.

百姓等候撒迦利亚，诧异他许久在殿里。
And the people were waiting for Zacharias and were surprised because he was in the Temple for such a long time.

及至他出来，不能和他们说话。他们就知道他在殿里见了异象。因为他直向他们打手式，竟成了哑吧。
And when he came out he was not able to say anything, and they saw that he had seen a vision in the Temple; and he was making signs to them without words.

他供职的日子已满，就回家去了。
And when the days of his work in the Temple were ended, he went back to his house.

这些日子以后，他的妻子以利沙伯怀了孕，就隐藏了五个月，
After that time, Elisabeth, being certain that she was to become a mother, kept herself from men's eyes for five months, saying,

说，主在眷顾我的日子，这样看待我，要把我在人间的羞耻除掉。
The Lord has done this to me, for his eyes were on me, to take away my shame in the eyes of men.

到了第六个月，天使加百列奉神的差遣，往加利利的一座城去，这城名叫拿撒勒。
Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a town in Galilee, named Nazareth,

到一个童女那里，是已经许配大卫家的一个人，名叫约瑟，童女的名字叫马利亚。
To a virgin who was to be married to a man named Joseph, of the family of David; and the name of the virgin was Mary.

天使进去，对她说，蒙大恩的女子，我问你安，主和你同在了。
And the angel came in to her and said, Peace be with you, to whom special grace has been given; the Lord is with you.

马利亚因这话就很惊慌，又反复思想这样问安是什么意思。
But she was greatly troubled at his words, and said to herself, What may be the purpose of these words?

天使对她说，马利亚不要怕。你在神面前已经蒙恩了。
And the angel said to her, Have no fear, Mary, for you have God's approval.

你要怀孕生子，可以给他起名叫耶稣。
And see, you will give birth to a son, and his name will be Jesus.

他要为大，称为至高者的儿子。主神要把他祖大卫的位给他。
He will be great, and will be named the Son of the Most High: and the Lord God will give him the kingdom of David, his father:

他要作雅各家的王，直到永远。他的国也没有穷尽。
He will have rule over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.

马利亚对天使说，我没有出嫁，怎么有这事呢？
And Mary said to the angel, How may this be, because I have had no knowledge of a man?

天使回答说，圣灵要临到你身上，至高者的能力要荫庇你。因此所要生的圣者，必称为神的儿子。（或作所要生的必称为圣称为神的儿子）
And the angel in answer said to her, The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will come to rest on you, and so that which will come to birth will be named holy, Son of God.

况且你的亲戚以利沙伯，在年老的时候，也怀了男胎。就是那素来称为不生育的，现在有孕六个月了。
Even now Elisabeth, who is of your family, is to be a mother, though she is old: and this is the sixth month with her who was without children.

因为出于神的话，没有一句不带能力的。
For there is nothing which God is not able to do.

马利亚说，我是主的使女，情愿照你的话成就在我身上。天使就离开她去了。
And Mary said: I am the servant of the Lord; may it be to me as you say. And the angel went away.

那时候马利亚起身，急忙往山地里去，来到犹大的一座城。
Then Mary got up and went quickly into the high lands, to a town of Judah;

进了撒迦利亚的家，问以利沙伯安。
And went into the house of Zacharias and took Elisabeth in her arms.

以利沙伯一听马利亚问安，所怀的胎就在腹里跳动，以利沙伯且被圣灵充满。
And when the voice of Mary came to the ears of Elisabeth, the baby made a sudden move inside her; then Elisabeth was full of the Holy Spirit,

高声喊着说，你在妇女中是有福的，你所怀的胎也是有福的。
And she said with a loud voice: May blessing be on you among women, and a blessing on the child of your body.

我主的母到我这里来，这是从哪里得的呢？
How is it that the mother of my Lord comes to me?

因为你问安的声音，一入我耳，我腹里的胎，就欢喜跳动。
For, truly, when the sound of your voice came to my ears, the baby in my body made a sudden move for joy.

这相信的女子是有福的。因为主对她所说的话，都要应验。
Happy will she be who had faith that the things which the Lord has said to her will be done.

马利亚说，我心尊主为大，
And Mary said: My soul gives glory to God;

我灵以神我的救主为乐。
My spirit is glad in God my Saviour.

因为他顾念他使女的卑微。从今以后，万代要称我有福。
For he has had pity on his servant, though she is poor and lowly placed: and from this hour will all generations give witness to the blessing which has come to me.

那有权能的为我成就了大事。他的名为圣。
For he who is strong has done great things for me; and holy is his name.

他怜悯敬畏他的人，直到世世代代。
His mercy is for all generations in whom is the fear of him.

他用膀臂施展大能。那狂傲的人，正心里妄想，就被他赶散了。
With his arm he has done acts of power; he has put to flight those who have pride in their hearts.

他叫有权柄的失位，叫卑贱的升高。
He has put down kings from their seats, lifting up on high the men of low degree.

叫饥饿的得饱美食，叫富足的空手回去。
Those who had no food he made full of good things; the men of wealth he sent away with nothing in their hands;

他扶助了他的仆人以色列，
His help he has given to Israel, his servant, so that he might keep in mind his mercy to Abraham and his seed for ever,

为要记念亚伯拉罕和他的后裔，施怜悯，直到永远，正如从前对我们列祖所说的话。
As he gave his word to our fathers.

马利亚和以利沙伯同住，约有三个月，就回家去了。
And Mary was with her for about three months and then went back to her house.

以利沙伯的产期到了，就生了一个儿子。
Now it was time for Elisabeth to give birth, and she had a son.

邻里亲族，听见主向他大施怜悯，就和他一同欢乐。
And it came to the ears of her neighbours and relations that the Lord had been very good to her, and they took part in her joy.

到了第八日，他们来要给孩子行割礼。并要照他父亲的名字，叫他撒迦利亚。
And on the eighth day they came to see to the circumcision of the child, and they would have given him the name of Zacharias, his father's name;

他母亲说，不可。要叫他约翰。
But his mother made answer and said, No, his name is John.

他们说，你亲族中没有叫这名字的。
And they said, Not one of your relations has that name.

他们就向他父亲打手式，问他要叫这孩子什么名字。
And they made signs to his father, to say what name was to be given to him.

他要了一块写字的板，就写上说，他的名字是约翰。他们便都希奇。
And he sent for writing materials and put down: His name is John; and they were all surprised.

撒迦利亚的口立时开了，舌头也舒展了，就说出话来，称颂神。
And straight away his mouth was open and his tongue was free and he gave praise to God.

周围居住的人都惧怕，这一切的事就传遍了犹太的山地。
And fear came on all those who were living round about them: and there was much talk about all these things in all the hill-country of Judaea.

凡听见的人，都将这事放在心里，说，这个孩子，将来怎么样呢？因为有主与他同在。
And all who had word of them kept them in their minds and said, What will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was with him.

他父亲撒迦利亚，被圣灵充满了，就预言说，
And his father, Zacharias, was full of the Holy Spirit, and with the voice of a prophet said these words:

主以色列的神，是应当称颂的。因他眷顾他的百姓，为他们施行救赎。
Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has come to his people and made them free,

在他仆人大卫家中，为我们兴起了拯救的角，
Lifting up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David,

（正如主借着从创世以来，圣先知的口所说的话）
(As he said, by the mouth of his holy prophets, from the earliest times,)

拯救我们脱离仇敌，和一切恨我们之人的手。
Salvation from those who are against us, and from the hands of those who have hate for us;

向我们列祖施怜悯，记念他的圣约。
To do acts of mercy to our fathers and to keep in mind his holy word,

就是他对我们祖宗亚伯拉罕所起的誓，
The oath which he made to Abraham, our father,

叫我们既从仇敌手中被救出来，
That we, being made free from the fear of those who are against us, might give him worship,

就可以终身在他面前，坦然无惧地用圣洁公义事奉他。
In righteousness and holy living before him all our days.

孩子阿，你要称为至高者的先知。因为你要行在主的前面，预备他的道路。
And you, child, will be named the prophet of the Most High: you will go before the face of the Lord, to make ready his ways;

叫他的百姓因罪得赦，就知道救恩。
To give knowledge of salvation to his people, through the forgiveness of sins,

因我们神怜悯的心肠，叫清晨的日光从高天临到我们，
Because of the loving mercies of our God, by which the dawn from heaven has come to us,

要照亮坐在黑暗中死荫里的人。把我们的脚引到平安的路上。
To give light to those in dark places, and in the shade of death, so that our feet may be guided into the way of peace.

那孩子渐渐长大，心灵强健，住在旷野，直到他显明在以色列人面前的日子。
And the child became tall, and strong in spirit; and he was living in the waste land till the day when he came before the eyes of Israel.

当那些日子，该撒亚古士督有旨意下来，叫天下人民都报名上册。
Now it came about in those days that an order went out from Caesar Augustus that there was to be a numbering of all the world.

这是居里扭作叙利亚巡抚的时候，头一次行报名上册的事。
This was the first numbering, which was made when Quirinius was ruler of Syria.

众人各归各城，报名上册。
And all men went to be numbered, everyone to his town.

约瑟也从加利利的拿撒勒城上犹太去，到了大卫的城，名叫伯利恒，因他本是大卫一族一家的人。
And Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the town of Nazareth, into Judaea, to Beth-lehem, the town of David, because he was of the house and family of David,

要和他所聘之妻马利亚，一同报名上册。那时马利亚的身孕已经重了。
To be put on the list with Mary, his future wife, who was about to become a mother.

他们在那里的时候，马利亚的产期到了。
And while they were there, the time came for her to give birth.

就生了头胎的儿子，用布包起来，放在马槽里，因为客店里没有地方。
And she had her first son; and folding him in linen, she put him to rest in the place where the cattle had their food, because there was no room for them in the house.

在伯利恒之野地里有牧羊的人，夜间按着更次看守羊群。
And in the same country there were keepers of sheep in the fields, watching over their flock by night.

有主的使者站在他们旁边，主的荣光四面照着他们。牧羊的人就甚惧怕。
And an angel of the Lord came to them, and the glory of the Lord was shining round about them: and fear came on them.

那天使对他们说，不要惧怕，我报给你们大喜的信息，是关乎万民的。
And the angel said, Have no fear; for truly, I give you good news of great joy which will be for all the people:

因今天在大卫的城里，为你们生了救主，就是主基督。
For on this day, in the town of David, a Saviour has come to birth, who is Christ the Lord.

你们要看见一个婴孩，包着布，卧在马槽里，那就是记号了。
And this is the sign to you: you will see a young child folded in linen, in the place where the cattle have their food.

忽然有一大队天兵，同那天使赞美神说，
And suddenly there was with the angel a great band of spirits from heaven, giving praise to God, and saying,

在至高之处荣耀归与神，在地上平安归与他所喜悦的人。（有古卷作喜悦归与人）。
Glory to God in the highest, and on the earth peace among men with whom he is well pleased.

众天使离开他们升天去了，牧羊的人彼此说，我们往伯利恒去，看看所成的事，就是主所指示我们的。
And when the angels had gone away from them into heaven, the keepers of the sheep said to one another, Let us go now to Beth-lehem, and see this thing which has come about, which the Lord has made clear to us.

他们急忙去了，就寻见马利亚和约瑟，又有那婴孩卧在马槽里。
And they came quickly, and saw Mary and Joseph, and the child in the place where the cattle had their food.

既然看见，就把天使论这孩子的话传开了。
And when they saw it, they gave them an account of the things which had been said to them about the child.

凡听见的，就诧异牧羊之人对他们所说的话。
And all those to whose ears it came were full of wonder at the things said by the keepers of the sheep.

马利亚却把这一切的事存在心里，反复思想。
But Mary kept all these words in her heart, and gave much thought to them.

牧羊的人回去了，因所听见所看见的一切事，正如天使向他们所说的，就归荣耀与神，赞美他。
Then the keepers of the sheep went back, giving glory and praise to God for all the things which had come to their ears and which they had seen, as it had been said to them.

满了八天，就给孩子行割礼，与他起名叫耶稣，这就是没有成胎以前，天使所起的名。
And when, after eight days, the time came for his circumcision, he was named Jesus, the name which the angel had given to him before his birth.

按摩西律法满了洁净的日子，他们带着孩子上耶路撒冷去，要把他献与主。
And when the necessary days for making them clean by the law of Moses had come to an end, they took him to Jerusalem to give him to the Lord

（正如主的律法上所记，凡头生的男子，必称圣归主。）
(As it says in the law of the Lord, Every mother's first male child is to be holy to the Lord),

又要照主的律法上所说，或用一对班鸠，或用两只雏鸽献祭。
And to make an offering, as it is ordered in the law of the Lord, of two doves or other young birds.

在耶路撒冷有一个人名叫西面，这人又公义又虔诚，素常盼望以色列的安慰者来到，又有圣灵在他身上。
And there was then in Jerusalem a man whose name was Simeon; and he was an upright man, fearing God and waiting for the comfort of Israel: and the Holy Spirit was on him.

他得了圣灵的启示，知道自己未死以前，必看见主所立的基督。
And he had knowledge, through the Holy Spirit, that he would not see death till he had seen the Lord's Christ.

他受了圣灵的感动，进入圣殿。正遇见耶稣的父母抱着孩子进来，要照律法的规矩办理。
And full of the Spirit he came into the Temple; and when the father and mother came in with the child Jesus, to do with him what was ordered by the law,

西面就用手接过他来，称颂神说，
Then he took him in his arms and gave praise to God and said,

主阿，如今可以照你的话，释放仆人安然去世。
Now you are letting your servant go in peace, O Lord, as you have said;

因为我的眼睛已经看见你的救恩。
For my eyes have seen your salvation,

就是你在万民面前所预备的。
Which you have made ready before the face of all nations;

是照亮外邦人的光，又是你民以色列的荣耀。
A light of revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of your people Israel.

孩子的父母，因这论耶稣的话就希奇。
And his father and mother were full of wonder at the things which were said about him.

西面给他们祝福，又对孩子的母亲马利亚说，这孩子被立，是要叫以色列中许多人跌倒，许多人兴起。又要作毁谤的话柄。叫许多人心里的意念显露出来。你自己的心也要被刀刺透。
And Simeon gave them his blessing and said to Mary, his mother, See, this child will be the cause of the downfall and the lifting up of great numbers of people in Israel, and he will be a sign against which hard words will be said;


(And a sword will go through your heart;) so that the secret thoughts of men may come to light.

又有女先知名叫亚拿，是亚设支派法内力的女儿，年纪已经老迈，从作童女出嫁的时候，同丈夫住了七年，就寡居了。
And there was one, Anna, a woman prophet, the daughter of Phanuel, of the family of Asher (she was very old, and after seven years of married life

现在已经八十四岁，（或作就寡居了八十四年）并不离开圣殿，禁食祈求，昼夜事奉神。
She had been a widow for eighty-four years); she was in the Temple at all times, worshipping with prayers and going without food, night and day.

正当那时，她进前来称谢神，将孩子的事，对一切盼望耶路撒冷得救赎的人讲说。
And coming up at that time, she gave praise to God, talking of him to all those who were waiting for the freeing of Jerusalem.

约瑟和马利亚，照主的律法，办完了一切的事，就回加利利，到自己的城拿撒勒去了。
And when they had done all the things which were ordered by the law of the Lord, they went back to Galilee, to Nazareth, the town where they were living.

孩子渐渐长大，强健起来，充满智慧。又有神的恩在他身上。
And the child became tall and strong and full of wisdom, and the grace of God was on him.

每年到逾越节，他父母就上耶路撒冷去。
And every year his father and mother went to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover.

当他十二岁的时候，他们按着节期的规矩上去。
And when he was twelve years old, they went up, as their way was, to the feast;

守满了节期，他们回去，孩童耶稣仍旧在耶路撒冷。他的父母并不知道。
And when the days of the feast came to an end and they were going back, the boy Jesus was still in Jerusalem, but they had no knowledge of it:

以为他在同行的人中间，走了一天的路程，就在亲族和熟识的人中找他。
And in the belief that he was with some of their number, they went a day's journey; and after looking for him among their relations and friends,

既找不着，就回耶路撒冷去找他。
And seeing that he was not there, they went back to Jerusalem, to make search for him.

过了三天，就遇见他在殿里，坐在教师中间，一面听，一面问。
And after three days they came across him in the Temple, seated among the wise men, giving ear to their words and putting questions to them.

凡听见他的，都希奇他的聪明，和他的应对。
And all to whose ears it came were full of wonder at his knowledge and the answers which he gave.

他父母看见就很希奇。他母亲对他说，我儿，为什么向我们这样行呢？看哪，你父亲和我伤心来找你。
And when they saw him they were surprised, and his mother said to him, Son, why have you done this to us? see, your father and I have been looking for you with sorrow.

耶稣说，为什么找我呢？岂不知我应当以我父的事为念吗？（或作岂不知我应当在我父的家里吗）
And he said to them, Why were you looking for me? was it not clear to you that my right place was in my Father's house?

他所说的这话，他们不明白。
And his words seemed strange to them.

他就同他们下去，回到拿撒勒。并且顺从他们。他母亲把这一切的事都存在心里。
And he went down with them and came to Nazareth; and did as he was ordered: and his mother kept all these words in her heart.

耶稣的智慧和身量，（身量或作年纪）并神和人喜爱他的心，都一齐增长。
And Jesus was increasing in wisdom and in years, and in grace before God and men.

该撒提庇留在位第十五年，本丢彼拉多作犹太巡抚，希律作加利利分封的王，他兄弟腓力作以土利亚和特拉可尼地方分封的王，吕撒聂作亚比利尼分封的王，
Now in the fifteenth year of the rule of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being ruler of Judaea, and Herod being king of Galilee, his brother Philip king of the country of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias king of Abilene,

亚那和该亚法作大祭司，那时，撒迦利亚的儿子约翰在旷野里，神的话临到他。
When Annas and Caiaphas were high priests, the word of the Lord came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the waste land.

他就来到约但河一带地方，宣讲悔改的洗礼，使罪得赦。
And he came into all the country round about Jordan, preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed.

正如先知以赛亚书上所记的话，说，在旷野有人声喊着说，预备主的道，修直他的路。
As it says in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight.

一切山洼都要填满，大小山冈都要削平。弯弯曲曲的地方要改为正直，高高低低的道路要改为平坦。
Every valley will be lifted up, and all the mountains and hills made low, and the twisted will be made straight, and the rough ways smooth;

凡有血气的，都要见神的救恩。
And all flesh will see the salvation of God.

约翰对那出来要受他洗的众人说，毒蛇的种类，谁指示你们逃避将来的忿怒呢？
So he said to the people who went out to him for baptism: You offspring of snakes, at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come?

你们要结出果子来，与悔改的心相称，不要自己心里说，有亚伯拉罕为我们的祖宗。我告诉你们，神能从这些石头中，给亚伯拉罕兴起子孙来。
Make clear by your acts that your hearts have been changed; and do not say to yourselves, We have Abraham for our father: for I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children of Abraham.

现在斧子已经放在树根上，凡不结好果子的树，就砍下来丢在火里。
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees; and every tree which does not have good fruit will be cut down and put into the fire.

众人问他说，这样我们当作什么呢？
And the people put questions to him, saying, What have we to do?

约翰回答说，有两件衣裳的，就分给那没有的。有食物的也当这样行。
And he made answer and said to them, He who has two coats, let him give to him who has not even one; and he who has food, let him do the same.

又有税吏来要受洗，问他说，夫子，我们当作什么呢？
Then tax-farmers came to him for baptism and said to him, Master, what have we to do?

约翰说，除了例定的数目，不要多取。
And he said to them, Do not make an attempt to get more money than the right amount.

又有兵丁问他说，我们当作什么呢？约翰说，不要以强暴待人，也不要讹诈人，自己有钱粮就当知足。
And men of the army put questions to him, saying, And what have we to do? And he said to them, Do no violent acts to any man, and do not take anything without right, and let your payment be enough for you.

百姓指望基督来的时候，人都心里猜疑，或者约翰是基督。
And while the people were waiting, and all men were questioning in their hearts about John, if he was the Christ or not,

约翰说，我是用水给你们施洗，但有一位能力比我更大的要来，我就是给他解鞋带也不配。他要用圣灵与火给你们施洗。
John made answer, saying to them all, Truly, I give you baptism with water, but one is coming who is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo: he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit, and with fire:

他手里拿着簸箕，要扬净他的场，把麦子收在仓里，把糠用不灭的火烧尽了。
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain; he will put the good grain in his store, but the waste will be burned in the fire which will never be put out.

约翰又用许多别的话劝百姓，向他们传福音。
And so comforting them with these and other words, he gave the good news to the people;

只是分封的王希律，因他兄弟之妻希罗底的缘故，并因他所行的一切恶事，受了约翰的责备，
But Herod the king, because John had made a protest on account of Herodias, his brother's wife, and other evil things which Herod had done,

又另外添了一件，就是把约翰收在监里。
Did this most evil thing of all, and had John shut up in prison.

众百姓都受了洗，耶稣也受了洗，正祷告的时候，天就开了，
Now it came about that when all the people had been given baptism, Jesus, having had baptism with them, was in prayer, when, the heaven being open,

圣灵降临在他身上，形状仿佛鸽子。又有声音从天上来，说，你是我的爱子，我喜悦你。
The Holy Spirit came down in the form of a dove, and a voice came from heaven, saying, You are my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

耶稣开头传道，年纪约有三十岁，依人看来，他是约瑟的儿子，约瑟是希里的儿子，
And Jesus at this time was about thirty years old, being the son (as it seemed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,

希里是玛塔的儿子，玛塔是利未的儿子，利未是麦基的儿子，麦基是雅拿的儿子，雅拿是约瑟的儿子。
The son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,

约瑟是玛他提亚的儿子，玛他提亚是亚摩斯的儿子，亚摩斯是拿鸿的儿子，拿鸿是以斯利的儿子，以斯利是拿该的儿子，
The son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,

拿该是玛押的儿子，玛押是玛他提亚的儿子，玛他提亚是西美的儿子，西美是约瑟的儿子，约瑟是犹大的儿子，犹大是约亚拿的儿子，
The son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,

约亚拿是利撒的儿子，利撒是所罗巴伯的儿子，所罗巴伯是撒拉铁的儿子，撒拉铁是尼利的儿子，尼利是麦基的儿子，
The son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,

麦基是亚底的儿子，亚底是哥桑的儿子，哥桑是以摩当的儿子，以摩当是珥的儿子，珥是约细的儿子，
The son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,

约细是以利以谢的儿子，以利以谢是约令的儿子，约令是玛塔的儿子，玛塔是利未的儿子，
The son of Jesus, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,

利未是西缅的儿子，西缅是犹大的儿子，犹大是约瑟的儿子，约瑟是约南的儿子，约南是以利亚敬的儿子，
The son of Symeon, the son of Judas, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,

以利亚敬是米利亚的儿子，米利亚是买南的儿子，买南是玛达他的儿子，玛达他是拿单的儿子，拿单是大卫的儿子，
The son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,

大卫是耶西的儿子，耶西是俄备得的儿子，俄备得是波阿斯的儿子，波阿斯是撒门的儿子，撒门是拿顺的儿子，
The son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,

拿顺是亚米拿达的儿子，亚米拿达是亚兰的儿子，亚兰是希斯仑的儿子，希斯仑是法勒斯的儿子，法勒斯是犹大的儿子，
The son of Amminadab, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,

犹大是雅各的儿子，雅各是以撒的儿子，以撒是亚伯拉罕的儿子，亚伯拉罕是他拉的儿子，他拉是拿鹤的儿子，
The son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,

拿鹤是西鹿的儿子，西鹿是拉吴的儿子，拉吴是法勒的儿子，法勒是希伯的儿子，希伯是沙拉的儿子，
The son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,

沙拉是该南的儿子，该南是亚法撒的儿子，亚法撒是闪的儿子，闪是挪亚的儿子，挪亚是拉麦的儿子，
The son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,

拉麦是玛土撒拉的儿子，玛土撒拉是以诺的儿子，以诺是雅列的儿子，雅列是玛勒列的儿子，玛勒列是该南的儿子，该南是以挪士的儿子，
The son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,

以挪士是塞特的儿子，塞特是亚当的儿子，亚当是神的儿子。
The son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.

耶稣被圣灵充满，从约但河回来，圣灵将他引到旷野，四十天受魔鬼的试探。
And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, came back from the Jordan, and was guided by the Spirit in the waste land

那些日子没有吃什么。日子满了，他就饿了。
For forty days, being tested by the Evil One. And he had no food in those days; and when they came to an end, he was in need of food.

魔鬼对他说，你若是神的儿子，可以吩咐这块石头变成食物。
And the Evil One said to him, If you are the Son of God, give orders to this stone to become bread.

耶稣回答说，经上记着说，人活着不是单靠食物，乃是靠神口里所出的一切话
And Jesus made answer to him, It has been said in the Writings, Bread is not man's only need.

魔鬼又领他上了高山，霎时间把天下的万国都指给他看。
And he took him up and let him see all the kingdoms of the earth in a minute of time.

对他说，这一切权柄荣华，我都要给你。因为这原是交付我的，我愿意给谁就给谁。
And the Evil One said, I will give you authority over all these, and the glory of them, for it has been given to me, and I give it to anyone at my pleasure.

你若在我面前下拜，这都要归你。
If then you will give worship to me, it will all be yours.

耶稣说，经上记着说，当拜主你的神，单要事奉他。
And Jesus in answer said to him, It has been said in the Writings, Give worship to the Lord your God, and be his servant only.

魔鬼又领他到耶路撒冷去，叫他站在殿顶上，（顶原文作翅）对他说，你若是神的儿子，可以从这里跳下去。
And he took him to Jerusalem and put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him, If you are the Son of God, let yourself go down from here; for it is said in the Writings,

因为经上记着说，主要为你吩咐他的使者保护你。
He will give his angels orders to take care of you:

他们要用手托着你，免得你的脚碰在石头上。
And, In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.

耶稣对他说，经上说，不可试探主你的神。
And Jesus made answer and said to him, It is said in the Writings, You may not put the Lord your God to the test.

魔鬼用完了各样的试探，就暂时离开耶稣。
And when all these tests were ended the Evil One went away from him for a time.

耶稣满有圣灵的能力回到加利利，他的名声就传遍了四方。
And Jesus came back to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and the news of him went through all the country round about.

他在各会堂里教训人，众人都称赞他。
And he was teaching in their Synagogues and all men gave him praise.

耶稣来到拿撒勒，就是他长大的地方。在安息日，照他平常的规矩，进了会堂，站起来要念圣经。
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been as a child, and he went, as his way was, into the Synagogue on the Sabbath, and got up to give a reading.

有人把先知以赛亚的书交给他，他就打开，找到一处写着说，
And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him and, opening the book, he came on the place where it is said,

主的灵在我身上，因为他用膏膏我，叫我传福音给贫穷的人。差遣我报告被掳的得释放，瞎眼的得看见，叫那受压制的得自由，
The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor; he has sent me to make well those who are broken-hearted; to say that the prisoners will be let go, and the blind will see, and to make the wounded free from their chains,

报告神悦纳人的禧年。
To give knowledge that the year of the Lord's good pleasure is come.

于是把书卷起来，交还执事，就坐下。会堂里的人都定睛看他。
And shutting the book he gave it back to the servant and took his seat: and the eyes of all in the Synagogue were fixed on him.

耶稣对他们说，今天这经应验在你们耳中了。
Then he said to them, Today this word has come true in your hearing.

众人都称赞他，并希奇他口中所出的恩言。又说，这不是约瑟的儿子吗？
And they were all giving witness, with wonder, to the words of grace which came from his mouth: and they said, Is not this the son of Joseph?

耶稣对他们说，你们必引这俗语向我说，医生，你医治自己吧。我们听见你在迦百农所行的事，也当行在你自己家乡里。
And he said to them, Without doubt you will say to me, Let the medical man make himself well: the things which to our knowledge were done at Capernaum, do them here in your country.

又说，我实在告诉你们，没有先知在自己家乡被人悦纳的。
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, No prophet is honoured in his country.

我对你们说实话，当以利亚的时候，天闭塞了三年零六个月，遍地有大饥荒，那时，以色列中有许多寡妇。
Truly I say to you, There were a number of widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up for three years and six months and there was no food in the land;

以利亚并没有奉差往他们一个人那里去，只奉差往西顿的撒勒法，一个寡妇那里去。
But Elijah was not sent to one of them, but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.

先知以利沙的时候，以色列中有许多长大麻疯的。但内中除了叙利亚国的乃缦，没有一个得洁净的。
And there were a number of lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, and not one of them was made clean, but only Naaman the Syrian.

会堂里的人听见这话，都怒气满胸。
And all who were in the Synagogue were very angry when these things were said to them.

就起来撵他出城，他们的城造在山上，他们带他到山崖，要把他推下去。
And they got up and took him out of the town to the edge of the mountain on which their town was, so that they might send him down to his death.

他却从他们中间直行，过去了。
But he came through them and went on his way.

耶稣下到迦百农，就是加利利的一座城，在安息日教训众人。
And he came down to Capernaum, a town of Galilee; and he was giving them teaching on the Sabbath.

他们很希奇他的教训，因为他的话里有权柄。
And they were surprised at his teaching, for his word was with authority.

在会堂里有一个人，被污鬼的精气附着，大声喊叫说，
And there was a man in the Synagogue who had an unclean spirit; and he gave a loud cry and said,

唉，拿撒勒的耶稣，我们与你有什么相干，你来灭我们吗？我知道你是谁，乃是神的圣者。
Let us be! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? have you come to put an end to us? I have knowledge who you are, the Holy One of God.

耶稣责备他说，不要作声，从这人身上出来吧。鬼把那人摔倒在众人中间，就出来了，却也没有害他。
And Jesus said to him, Be quiet, and come out of him. And when the evil spirit had put him down on the earth in the middle of them, he came out of him, having done him no damage.

众人都惊讶，彼此对问说，这是什么道理呢？因为他用权柄能力吩咐污鬼，污鬼就出来。
And wonder came on them all and they said to one another, What are these words? for with authority and power he gives orders to the evil spirits and they come out.

于是耶稣的名声传遍了周围地方。
And there was much talk about him in all the places round about.

耶稣出了会堂，进了西门的家。西门的岳母害热病甚重。有人为她求耶稣。
And he got up and went out of the Synagogue and went into the house of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was very ill with a burning heat; and in answer to their prayers for her

耶稣站在她旁边，斥责那热病，热就退了。她立刻起来服事他们。
He went near her, and with a sharp word he gave orders to the disease and it went away from her; and straight away she got up and took care of their needs.

日落的时候，凡有病人的，不论害什么病，都带到耶稣那里。耶稣按手在他们各人身上，医好他们。
And at sundown all those who had anyone ill with any sort of disease, took them to him, and he put his hands on every one of them and made them well.

又有鬼从好些人身上出来，喊着说，你是神的儿子。耶稣斥责他们，不许他们说话，因为他们知道他是基督。
And evil spirits came out of a number of them, crying out and saying, You are the Son of God. But he gave them sharp orders not to say a word, because they had knowledge that he was the Christ.

天亮的时候，耶稣出来，走到旷野地方。众人去找他，到了他那里，要留住他，不要他离开他们。
And when it was day, he came out and went to a waste place; and great numbers of people came looking for him, and they came to him and would have kept him from going away.

但耶稣对他们说，我也必须在别城传神国的福音。因我奉差原是为此。
But he said to them, I have to give the good news of the kingdom of God in other towns, because that is why I was sent.

于是耶稣在加利利的各会堂传道。
And he was teaching in the Synagogues of Galilee.

耶稣站在革尼撒勒湖边，众人拥挤他，要听神的道。
Now it came about that while the people came pushing to be near him, and to have knowledge of the word of God, he was by a wide stretch of water named Gennesaret;

他见有两只船湾在湖边。打鱼的人却离开船，洗网去了。
And he saw two boats by the edge of the water, but the fishermen had gone out of them and were washing their nets.

有一只船，是西门的，耶稣就上去，请他把船撑开，稍微离岸，就坐下，从船上教训众人。
And he got into one of the boats, the property of Simon, and made a request to him to go a little way out from the land. And being seated he gave the people teaching from the boat.

讲完了，对西门说，把船开到水深之处，下网打鱼。
And when his talk was ended, he said to Simon, Go out into deep water, and let down your nets for fish.

西门说，夫子，我们整夜劳力，并没有打着什么。但依从你的话，我就下网。
And Simon, answering, said, Master, we were working all night and we took nothing: but at your word I will let down the nets.

他们下了网，就圈住许多鱼，网险些裂开。
And when they had done this, they got such a great number of fish that it seemed as if their nets would be broken;

便招呼那只船上的同伴来帮助。他们就来把鱼装满了两只船，甚至船要沉下去。
And they made signs to their friends in the other boat to come to their help. And they came, and the two boats were so full that they were going down.

西门彼得看见，就俯伏在耶稣膝前，说，主阿，离开我，我是个罪人。
But Simon, when he saw it, went down at the knees of Jesus and said, Go away from me, O Lord, for I am a sinner.

他和一切同在的人，都惊讶这一网所打的鱼。
For he was full of wonder and so were all those who were with him, at the number of fish which they had taken;

他的伙伴西庇太的儿子，雅各，约翰，也是这样。耶稣对西门说，不要怕，从今以后，你要得人了。
And so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, who were working with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Have no fear; from this time forward you will be a fisher of men.

他们把两只船拢了岸，就撇下所有的跟从了耶稣。
And when they had got their boats to the land, they gave up everything and went after him.

有一回耶稣在一个城里，有人满身长了大麻疯，看见他就俯伏在地，求他说，主若肯，必能叫我洁净了。
And it came about that while he was in one of the towns, there was a leper there: and when he saw Jesus he went down on his face in prayer to him, saying, Lord, if it is your pleasure, you have power to make me clean.

耶稣伸手摸他说，我肯，你洁净了吧。大麻疯立刻就离了他的身。
And he put out his hand to him and said, It is my pleasure; be clean. And straight away his disease went from him.

耶稣嘱咐他，你切不可告诉人。只要去把身体给祭司察看，又要为你得了洁净，照摩西所吩咐的，献上礼物对众人作证据。
And he gave him orders: Say nothing to any man, but let the priest see you and give an offering so that you may be made clean, as the law of Moses says, and for a witness to them.

但耶稣的名声越发传扬出去。有极多的人聚集来听道，也指望医治他们的病。
But news of him went out all the more, in every direction, and great numbers of people came together to give hearing to his words and to be made well from their diseases.

耶稣却退到旷野去祷告。
But he went away by himself to a waste place for prayer.

有一天耶稣教训人，有法利赛人和教法师在旁边坐着，他们是从加利利各乡村和犹太并耶路撒冷来的。主的能力与耶稣同在，使他能医治病人。
And it came about that on one of these days he was teaching; and some Pharisees and teachers of the law were seated there, who had come from every town of Galilee and Judaea and from Jerusalem; and the power of the Lord was with him, to make those who were ill free from their diseases.

有人用褥子抬着一个瘫子，要抬进去放在耶稣面前，
And some men had with them, on a bed, a man who was ill, without power of moving; and they made attempts to get him in and put him before Jesus.

却因人多，寻不出法子抬进去，就上了房顶，从瓦间把他连褥子缒到当中，正在耶稣面前。
And because of the mass of people, there was no way to get him in; so they went up on the top of the house and let him down through the roof, on his bed, into the middle in front of Jesus.

耶稣见他们的信心，就对瘫子说，你的罪赦了。
And seeing their faith he said, Man, you have forgiveness for your sins.

文士和法利赛人就议论说，这说僭妄话的是谁？除了神以外，谁能赦罪呢？
And the scribes and Pharisees were having an argument, saying, Who is this, who has no respect for God? who is able to give forgiveness for sins, but God only?

耶稣知道他们所议论的，就说，你们心里议论的是什么呢？
But Jesus, who had knowledge of their thoughts, said to them, Why are you reasoning in your hearts?

或说，你的罪赦了，或说，你起来行走，哪一样容易呢？
Which is the simpler: to say, You have forgiveness for your sins; or to say, Get up and go?

但要叫你们知道人子在地上有赦罪的权柄，就对瘫子说，我吩咐你起来，拿你的褥子回家去吧。
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins, (he said to the man who was ill,) I say to you, Get up, and take up your bed, and go into your house.

那人当众人面前，立刻起来，拿着他所躺卧的褥子回家去，归荣耀与神。
And straight away he got up before them, and took up his bed and went away to his house giving praise to God.

众人都惊奇，也归荣耀与神，并且满心惧怕，说，我们今日看见非常的事了。
And wonder overcame them all, and they gave glory to God; and they were full of fear, saying, We have seen strange things today.

这事以后，耶稣出去，看见一个税吏，名叫利未，坐在税关上，就对他说，你跟从我来。
And after these things he went out, and saw Levi, a tax-farmer, seated at the place where taxes were taken, and said to him, Come after me.

他就撇下所有的，起来，跟从了耶稣。
And giving up his business, he got up and went after him.

利未在自己家里，为耶稣大摆筵席。有许多税吏和别人，与他们一同坐席。
And Levi made a great feast for him in his house: and a great number of tax-farmers and others were seated at table with them.

法利赛人和文士，就向耶稣的门徒发怨言，说，你们为什么和税吏，并罪人，一同吃喝呢？
And the Pharisees and their scribes made protests against his disciples, saying, Why do you take food and drink with tax-farmers and sinners?

耶稣对他们说，无病的人用不着医生。有病的人才用得着。
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill.

我来本不是召义人悔改。乃是召罪人悔改。
I have come, not to get the upright, but sinners, so that they may be turned from their sins.

他们说，约翰的门徒屡次禁食祈祷，法利赛人的门徒也是这样。惟独你的门徒又吃又喝。
And they said to him, The disciples of John frequently go without food, and make prayers, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees; but your disciples take food and drink.

耶稣对他们说，新郎和陪伴之人同在的时候，岂能叫陪伴之人禁食呢？
And Jesus said, Are you able to make the friends of the newly-married man go without food when he is with them?

但日子将到，新郎要离开他们，那日他们就要禁食了。
But the days will come when he will be taken away from them, and then they will go without food.

耶稣又设一个比喻，对他们说，没有人把新衣服撕下一块来，补在旧衣服上。若是这样，就把新的撕破了，并且所撕下来的那块新的，和旧的也不相称。
And he said to them, in a story, No man takes a bit of cloth from a new coat and puts it on to an old coat, for so the new coat would be damaged and the bit from the new would not go well with the old.

也没有人把新酒装在旧皮袋里。若是这样，新酒必将皮袋裂开，酒便漏出来，皮袋也就坏了。
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins, for fear that the skins will be burst by the new wine, and the wine be let out, and the skins come to destruction.

但新酒必须装在新皮袋里。
But new wine has to be put into new wine-skins.

没有人喝了陈酒又想喝新的，他总说陈的好。
And no man, having had old wine, has any desire for new, for he says, The old is better.

有一个安息日，耶稣从麦地经过。他的门徒掐了麦穗，用手搓着吃。
Now it came about that on the Sabbath he was going through the fields of grain, and his disciples took the heads of the grain for food, crushing them in their hands.

有几个法利赛人说，你们为什么作安息日不可作的事呢？
But some of the Pharisees said, Why do you do what it is not right to do on the Sabbath?

耶稣对他们说，经上记着大卫和跟从他的人，饥饿之时所作的事，连这个你们也没有念过吗？
And Jesus said, Have you not seen in the Writings what David did when he was in need of food, he, and those who were with him;

他怎么进了神的殿，拿陈设饼吃，又给跟从的人吃。这饼除了祭司以外，别人都不可吃。
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread, which only the priests may take, and gave it to those who were with him?

又对他们说，人子是安息日的主。
And he said, The Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath.

又有一个安息日，耶稣进了会堂教训人。在那里有一个人右手枯干了。
And it came about, on another Sabbath, that he went into the Synagogue and was teaching there. And a man was there whose right hand was dead.

文士和法利赛人窥探耶稣，在安息日治病不治病。要得把柄去告他。
And the scribes and Pharisees were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath, so that they might be able to say something against him.

耶稣却知道他们的意念。就对那枯干一只手的人说，起来，站在当中。那人就起来站着。
But he had knowledge of their thoughts; and he said to the man whose hand was dead, Get up and come into the middle. And he got up and came forward.

耶稣对他们说，我问你们，在安息日行善行恶，救命害命，那样是可以的呢？
And Jesus said, I put the question to you, Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil? to give life or to take it away?

他就周围看着他们众人，对那人说，伸出手来。他把手一伸，手就复了原。
And looking round on all of them, he said to him, Put out your hand. And he did so: and his hand was made well.

他们就满心大怒，彼此商议，怎样处治耶稣。
But they were full of wrath, and were talking together about what they might do to Jesus.

那时耶稣出去上山祷告。整夜祷告神。
And it came about in those days that he went out to the mountain for prayer; and he was all night in prayer to God.

到了天亮，叫他的门徒来。就从他们中间挑选十二个人，称他们为使徒。
And the day came and, turning to his disciples, he made a selection from among them of twelve, to whom he gave the name of Apostles;

这十二个人有西门，耶稣又给他起名叫彼得，还有他兄弟安得烈，又有雅各和约翰，腓力和巴多罗买，
Simon, to whom he gave the name of Peter, and Andrew, his brother, and James and John and Philip and Bartholomew

马太和多马，亚勒腓的儿子雅各，和奋锐党的西门，
And Matthew and Thomas and James, the son of Alphaeus, and Simon, who was named the Zealot,

雅各的儿子犹大，（儿子或作兄弟）和卖主的加略人犹大。
And Judas, the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, he who was false to him.

耶稣和他们下了山，站在一块平地上。同站的有许多门徒，又有许多百姓，从犹太全地，和耶路撒冷，并推罗西顿的海边来。都要听他讲道，又指望医治他们的病。
And he came down with them to a level place, and a great band of his disciples, and a very great number of people from all Judaea and Jerusalem and from the parts of Tyre and Sidon by the sea, came to give hearing to him, and to be made well from their diseases;

还有被污鬼缠磨的，也得了医治。
And those who were troubled with unclean spirits were made well.

众人都想要摸他。因为有能力从他身上发出来，医好了他们。
And all the people were desiring to be touched by him, for power came from him and made them all well.

耶稣举目看着门徒说，你们贫穷的人有福了。因为神的国是你们的。
And turning his eyes to his disciples he said, Happy are you who are poor: for the kingdom of God is yours.

你们饥饿的人有福了。因为你们将要饱足。你们哀哭的人有福了。因为你们将要喜笑。
Happy are you who are in need of food now: for you will be made full. Happy are you who are weeping now; for you will be glad.

人为人子恨恶你们，拒绝你们，辱骂你们，弃掉你们的名，以为是恶，你们就有福了。
Happy are you, when men have hate for you, and put you away from among them and say angry words to you, turning away in disgust at your name, because of the Son of man.

当那日你们要欢喜跳跃。因为你们在天上的赏赐是大的。他们的祖宗待先知也是这样。
Be glad in that day, and be lifted up for joy, for your reward in heaven will be great: for their fathers did these same things to the prophets.

但你们富足的人有祸了。因为你们受过你们的安慰。
But unhappy are you who have wealth: for you have been comforted now.

你们饱足的人有祸了。因为你们将要饥饿。你们喜笑的人有祸了。因为你们将要哀恸哭泣。
Unhappy are you who are full of food now: for you will be in need. Unhappy are you who are laughing now: for you will be crying in sorrow.

人都说你们好的时候，你们就有祸了。因为他们的祖宗待假先知也是这样。
Unhappy are you when all men give you their approval: for so their fathers did to the false prophets.

只是我告诉你们这听道的人，你们的仇敌要爱他，恨你们的要待他好。
But I say to you who give ear to me, Have love for those who are against you, do good to those who have hate for you,

咒诅你们的要为他祝福，凌辱你们的要为他祷告。
Give blessing to those who give you curses, say prayers for those who are cruel to you.

有人打你这边的脸，连那边的脸也由他打。有人夺你的外衣，连里衣也由他拿去。
If a man gives you a blow on one side of your face, then let the other side be turned to him; from him who takes away your coat, do not keep back your robe.

凡求你的，就给他。有人夺你的东西去，不用再要回来。
Give to everyone who comes with a request, and if a man takes away your property, make no attempt to get it back again.

你们愿意人怎样待你们，你们也要怎样待人。
Do to others as you would have them do to you.

你们若单爱那爱你们的人，有什么可酬谢的呢？就是罪人也爱那爱他们的人。
If you have love for those who have love for you, what credit is it to you? for even sinners have love for those who have love for them.

你们若善待那善待你们的人，有什么可酬谢的呢？就是罪人也是这样行。
And if you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is it to you? for even sinners do the same.

你们若借给人，指望从他收回，有什么可酬谢的呢？就是罪人也借给罪人，要如数收回。
And if you let those have the use of your money, from whom you are hoping to get it back, what credit is it to you? even sinners do so to sinners, hoping to get back as much as they gave.

你们倒要爱仇敌，也要善待他们，并要借给人不指望偿还。你们的赏赐就必大了，你们也必作至高者的儿子。因为他恩待那忘恩的和作恶的。
But be loving to those who are against you and do them good, and give them your money, not giving up hope, and your reward will be great and you will be the sons of the Most High: for he is kind to evil men, and to those who have hard hearts.

你们要慈悲，象你们的父慈悲一样。
Be full of pity, even as your Father is full of pity.

你们不要论断人，就不被论断。你们不要定人的罪，就不被定罪。你们要饶恕人，就必蒙饶恕。（饶恕原文作释放）
Be not judges of others, and you will not be judged: do not give punishment to others, and you will not get punishment yourselves: make others free, and you will be made free:

你们要给人，就必有给你们的。并且用十足的升斗，连摇带按，上尖下流的，倒在你们怀里。因为你们用什么量器量给人，也必用什么量器量给你们。
Give, and it will be given to you; good measure, crushed down, full and running over, they will give to you. For in the same measure as you give, it will be given to you again.

耶稣又用比喻对他们说，瞎子岂能领瞎子，两个人不是都要掉在坑里吗？
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story, saying, Is it possible for one blind man to be guide to another? will they not go falling together into a hole?

学生不能高过先生。凡学成了的不过和先生一样。
The disciple is not greater than his master, but everyone whose learning is complete will be like his master.

为什么看见你弟兄眼中有刺，却不想自己眼中有梁木呢？
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye, but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye?

你不见自己眼中有梁木。怎能对你弟兄说，容我去掉你眼中的刺呢？你这假冒为善的人，先去掉自己眼中的梁木，然后才能看得清楚，去掉你弟兄眼中的刺。
How will you say to your brother, Brother, let me take the grain of dust out of your eye, when you yourself do not see the bit of wood in your eye? O false one! first take the wood out of your eye and then you will see clearly to take the dust out of your brother's eye.

因为没有好树结坏果子。也没有坏树结好果子。
For no good tree gives bad fruit, and no bad tree gives good fruit.

凡树木看果子，就可以认出他来。人不是从荆棘上摘无花果，也不是从蒺藜里摘葡萄。
For every tree is judged by its fruit. Men do not get figs from thorns, or grapes from blackberry plants.

善人从他心里所存的善，就发出善来。恶人从他心里所存的恶，就发出恶来。因为心里所充满的，口里就说出来。
The good man, out of the good store of his heart, gives good things; and the evil man, out of his evil store, gives evil: for out of the full store of the heart come the words of the mouth.

你们为什么称呼我主阿，主阿，却不遵我的话行呢？
Why do you say to me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?

凡到我这里来，听见我的话就去行的，我要告诉你们他像什么人。
Everyone who comes to me and gives ear to my words and does them, I will make clear to you what he is like:

他像一个人盖房子，深深地挖地，把根基安在磐石上。到发大水的时候，水冲那房子，房子总不能摇动。因为根基立在磐石上。有古卷作因为盖造得好
He is like a man building a house, who went deep and put the base of it on a rock; and when the water came up and the river was driving against that house, it was not moved, because the building was good.

惟有听见不去行的，就像一个人在土地上盖房子，没有根基。水一冲，随即倒塌了，并且那房子坏得很大。
But he who gives hearing, without doing, is like a man building a house on the earth without a base for it; and when the force of the river came against it, straight away it came down; and the destruction of that house was great.

耶稣对百姓讲完了这一切的话，就进了迦百农。
After he had come to the end of all his words in the hearing of the people, he went into Capernaum.

有一个百夫长所宝贵的仆人，害病快要死了。
And a certain captain had a servant who was very dear to him; this servant was ill and near to death.

百夫长风闻耶稣的事，就托犹太人的几个长老，去求耶稣来救他的仆人。
And when news of Jesus came to his ears, he sent to him rulers of the Jews, requesting that he would come and make his servant well.

他们到了耶稣那里，就切切地求他说，你给他行这事，是他所配得的。
And they, when they came to Jesus, made their request warmly, saying,

因为他爱我们的百姓，给我们建造会堂。
It is right for you to do this for him, because he is a friend to our nation, and himself has put up a Synagogue for us.

耶稣就和他们同去。离那家不远，百夫长托几个朋友去见耶稣，对他说，主阿，不要劳动。因你到我舍下，我不敢当。
And Jesus went with them. And when he was not far from the house, the man sent friends to him, saying, Lord, do not give yourself trouble: for I am not important enough for you to come into my house:

我也自以为不配去见你，只要你说一句话，我的仆人就必好了。
And I had the feeling that I was not even good enough to come to you: but say the word only, and my servant will be well.

因为我在人的权下，也有兵在我以下，对这个说去，他就去。对那个说来，他就来。对我的仆人说，你作这事，他就去作。
For I, myself, am a man under authority, having men under me; and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.

耶稣听见这话，就希奇他，转身对跟随的众人说，我告诉你们，这么大的信心，就是在以色列中我也没有遇见过。
And when these things were said to Jesus, he was surprised, and, turning to the mass of people coming after him, said, I have not seen such great faith, no, not in Israel.

那托来的人回到百夫长家里，看见仆人已经好了。
And when those who were sent came back to the house they saw that the servant was well.

过了不多时，有古卷作次日耶稣往一座城去，这城名叫拿因，他的门徒和极多的人与他同行。
And it came about, after a little time, that he went to a town named Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great number of people.

将近城门，有一个死人被抬出来。这人是他母亲独生的儿子，他母亲又是寡妇。有城里的许多人同着寡妇送殡。
Now when he came near the door of the town, a dead man was being taken out, the only son of his mother, who was a widow: and a great number of people from the town were with her.

主看见那寡妇就怜悯她，对她说，不要哭。
And when the Lord saw her, he had pity on her and said to her, Be not sad.

于是进前按着杠，抬的人就站住了。耶稣说，少年人，我吩咐你起来。
And he came near, and put his hand on the stretcher where the dead man was: and those who were moving it came to a stop. And he said, Young man, I say to you, Get up.

那死人就坐起，并且说话。耶稣便把他交给他母亲。
And the dead man got up, and words came from his lips. And he gave him to his mother.

众人都惊奇，归荣耀与神说，有大先知在我们中间兴起来了。又说，神眷顾了他的百姓。
And fear came on all, and they gave praise to God, saying, A great prophet is among us: and, God has given thought to his people.

他这事的风声就传遍了犹太，和周围地方。
And this story about him went through all Judaea and the places round about.

约翰的门徒把这些事都告诉约翰。
And the disciples of John gave him an account of all these things.

他便叫了两个门徒来，打发他们到主那里去，说，那将要来的是你吗？还是我们等候别人呢？
Then John sent two of his disciples to the Lord, saying, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?

那两个人来到耶稣那里，说，施洗的约翰打发我们来问你，那将要来的是你吗？还是我们等候别人呢？
And when the men came to him they said, John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?

正当那时候，耶稣治好了许多有疾病的，受灾患的，被恶鬼附着的。又开恩叫好些瞎子能看见。
At that time, he made a number of people free from their diseases and their pains, and from evil spirits; and to others who were blind he gave back the use of their eyes.

耶稣回答说，你们去把所看见所听见的事告诉约翰。就是瞎子看见，瘸子行走，长大麻疯的洁净，聋子听见，死人复活，穷人有福音传给他们。
And answering them he said, Go back and give news to John of what you have seen, and the things which have come to your ears; the blind now see, those who had no power in their legs are walking, lepers are made clean, those who had no hearing now have their ears open, dead men come to life again, and the poor have the good news given to them.

凡不因我跌倒的，就有福了。
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me.

约翰所差来的人既走了，耶稣就对众人讲论约翰说，你们从前出去到旷野，是要看什么呢？要看风吹动的芦苇吗？
And when the men who were sent by John had gone away, he said to the people, about John, What did you go out into the waste land to see? a tall stem moving in the wind?

你们出去到底是要看什么？要看穿细软衣服的人吗？那穿华丽衣服宴乐度日的人，是在王宫里。
But what did you go out to see? a man in soft clothing? See now, those who have beautiful clothing and delicate food are in kings' houses.

你们出去究竟是要看什么？要看先知吗？我告诉你们，是的，他比先知大多了。
But what did you go out to see? a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.

经上记着说，我要差遣我的使者在你前面，预备道路。所说的就是这个人。
This is he of whom it has been said, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way before you.

我告诉你们，凡妇人所生的，没有一个大过约翰的。然而神国里最小的比他还大。
I say to you, Among all the sons of women, not one is greater than John: but he who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.

众百姓和税吏，既受过约翰的洗，听见这话，就以神为义。
(And all the people, and the tax-farmers, to whom John had given baptism, when they had knowledge of these things, gave glory to God.

但法利赛人和律法师，没有受过约翰的洗，竟为自己废弃了神的旨意。（二十九三十两节或作众百姓和税吏听见了约翰的话就受了他的洗便以神为义但法利赛人和律法师不受约翰的洗，竟为自己废弃了神的旨意。）
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were against the purpose of God for themselves, not having had his baptism.)

主又说，这样，我可用什么比这世代的人呢？他们好像什么呢？
What comparison am I to make of the men of this generation? what are they like?

好像孩童坐在街市上，彼此呼叫说，我们向你们吹笛，你们不跳舞，我们向你们举哀，你们不啼哭。
They are like children who are seated in the market-place, crying out to one another, and saying, We made music for you, but you did not take part in the dance; we gave cries of sorrow, but you were not sad.

施洗的约翰来，不吃饼，不喝酒。你们说他是被鬼附着的。
For John the Baptist came, taking no food or drink, and you say, He has an evil spirit.

人子来，也吃也喝。你们说他是贪食好酒的人，是税吏和罪人的朋友。
The Son of man came feasting, and you say, Here is a lover of food and wine, a friend of tax-farmers and sinners.

但智慧之子，都以智慧为是。
But wisdom is judged to be right by all her children.

有一个法利赛人，请耶稣和他吃饭。耶稣就到法利赛人家里去坐席。
And one of the Pharisees made a request that he would take a meal with him. And he went into the Pharisee's house and took his seat at the table.

那城里有一个女人，是个罪人。知道耶稣在法利赛人家里坐席，就拿着盛香膏的玉瓶，
And there was a woman in the town who was a sinner; and when she had news that he was a guest in the Pharisee's house, she took a bottle of perfume,

站在耶稣背后，挨着他的脚哭，眼泪湿了耶稣的脚，就用自己的头发擦干，又用嘴连连亲他的脚，把香膏抹上。
And went in and took her place at the back of him, near his feet, weeping, so that his feet were washed with the drops from her eyes, and with her hair she made them dry, and kissing his feet she put the perfume on them.

请耶稣的法利赛人看见这事，心里说，这人若是先知，必知道摸他的是谁，是个怎样的女人，乃是个罪人。
Now when the Pharisee in whose house he was saw it, he said to himself, This man, if he was a prophet, would be conscious what sort of woman this is who has put her hands on him, that she is a sinner.

耶稣对他说，西门，我有句话要对你说。西门说，夫子，请说。
And Jesus, answering, said, Simon, I have something to say to you. And he said, Master, say on.

耶稣说，一个债主，有两个人欠他的债。一个欠五十两银子，一个欠五两银子。
And he said, Two men were in debt to a certain man of business: one had a debt of five hundred pence, and the other of fifty.

因为他们无力偿还，债主就开恩免了他们两个人的债。这两个人哪一个更爱他呢？
When they were unable to make payment, he made the two of them free of their debts. Which of them, now, will have the greater love for him?

西门回答说，我想是那多得恩免的人。耶稣说，你断的不错。
Simon, in answer, said, It seems he whose debt was greater. And he said, Your decision is right.

于是转过来向着那女人，便对西门说，你看见这女人吗？我进了你的家，你没有给我水洗脚。但这女人用眼泪湿了我的脚，用头发擦干。
And turning to the woman he said to Simon, You see this woman? I came into your house; you did not give me water for my feet: but she has been washing my feet with the drops from her eyes, and drying them with her hair.

你没有与我亲嘴，但这女人从我进来的时候，就不住地用嘴亲我的脚。
You did not give me a kiss: but she, from the time when I came in, has gone on kissing my feet.

你没有用油抹我的头，但这女人用香膏抹我的脚。
You put no oil on my head: but she has put perfume on my feet.

所以我告诉你，他许多的罪都赦免了。因为他的爱多。但那赦免少的，他的爱就少。
And so I say to you, She will have forgiveness for her sins which are great in number, because of her great love: but he who has small need of forgiveness gives little love.

于是对那女人说，你的罪赦免了。
And he said to her, You have forgiveness for your sins.

同席的人心里说，这是什么人，竟赦免人的罪呢？
And those who were seated at table with him said to themselves, Who is this who even gives forgiveness of sins?

耶稣对那女人说，你的信救了你，平平安安地回去吧。
And he said to the woman, By your faith you have salvation; go in peace.

过了不多日，耶稣周游各城各乡传道，宣讲神国的福音。和他同去的有十二个门徒，
And it came about, after a short time, that he went through town and country giving the good news of the kingdom of God, and with him were the twelve,

还有被恶鬼所附，被疾病所累，已经治好的几个妇女，内中有称为抹大拉的马利亚，曾有七个鬼从她身上赶出来。
And certain women who had been made free from evil spirits and diseases, Mary named Magdalene, from whom seven evil spirits had gone out,

又有希律的家宰苦撒的妻子约亚拿，并苏撒拿，和好些别的妇女，都是用自己的财物供给耶稣和门徒。
And Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's chief house-servant, and Susanna and a number of others, who gave him of their wealth for his needs.

当许多人聚集，又有人从各城里出来见耶稣的时候，耶稣就用比喻说，
And when a great number of people came together, and men from every town went out to him, he gave them teaching in the form of a story:

有一个撒种的出去撒种。撒的时候，有落在路旁的，被人践踏，天上的飞鸟又来吃尽了。
A man went out to put in seed, and while he was doing it, some was dropped by the wayside and it was crushed under foot, and was taken by the birds of heaven.

有落在磐石上的，一出来就枯干了，因为得不着滋润。
And some went on the rock, and when it came up it became dry and dead because it had no water.

有落在荆棘里的，荆棘一同生长，把它挤住了。
And some went among thorns, and the thorns came up with it and it had no room for growth.

又有落在好土里的，生长起来，结实百倍。耶稣说了这些话，就大声说，有耳可听的，就应当听。
And some falling on good earth, came up and gave fruit a hundred times as much. And with these words he said in a loud voice, He who has ears, let him give ear.

门徒问耶稣说，这比喻是什么意思呢？
And his disciples put questions to him about the point of the story.

他说，神国的奥秘，只叫你们知道。至于别人，就用比喻，叫他们看也看不见，听也听不明。
And he said, To you is given knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of God; but to the others, they are given in stories, so that seeing, they may not see, and though they give hearing, the sense will not be clear to them.

这比喻乃是这样。种子就是神的道。
Now this is the point of the story: The seed is the word of God.

那些在路旁的，就是人听了道，随后魔鬼来，从他们心里把道夺去，恐怕他们信了得救。
Those by the side of the road are those who have given hearing; then the Evil One comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not have faith and get salvation.

那些在磐石上的，就是人听道，欢喜领受，但心中没有根，不过暂时相信，及至遇见试炼就退后了。
And those on the rock are those who with joy give hearing to the word; but having no root, they have faith for a time, and when the test comes they give up.

那落在荆棘里的，就是人听了道，走开以后，被今生的思虑钱财宴乐挤住了，便结不出成熟的子粒来。
And those which went among thorns are those who have given hearing, and go on their way, but they are overcome by cares and wealth and the pleasures of life, and they give no fruit.

那落在好土里的，就是人听了道，持守在诚实善良的心里，并且忍耐着结实。
And those in the good earth are those who, having given ear to the word, keep it with a good and true heart, and in quiet strength give fruit.

没有人点灯用器皿盖上，或放在床底下，乃是放在灯台上，叫进来的人看见亮光。
No man, when the light is lighted, puts a cover over it, or puts it under a bed, but he puts it on its table, so that those who come in may see the light.

因为掩藏的事，没有不显出来的。隐瞒的事，没有不露出来被人知道的。
For nothing is put out of view which will not be made clear, and nothing is secret of which the knowledge will not come to light.

所以你们应当小心怎样听。因为凡有的，还要加给他。凡没有的，连他自以为有的，也要夺去。
So take care how you give hearing, for to him who has will be given, and from him who has not will be taken even what he seems to have.

耶稣的母亲和他弟兄来了，因为人多，不得到他跟前。
And his mother and his brothers came to him, and they were not able to get near him because of the great number of people.

有人告诉他说，你母亲和你弟兄，站在外边，要见你。
And someone said to him, Your mother and your brothers are outside desiring to see you.

耶稣回答说，听了神之道而遵行的人，就是我的母亲，我的弟兄了。
But he said to them in answer, My mother and my brothers are those who have knowledge of the word of God and do it.

有一天耶稣和门徒上了船，对门徒说，我们可以渡到湖那边去。他们就开了船。
Now it came about on one of those days that he got into a boat with his disciples; and he said to them, Let us go over to the other side of the water: and they put out the boat.

正行的时候，耶稣睡着了。湖上忽然起了暴风，船将满了水，甚是危险。
But while they were sailing he went to sleep: and a storm of wind came down on the sea, and the boat became full of water and they were in danger.

门徒来叫醒了他，说，夫子，夫子，我们丧命啦。耶稣醒了，斥责那狂风大浪。风浪就止住，平静了。
Then they came to him and, awaking him out of his sleep, said, Master, Master, destruction is near. And he, when he was awake, gave orders to the wind and the rolling waves, and the storm came to an end, and all was calm.

耶稣对他们说，你们的信心在哪里呢？他们又惧怕，又希奇，彼此说，这到底是谁？他吩咐风和水，连风和水也听从他了。
And he said to them, Where is your faith? And fear and wonder overcame them, and they said to one another, Who then is this, who gives orders even to the winds and the water and they do what he says?

他们到了格拉森有古卷作加大拉人的地方，就是加利利的对面。
And they came to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.

耶稣上了岸，就有城里一个被鬼附着的人，迎面而来，这个人许久不穿衣服，不住房子，只住在坟茔里。
And when he had come to the land, there came to him a certain man from the town who had evil spirits; and for a long time he had had no clothing on, and was not living in a house but in the place of the dead.

他见了耶稣，就俯伏在他面前，大声喊叫，说，至高神的儿子耶稣，我与你有什么相干。求你不要叫我受苦。
And when he saw Jesus, he gave a loud cry and went down on the earth before him and in a loud voice said, What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? Do not be cruel to me.

是因耶稣曾吩咐污鬼从那人身上出来。原来这鬼屡次抓住他，他常被人看守，又被铁链和脚镣捆锁，他竟把锁链挣断，被鬼赶到旷野去。
For he gave an order to the evil spirit to come out of the man. For frequently it would take a grip of him: and he was kept under control, and prisoned with chains; but parting the chains in two, he would be sent by the driving of the evil spirit into waste places.

耶稣问他说，你名叫什么。他说，我名叫群。这是因为附着他的鬼多。
And Jesus said to him, What is your name? And he said, Legion; for a number of spirits had gone into him.

鬼就央求耶稣，不要吩咐他们到无底坑里去。
And they made a request to him that he would not give them an order to go away into the deep.

那里有一大群猪，在山上吃食。鬼央求耶稣，准他们进入猪里去。耶稣准了他们。
Now there was a great herd of pigs in that place, getting food on the mountain: and the evil spirits made a request to him that he would let them go into the pigs, and he let them.

鬼就从那人出来，进入猪里去。于是那群猪闯下山崖，投在湖里淹死了。
And the evil spirits came out of the man and went into the pigs: and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the water and came to destruction.

放猪的看见这事就逃跑了，去告诉城里和乡下的人。
And when the men who took care of them saw what had come about, they went quickly and gave news of it in the town and the country.

众人出来要看是什么事。到了耶稣那里，看见鬼所离开的那人，坐在耶稣脚前，穿着衣服，心里明白过来，他们就害怕。
And they went out to see what had taken place, and they came to Jesus and saw the man out of whom the evil spirits had gone, seated, clothed and with full use of his senses, at the feet of Jesus; and fear came on them.

看见这事的，便将被鬼附着的人怎么得救，告诉他们。
And those who had seen it gave them an account of how the man who had the evil spirits was made well.

格拉森四围的人，因为害怕得很，都求耶稣离开他们。耶稣就上船回去了。
And all the people of the country of the Gerasenes made a request to him to go away from them; for they were in great fear: and he got into a boat and went back.

鬼所离开的那人，恳求和耶稣同在。耶稣却打发他回去，
But the man from whom the evil spirits had gone out had a great desire to be with him, but he sent him away, saying,

说，你回家去，传说神为你作了何等大的事。他就去满城里传扬耶稣为他作了何等大的事。
Go back to your house and let them have news of all the great things which God has done for you. And he went away, giving word through all the town of the great things which Jesus had done for him.

耶稣回来的时候，众人迎接他，因为他们都等候他。
And when Jesus went back, the people were glad to see him, for they were all waiting for him.

有一个管会堂的，名叫睚鲁，来俯伏在耶稣脚前，求耶稣到他家里去。
Then there came a man named Jairus, who was a ruler in the Synagogue: and he went down at the feet of Jesus, desiring him to come to his house;

因他有一个独生女儿，约有十二岁，快要死了。耶稣去的时候，众人拥挤他。
For he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was near to death. But while he was on his way, the people were pushing to be near him.

有一个女人，患了十二年的血漏，在医生手里花尽了她一切养生的，并没有一人能医好她。
And a woman, who had had a flow of blood for twelve years, and had given all her money to medical men, and not one of them was able to make her well,

她来到耶稣背后，摸他的衣裳？？子，血漏立刻就止住了。
Came after him and put her hand on the edge of his robe, and straight away the flowing of her blood was stopped.

耶稣说，摸我的是谁。众人都不承认，彼得和同行的人都说，夫子，众人拥拥挤挤紧靠着你。有古卷在此有你还问摸我的是谁吗？
And Jesus said, Who was touching me? And when they all said, It is not I, Peter and those who were with him said, Master, the people are pushing round you on every side.

耶稣说，总有人摸我。因我觉得有能力从我身上出去。
But Jesus said, Someone was touching me, for I had the feeling that power had gone out from me.

那女人知道不能隐藏，就战战兢兢地来俯伏在耶稣脚前，把摸他的缘故，和怎样立刻得好了，当着众人都说出来。
And when the woman saw that she was not able to keep it secret, she came, shaking with fear, and falling down before him she made clear before all the people the reason for her touching him, and how she was made well straight away.

耶稣对她说，女儿，你的信救了你，平平安安地去吧。
And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace.

还说话的时候，有人从管会堂的家里来说，你的女儿死了，不要劳动夫子。
While he was still talking, someone came from the house of the ruler of the Synagogue, saying, Your daughter is dead; do not go on troubling the Master.

耶稣听见就对他说，不要怕，只要信，你的女儿就必得救。
But Jesus at these words said to him, Have no fear, only have faith, and she will be made well.

耶稣到了他的家，除了彼得，约翰，雅各，和女儿的父母，不许别人同他进去。
And when he came to the house he did not let any man go in with him, but only Peter and John and James, and the father of the girl and her mother.

众人都为这女儿哀哭捶胸。耶稣说，不要哭，他不是死了，是睡着了。
And all the people were weeping and crying for her; but he said, Do not be sad, for she is not dead, but sleeping.

他们晓得女儿已经死了，就嗤笑耶稣。
And they were laughing at him, being certain that she was dead.

耶稣拉着她的手，呼叫说，女儿，起来吧。
But he, taking her hand, said to her, My child, get up.

她的灵魂便回来，她就立刻起来了。耶稣吩咐给她东西吃。
And her spirit came back to her and she got up straight away: and he gave orders that food was to be given to her.

她的父母惊奇得很。耶稣嘱咐他们，不要把所作的事告诉人。
And her father and mother were full of wonder, but he gave orders to them to say nothing about it to anyone.

耶稣叫齐了十二个门徒，给他们能力权柄，制伏一切的鬼，医治各样的病。
And getting the twelve together, he gave them power and authority over all evil spirits and over diseases, to make them well.

又差遣他们去宣传神国的道，医治病人。
And he sent them out to be preachers of the kingdom of God, and to make well those who were ill.

对他们说，行路的时候，不要带拐杖，和口袋，不要带食物，和银子，也不要带两件褂子。
And he said to them, Take nothing for your journey, no stick or bag or bread or money, and do not take two coats.

无论进哪一家，就住在那里，也从那里起行。
And if you go into a house, let that house be your resting-place till you go away.

凡不接待你们的，你们离开那城的时候，要把脚上的尘土跺下去，见证他们的不是。
And if any people will not take you in, when you go away from that town, put off its dust from your feet for a witness against them.

门徒就出去，走遍各乡，宣传福音，到处治病。
And they went away, journeying through all the towns, preaching the good news and making people free from diseases in all places.

分封的王希律听见耶稣所作的一切事，就游移不定。因为有人说，是约翰从死里复活。
Now Herod the king had news of all these things: and he was in doubt, because it was said by some people that John had come back from the dead;

又有人说，是以利亚显现。还有人说，是古时的一个先知又活了。
And by some, that Elijah had come; and by others, that one of the old prophets had come back to life.

希律说，约翰我已经斩了，这却是什么人？我竟听见他这样的事呢？就想要见他。
And Herod said, I put John to death: but who is this, of whom such stories are given to me? And he had a desire to see him.

使徒回来，将所作的事告诉耶稣。耶稣就带他们暗暗地离开那里，往一座城去，那城名叫伯赛大。
And the twelve, when they came back, gave him an account of what they had done. And he took them with him and went away from the people to a town named Beth-saida.

但众人知道了，就跟着他去。耶稣便接待他们，对他们讲论神国的道，医治那些需医的人。
But the people, getting news of it, went after him: and he was pleased to see them, and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God, and made those well who were in need of it.

日头快要平西，十二个门徒来对他说，请叫众人散开，他们好往四面乡村里去借宿找吃的。因为我们这里是野地。
And the day went on; and the twelve came to him and said, Send these people away so that they may go into the towns and the country round about and get resting-places and food for themselves, for we are in a waste place.

耶稣说，你们给他们吃吧。门徒说，我们不过有五个饼，两条鱼。若不去为这许多人买食物就不够。
But he said, Give them food yourselves. And they said, We have only five cakes of bread and two fishes, if we do not go and get food for all these people.

那时，人数约有五千。耶稣对门徒说，叫他们一排一排的坐下，每排大约五十个人。
For there were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them be seated in groups, about fifty to a group.

门徒就如此行，叫众人都坐下。
And they did so, and made them all be seated.

耶稣拿着这五个饼，两条鱼，望着天祝福，掰开，递给门徒摆在众人面前。
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing over them, and when they had been broken, he gave them to the disciples to give to the people.

他们就吃，并且都吃饱了。把剩下的零碎收拾起来，装满了十二篮子。
And they all took the food and had enough; and they took up of the broken bits which were over, twelve baskets full.

耶稣自己祷告的时候，门徒也同他在那里。耶稣问他们说，众人说我是谁。
And it came about that when he was in prayer, by himself, and the disciples were with him, he put a question to them, saying, Who do the people say I am?

他们说，有人说是施洗的约翰。有人说是以利亚。还有人说，是古时的一个先知又活了。
And they, answering, said, John the Baptist; but others say Elijah; and others, that one of the old prophets has come back.

耶稣说，你们说我是谁。彼得回答说，是神所立的基督。
And he said, But who do you say that I am? And Peter, answering, said, The Christ of God.

耶稣切切地嘱咐他们，不可将这事告诉人。
But he gave them special orders, not to say this to any man;

又说，人子必须受许多的苦，被长老祭司长和文士弃绝，并且被杀，第三日复活。
Saying, The Son of man will undergo much and be put on one side by the rulers and the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and be put to death, and on the third day he will come back to life.

耶稣又对众人说，若有人要跟从我，就当舍己，天天背起他的十字架来，跟从我。
And he said to them all, If any man has a desire to come after me, let him give up all, and take up his cross every day, and come after me.

因为凡要救自己生命的，生命或作灵魂下同必丧掉生命。凡为我丧掉生命的，必救了生命。
For whoever has a desire to keep his life will have it taken from him, but whoever gives up his life because of me, will keep it.

人若赚得全世界，却丧了自己，赔上自己，有什么益处呢？
For what profit will a man have if he gets all the world, but undergoes loss or destruction himself?

凡把我和我的道当作可耻的，人子在自己的荣耀里，并天父与圣天使的荣耀里，降临的时候，也要把那人当作可耻的。
For if any man has a feeling of shame because of me or of my words, the Son of man will have shame because of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.

我实在告诉你们，站在这里的，有人在没尝死味以前，必看见神的国。
But truly I say to you, Some of those who are here now will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God.

说了这话以后，约有八天，耶稣带着彼得，约翰，雅各，上山去祷告。
And about eight days after he had said these things, he took Peter and John and James with him and went up into the mountain for prayer.

正祷告的时候，他的面貌就改变了，衣服洁白放光。
And while he was in prayer, his face was changed and his clothing became white and shining.

忽然有摩西以利亚两个人，同耶稣说话。
And two men, Moses and Elijah, were talking with him;

他们在荣光里显现，谈论耶稣去世的事，就是他在耶路撒冷将要成的事。
Who were seen in glory and were talking of his death which was about to take place in Jerusalem.

彼得和他的同伴都打盹，既清醒了，就看见耶稣的荣光，并同他站着的那两个人。
Now Peter and those who were with him were overcome with sleep: but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men who were with him.

二人正要和耶稣分离的时候，彼得对耶稣说，夫子，我们在这里真好，可以搭三座棚，一座为你，一座为摩西，一座为以利亚。他却不知道所说的是什么。
And when they were about to go away from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here; let us make three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah: having no knowledge of what he was saying.

说这话的时候，有一朵云彩来遮盖他们。他们进入云彩里就惧怕。
And while he said these things, the shade of a cloud came over them, and they were full of fear when they went into the cloud.

有声音从云彩里出来，说，这是我的儿子，我所拣选的（有古卷作这是我的爱子），你们要听他。
And there was a voice from the cloud saying, This is my Son, the man of my selection; give ear to him.

声音住了，只见耶稣一人在那里。当那些日子，门徒不提所看见的事，一样也不告诉人。
And after the voice was gone they saw that Jesus was by himself. And they kept quiet, and said nothing at that time to anyone of the things which they had seen.

第二天，他们下了山，就有许多人迎见耶稣。
And on the day after, when they came down from the mountain, a great band of people came to him.

其中有一人喊叫说，夫子，求你看顾我的儿子，因为他是我的独生子。
And a man from among them, crying out, said, Master, I make a request to you, give a thought to my son, for he is my only child:

他被鬼抓住，就忽然喊叫。鬼又叫他抽疯，口中流沫，并且重重地伤害他，难以离开他。
And see, a spirit takes him, and suddenly he gives a cry, twisted in pain and streaming at the lips, and when it goes away from him at last, he is marked as from blows.

我求过你的门徒，把鬼赶出去，他们却是不能。
And I made a request to your disciples to send it out of him, but they were not able to do it.

耶稣说，嗳，这又不信又悖谬的世代阿，我在你们这里，忍耐你们，要到几时呢？将你的儿子带到这里来吧。
And Jesus said, O generation without faith and false in heart, how long will I have to be with you and put up with you? let your son come here.

正来的时候，鬼把他摔倒，叫他重重地抽疯。耶稣就斥责那污鬼，把孩子治好了，交给他父亲。
And while he was coming, he was pushed violently down and twisted by the evil spirit. But Jesus gave sharp orders to the unclean spirit, and made the boy well, and gave him back to his father.

众人都诧异神的大能。大能或作威荣耶稣所作的一切事，众人正希奇的时候，耶稣对门徒说，
And they were full of wonder at the great power of God. But while they were all wondering at all the things which he did, he said to his disciples,

你们要把这些话存在耳中。因为人子将要被交在人手里。
Let these words go deep into your ears, for the Son of man will be given up into the hands of men.

他们不明白这话，意思乃是隐藏的，叫他们不能明白，他们也不敢问这话的意思。
But this saying was not clear to them and its sense was kept secret from them so that they were not able to see it: and they had fear of questioning him about it.

门徒中间起了议论，谁将为大。
Now there was a discussion among them about which of them would be the greatest.

耶稣看出他们心中的议论，就领一个小孩子来，叫他站在自己旁边。
But when Jesus saw the reasoning of their hearts, he took a small child and put him by his side,

对他们说，凡为我名接待这小孩子的，就是接待我。凡接待我的，就是接待那差我来的。你们中间最小的，他便为大。
And said to them, Whoever gives honour to this child in my name, gives honour to me: and whoever gives honour to me, gives honour to him who sent me: for whoever is least among you all, that man is great.

约翰说，夫子，我们看见一个人奉你的名赶鬼，我们就禁止他。因为他不与我们一同跟从你。
And John, answering, said, Master, we saw a man driving out evil spirits in your name, and we did not let him do it, because he was not one of us.

耶稣说，不要禁止他。因为不敌挡你们的，就是帮助你们的。
But Jesus said to him, Let him do it, for he who is not against you is for you.

耶稣被接上升的日子将到，他就定意向耶路撒冷去，
And it came about that when the days were near for him to be taken up, his face was turned to go to Jerusalem,

便打发使者在他前头走。他们到了撒玛利亚的一个村庄，要为他预备。
And he sent men before: and they came to a small town of Samaria to make ready for him.

那里的人不接待他，因他面向耶路撒冷去。
But they would not have him there, because he was clearly going to Jerusalem.

他的门徒，雅各，约翰，看见了，就说，主阿，你要我们吩咐火从天上降下来，烧灭他们，像以利亚所作的吗（有古卷无像以利亚所作的数字）？
And when his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, Lord, may we send fire from heaven and put an end to them?

耶稣转身责备两个门徒说，你们的心如何，你们并不知道。
But turning round he said sharp words to them.

人子来不是要灭人的性命（性命或作灵魂。下同。），是要救人的性命。说着就往别的村庄去了（有古卷只有五十五节首句，五十六节末句。）。
And they went to another small town.

他们走路的时候，有一人对耶稣说你无论往哪里去，我要跟从你。
And when they were on the way, a certain man said to him, I will come after you wherever you go.

耶稣说，狐狸有洞，天空的飞鸟有窝，只是人子没有枕头的地方。
And Jesus said to him, Foxes have holes and the birds of the air have resting-places, but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head.

又对一个人说，跟从我来，那人说，主，容我先回去埋葬我的父亲。
And he said to another, Come after me. But he said, Lord, let me first go and give the last honours to my father.

耶稣说，任凭死人埋葬他们的死人。你只管去传扬神国的道。
But he said to him, Let the dead take care of their dead; it is for you to go and give news of the kingdom of God.

又有一人说，主，我要跟从你。但容我先去辞别我家里的人。
And another man said, I will come with you, Lord, but first let me say a last good-day to those who are at my house.

耶稣说，手扶着犁向后看的，不配进神的国。
But Jesus said, No man, having put his hand to the plough and looking back, is good enough for the kingdom of God.

这事以后，主又设立七十个人，差遣他们两个两个的，在他前面往自己所要到的各城各地方去。
Now after these things, the Lord made selection of seventy others and sent them before him, two together, into every town and place where he himself was about to come.

就对他们说，要收的庄稼多，作工的人少。所以你们当求庄稼的主，打发工人出去收他的庄稼。
And he said to them, There is much grain ready to be cut, but not enough workers: so make prayer to the Lord of the grain-fields that he will send workers to get in the grain.

你们去吧。我差你们出去，如同羊羔进入狼群。
Go on your way: see, I send you out like lambs among wolves.

不要带钱囊，不要带口袋，不要带鞋。在路上也不要问人的安。
Take no bag for money or for food, and no shoes; say no word to any man on the way.

无论进那一家，先要说，愿这一家平安。
And whenever you go into a house, first say, Peace be to this house.

那里若有当得平安的人，当得平安的人原文作平安之子你们所求的平安就必临到那家，不然，就归与你们了。
And if a son of peace is there, your peace will be with him: but if not, it will come back to you again.

你们要住在那家，吃喝他们所供给的。因为工人得工价，是应当的。不要从这家搬到那家。
And keep in that same house, taking what food and drink they give you: for the worker has a right to his reward. Do not go from house to house.

无论进那一城，人若接待你们，给你们摆上什么，你们就吃什么。
And into whatever town you go, if they take you in, take whatever food is given to you:

要医治那城里的病人，对他们说，神的国临近你们了。
And make well those in it who are ill and say to them, The kingdom of God is near to you.

无论进那一城，人若不接待你们，你们就到街上去，
But if you go into a town where they will not have you, go out into the streets of it and say,

说，就是你们城里的尘土，粘在我们的脚上，我们也当着你们擦去。虽然如此，你们该知道神的国临近了。
Even the dust of your town, which is on our feet, we put off as a witness against you; but be certain of this, that the kingdom of God is near.

我告诉你们，当审判的日子，所多玛所受的，比那城还容易受呢。
I say to you, It will be better in that day for Sodom than for that town.

哥拉汛哪，你有祸了。伯赛大阿，你有祸了。因为在你们中间所行的异能，若行在推罗西顿，他们早已披麻蒙灰坐在地上悔改了。
A curse is on you, Chorazin! A curse is on you, Beth-saida! For if such works of power had been done in Tyre and Sidon as have been done in you, they would have been turned from their sins, in days gone by, seated in the dust.

当审判的日子，推罗西顿所受的，比你们还容易受呢。
But it will be better for Tyre and Sidon, in the day of judging, than for you.

迦百农阿，你已经升到天上。（或作你将要升到天上吗？）将来必推下阴间。
And you, Capernaum, were you not lifted up to heaven? you will go down to hell.

又对门徒说，听从你们的，就是听从我，弃绝你们的，就是弃绝我，弃绝我的，就是弃绝那差我来的。
Whoever gives ear to you, gives ear to me; and whoever is against you, is against me; and whoever is against me, is against him who sent me.

那七十个人欢欢喜喜地回来说，主阿，因你的名，就是鬼也服了我们。
And the seventy came back with joy, saying, Lord, even the evil spirits are under our power in your name.

耶稣对他们说，我曾看见撒但从天上坠落，像闪电一样。
And he said, I was watching for Satan, falling from heaven like a star.

我已经给你们权柄，可以践踏蛇和蝎子，又胜过仇敌一切的能力，断没有什么能害你们。
See, I have given you power to put your feet on snakes and evil beasts, and over all the strength of him who is against you: and nothing will do you damage.

然而不要因鬼服了你们就欢喜，要因你们的名记录在天上欢喜。
Do not be glad, however, because you have power over spirits, but because your names are recorded in heaven.

正当那时，耶稣被圣灵感动就欢乐，说，父阿，天地的主，我感谢你，因为你将这些事，向聪明通达人就藏起来，向婴孩就显出来。父阿，是的，因为你的美意本是如此。
In that same hour he was full of joy in the Holy Spirit and said, I give praise to you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning, and have made them clear to little children: for so, O Father, it was pleasing in your eyes.

一切所有的，都是我父交付我的。除了父，没有人知道子是谁。除了子和子所愿意指示的，没有人知道父是谁。
All things have been given to me by my Father: and no one has knowledge of the Son, but only the Father: and of the Father, but only the Son, and he to whom the Son will make it clear.

耶稣转身暗暗地对门徒说。看见你们所看见的，那眼睛就有福了。
And, turning to the disciples, he said privately, Happy are the eyes which see the things you see:

我告诉你们，从前有许多先知和君王，要看你们所看的，却没有看见。要听你们所听的，却没有听见。
For I say to you that numbers of prophets and kings have had a desire to see the things which you see, and have not seen them, and to have knowledge of the things which have come to your ears, and they had it not.

有一个律法师，起来试探耶稣说，夫子，我该作什么才可以承受永生。
And a certain teacher of the law got up and put him to the test, saying, Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?

耶稣对他说，律法上写的是什么？你念的是怎样呢？
And he said to him, What does the law say, in your reading of it?

他回答说，你要尽心，尽性，尽力，尽意，爱主你的神。又要爱邻舍如同自己。
And he, answering, said, Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind; and for your neighbour as for yourself.

耶稣说，你回答的是。你这样行，就必得永生。
And he said, You have given the right answer: do this and you will have life.

那人要显明自己有理，就对耶稣说，谁是我的邻舍呢？
But he, desiring to put himself in the right, said to Jesus, And who is my neighbour?

耶稣回答说，有一个人从耶路撒冷下耶利哥去，落在强盗手中，他们剥去他的衣裳，把他打个半死，就丢下他走了。
And Jesus, answering him, said, A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he got into the hands of thieves, who took his clothing and gave him cruel blows, and when they went away, he was half dead.

偶然有一个祭司，从这条路下来。看见他就从那边过去了。
And by chance a certain priest was going down that way: and when he saw him, he went by on the other side.

又有一个利未人，来到这地方，看见他，也照样从那边过去了。
And in the same way, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, went by on the other side.

惟有一个撒玛利亚人，行路来到那里。看见他就动了慈心，
But a certain man of Samaria, journeying that way, came where he was, and when he saw him, he was moved with pity for him,

上前用油和酒倒在他的伤处，包裹好了，扶他骑上自己的牲口，带到店里去照应他。
And came to him and put clean linen round his wounds, with oil and wine; and he put him on his beast and took him to a house and took care of him.

第二天拿出二钱银子来，交给店主说，你且照应他。此外所费用的，我回来必还你。
And the day after he took two pennies and gave them to the owner of the house and said, Take care of him; and if this money is not enough, when I come again I will give you whatever more is needed.

你想这三个人，那一个是落在强盗手中的邻舍呢？
Which of these three men, in your opinion, was neighbour to the man who came into the hands of thieves?

他说，是怜悯他的。耶稣说，你去照样行吧。
And he said, The one who had mercy on him. And Jesus said, Go and do the same.

他们走路的时候，耶稣进了一个村庄。有一个女人名叫马大，接他到自己家里。
Now, while they were on their way, he came to a certain town; and a woman named Martha took him into her house.

她有一个妹子名叫马利亚，在耶稣脚前坐着听他的道。
And she had a sister, by name Mary, who took her seat at the Lord's feet and gave attention to his words.

马大伺候的事多，心里忙乱，就进前来说，主阿，我的妹子留下我一个人伺候，你不在意吗？请吩咐她来帮助我。
But Martha had her hands full of the work of the house, and she came to him and said, Lord, is it nothing to you that my sister has let me do all the work? Say to her that she is to give me some help.

耶稣回答说，马大，马大，你为许多的事，思虑烦扰。
But the Lord, answering, said to her, Martha, Martha, you are full of care and troubled about such a number of things:

但是不可少的只有一件。马利亚已经选择那上好的福分，是不能夺去的。
Little is needed, or even one thing only: for Mary has taken that good part, which will not be taken away from her.

耶稣在一个地方祷告。祷告完了，有个门徒对他说，求主教导我们祷告，像约翰教导他的门徒。
And it came about that he was in prayer in a certain place, and when he came to an end, one of his disciples said to him, Lord, will you give us teaching about prayer, as John did to his disciples?

耶稣说，你们祷告的时候，要说，我们在天上的父，有古卷只作父阿愿人都尊你的名为圣。愿你的国降临。愿你的旨意行在地上，如同行在天上。有古卷无愿你的旨意云云
And he said to them, When you say your prayers, say, Father, may your name be kept holy and your kingdom come.

我们日用的饮食，天天赐给我们。
Give us every day bread for our needs.

赦免我们的罪，因为我们也赦免凡亏欠我们的人。不叫我们遇见试探。救我们脱离凶恶。有古卷无末句
May we have forgiveness for our sins, as we make free all those who are in debt to us. And let us not be put to the test.

耶稣又说，你们中间谁有一个朋友，半夜到他那里去说，朋友，请借给我三个饼。
And he said to them, Which of you, having a friend, would go to him in the middle of the night and say to him, Friend, let me have three cakes of bread;

因为我有一个朋友行路，来到我这里，我没有什么给他摆上。
Because a friend of mine has come to me on a journey, and I have nothing to put before him;

那人在里面回答说，不要搅扰我。门已经关闭，孩子们也同我在床上了。我不能起来给你。
And he, from inside the house, would say in answer, Do not be a trouble to me; the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; it is not possible for me to get up and give to you?

我告诉你们，虽不因他是朋友起来给他，但因他情词迫切地直求，就必起来照他所需用的给他。
I say to you, Though he will not get up and give to him, because he is his friend, still, if he keeps on making his request, he will get up and give him as much as he has need of.

我又告诉你们，你们祈求就给你们。寻找就寻见。叩门就给你们开门。
And I say to you, Make requests, and they will be answered; what you are searching for, you will get; when you give the sign, the door will be open to you.

因为凡祈求的就得着。寻找的就寻见。叩门的就给他开门。
For to everyone who makes a request, it will be given; and he who is searching will get his desire; and to him who gives the sign, the door will be open.

你们中间作父亲的，谁有儿子求饼，反给他石头呢？求鱼，反拿蛇当鱼给他呢？
And which of you, being a father, will give a stone to his son, who makes request for bread? or for a fish, will give him a snake?

求鸡蛋，反给他蝎子呢？
Or for an egg, will give him a scorpion?

你们虽然不好，尚且知道拿好东西给儿女。何况天父，岂不更将圣灵给求他的人吗？
If, then, you who are evil are able to give good things to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who make request to him?

耶稣赶出一个叫人哑吧的鬼。鬼出去了，哑吧就说出话来众人都希奇。
And he was sending an evil spirit out of a man who was without the power of talking. And it came about that when the spirit had gone the man had the power of talking; and the people were full of wonder.

内中却有人说，他是靠着鬼王别西卜赶鬼。
But some of them said, He sends out evil spirits by Beelzebul, the ruler of evil spirits.

又有人试探耶稣，向他求从天上来的神迹。
And others, testing him, were looking for a sign from heaven from him.

他晓得他们的意念，便对他们说，凡一国自相分争，就成为荒场。凡一家自相分争，就必败落。
But he, having knowledge of their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom in which there is division is made waste; and a house in which there is division comes to destruction.

若撒但自相分争，他的国怎能站得住呢？因为你们说我是靠着别西卜赶鬼。
If, then, Satan is at war with himself, how will he keep his kingdom? because you say that I send evil spirits out of men by the help of Beelzebul.

我若靠着别西卜赶鬼，你们的子弟赶鬼，又靠着谁呢？这样，他们就要断定你们的是非。
And if I, by Beelzebul, send out evil spirits, by whose help do your sons send them out? so let them be your judges.

我若靠着神的能力赶鬼，这就是神的国临到你们了。
But if I, by the finger of God, send out evil spirits, then the kingdom of God has overtaken you.

壮士披挂整齐，看守自己的住宅，他所有的都平安无事。
When the strong man armed keeps watch over his house, then his goods are safe:

但有一个比他更壮的来，胜过他，就夺去他所倚靠的盔甲兵器，又分了他的赃。
But when one who is stronger makes an attack on him and overcomes him, he takes away his instruments of war, in which he had put his faith, and makes division of his goods.

不与我相合的，就是敌我的。不同我收聚的，就是分散的。
He who is not with me is against me, and he who will not give me help in getting people together is driving them away.

污鬼离了人身，就在无水之地，过来过去，寻求安歇之处。既寻不着，便说，我要回到我所出来的屋里去。
The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of a man, goes through dry places, looking for rest; and when he does not get it, he says, I will go back to my house from which I came.

到了，就看见里面打扫干净，修饰好了。
And when he comes, he sees that it has been made fair and clean.

便去另带了七个比自己更恶的鬼来，都进去住在那里。那人末后的景况，比先前更不好了。
Then he goes and gets seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they go in, and take their places there: and the last condition of that man is worse than the first.

耶稣正说这话的时候，众人中间，有一个女人大声说，怀你胎的和乳养你的有福了。
And it came about that when he said these things, a certain woman among the people said in a loud voice, Happy is the body which gave you birth, and the breasts from which you took milk.

耶稣说，是却还不如听神之道而遵守的人有福。
But he said, More happy are they who give hearing to the word of God and keep it.

当众人聚集的时候，耶稣开讲说，这世代是一个邪恶的世代。他们求看神迹，除了约拿的神迹以外，再没有神迹给他们看。
And when a great number of people came together to him, he said, This generation is an evil generation: it is looking for a sign and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah.

约拿怎样为尼尼微人成了神迹，人子也要照样为这世代的人成了神迹。
For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will the Son of man be to this generation.

当审判的时候，南方的女王，要起来定这世代的罪。因为她从地极而来，要听所罗门的智慧话。看哪，在这里有一人比所罗门更大。
The queen of the South will come up on the day of judging and give her decision against the men of this generation: for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon; and now something greater than Solomon is here.

当审判的时候，尼尼微人，要起来定这世代的罪。因为尼尼微人听了约拿所传的，就悔改了。看哪，在这里有一人比约拿更大。
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation: for they were turned away from their sins at the preaching of Jonah; but now something greater than Jonah is here.

没有人点灯放在地窨子里，或是斗底下，总是放在灯台上，使进来的人得见亮光。
No man, when the light has been lighted, puts it in a secret place, or under a vessel, but on its table, so that those who come in may see the light.

你眼睛就是身上的灯，你的眼睛若了亮，全身就光明。眼睛若昏花，全身就黑暗。
The light of the body is the eye: when your eye is true, all your body is full of light; but when it is evil, your body is dark.

所以你要省察，恐怕你里头的光，或者黑暗了。
So take care that the light which is in you is not dark.

若是你全身光明，毫无黑暗，就必全然光明，如同灯的明光照亮你。
If, then, all your body is light, with no part of it dark, it will be completely full of light, as when a flame with its bright shining gives you light.

说话的时候，有一个法利赛人请耶稣同他吃饭。耶稣就进去坐席。
Now, while he was talking, a Pharisee made a request that he would come to a meal with him; and he went in and took his seat at the meal.

这法利赛人看见耶稣饭前不洗手，便诧异。
And when the Pharisee saw it, he was surprised because he came to the meal without first washing himself.

主对他说，如今你们法利赛人洗净杯盘的外面。你们里面却满了勒索和邪恶。
And the Lord said to him, You Pharisees make the outside of the cup and the plate clean; but inside you are thieves and full of evil.

无知的人哪，造外面的，不也造里面吗？
O you foolish ones! did not he who made the outside in the same way make the inside?

只要把里面的施舍给人，凡物于你们就都洁净了。
But if you give to the poor such things as you are able, then all things are clean to you.

你们法利赛人有祸了。因为你们将薄荷芸香，并各样菜蔬，献上十分之一，那公义和爱神的事，反倒不行了。这原是你们当行的，那也是不可不行的。
But a curse is on you, Pharisees! for you make men give a tenth of every sort of plant, and give no thought to right and the love of God; but it is right for you to do these things, and not let the others be undone.

你们法利赛人有祸了。因为你们喜爱会堂里的首位，又喜爱人在街市上问你们的安。
A curse is on you, Pharisees! for your desires are for the most important seats in the Synagogues and for words of respect said to you in the market-place.

你们有祸了。因为你们如同不显露的坟墓，走在上面的人并不知道。
A curse is on you! for you are like the resting-places of dead men, which are not seen, and men go walking over them without knowledge of it.

律法师中有一个回答耶稣说，夫子，你这样说，也把我们糟蹋了。
And one of the teachers of the law, answering, said to him, Master, in saying this, you give a bad name to us as to them.

耶稣说，你们律法师也有祸了。因为你们把难担的担子，放在人身上，自己一个指头却不肯动。
And he said, A curse is on you, teachers of the law! for while other men are crushed under the weight of the rules you make for them, you yourselves do not put so much as one finger to them.

你们有祸了。因为你们修造先知的坟墓，那先知正是你们的祖宗所杀的。
A curse is on you! for you make resting-places for the bodies of the prophets, but your fathers put them to death.

可见你们祖宗所作的事，你们又证明又喜欢。因为他们杀了先知，你们修造先知的坟墓。
So you are witnesses and give approval to the work of your fathers; for they put them to death and you make their last resting-places.

所以神用智慧曾说，用智慧或作的智者我要差遣先知和使徒，到他们那里去。有的他们要杀害，有的他们要逼迫。
For this reason the wisdom of God has said, I will send them prophets and teachers, and to some of them they will give death and cruel pains;

使创世以来，所流众先知血的罪，都要问在这世代的人身上。
So that punishment may come on this generation for the blood of all the prophets which was given from the earliest days;

就是从亚伯的血起，直到被杀在坛和殿中间撒迦利亚的血为止。我实在告诉你们，这都要问在这世代的人身上。
From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who was put to death between the altar and the Temple. Yes, I say to you, It will come on this generation.

你们律法师有祸了。因为你们把知识的钥匙夺了去。自己不进去，正要进去的人，你们也阻挡他们。
A curse is on you, teachers of the law! for you have taken away the key of knowledge: you did not go in yourselves, and you got in the way of those who were going in.

耶稣从那里出来，文士和法利赛人，就极力地催逼他，引动他多说话。
And when he had come out of that place, the scribes and the Pharisees came round him angrily, questioning him about more things;

私下窥听，要拿他的话柄。
And watching him, for a chance to get something from his words which might be used against him.

这时，有几万人聚集，甚至彼此践踏，耶稣开讲，先对门徒说，你们要防备法利赛人的酵，就是假冒为善。
At that time, when thousands of the people had come together, in such numbers that they were crushing one another, he said first to his disciples, Have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees, which is deceit.

掩盖的事，没有不露出来的。隐藏的事，没有不被人知道的。
But nothing is covered up, which will not come to light, or secret, which will not be made clear.

因此你们在暗中所说的，将要在明处被人听见。在内室附耳所说的，将要在房上被人宣扬。
So, whatever you have said in the dark, will come to men's hearing in the light, and what you have said secretly inside the house, will be made public from the house-tops.

我的朋友，我对你们说，那杀身体以后，不能再作什么的，不要怕他们。
And I say to you, my friends, Have no fear of those who may put the body to death, and are able to do no more than that.

我要指示你们当怕的是谁。当怕那杀了以后，又有权柄丢在地狱里的。我实在告诉你们，正要怕他。
But I will make clear to you of whom you are to be in fear: of him who after death has power to send you to hell; yes, truly I say, Have fear of him.

五个麻雀，不是卖二分银子吗？但在神面前，一个也不忘记。
Are not five sparrows given in exchange for two farthings? and God has every one of them in mind.

就是你们的头发也都被数过了。不要惧怕，你们比许多麻雀还贵重。
But even the hairs of your head are numbered. Have no fear: you are of more value than a flock of sparrows.

我又告诉你们，凡在人面前认我的，人子在神的使者面前也必认他。
And I say to you that to everyone who gives witness to me before men, the Son of man will give witness before the angels of God.

在人面前不认我的，人子在神的使者面前也必不认他。
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me, I will say that I have no knowledge of him before the angels of God.

凡说话干犯人子的，还可得赦免，惟独亵渎圣灵的，总不得赦免。
And if anyone says a word against the Son of man, he will have forgiveness: but for him who says evil words against the Holy Spirit, there will be no forgiveness.

人带你们到会堂，并官府，和有权柄的人面前，不要思虑怎么分诉，说什么话。
And when they take you before the Synagogues and the authorities and the rulers, take no thought about what answers you will give, or what you will say:

因为正在那时候，圣灵要指教你们当说的话。
For the Holy Spirit will make clear to you in that very hour what to say.

众人中有一个人对耶稣说，夫子，请你吩咐我的兄长和我分开家业。
And one of the people said to him, Master, give an order to my brother to make division of the heritage with me.

耶稣说，你这个人，谁立我作你们断事的官，给你们分家业呢？
But he said, Man, who made me a judge or a maker of decisions for you?

于是对众人说，你们要谨慎自守，免去一切的贪心。因为人的生命，不在乎家道丰富。
And he said to them, Take care to keep yourselves free from the desire for property; for a man's life is not made up of the number of things which he has.

就用比喻对他们说，有一个财主，田产丰盛。
And he said to them, in a story, The land of a certain man of great wealth was very fertile:

自己心里思想说，我的出产没有地方收藏，怎么办呢？
And he said to himself, What is to be done? for I have no place in which to put all my fruit.

又说，我要这么办。要把我的仓房拆了，另盖更大的。在那里好收藏我一切的粮食和财物。
And he said, This I will do: I will take down my store-houses and make greater ones, and there I will put all my grain and my goods.

然后要对我的灵魂说，灵魂哪，你有许多财物积存，可作多年的费用。只管安安逸逸的吃喝快乐吧。
And I will say to my soul, Soul, you have a great amount of goods in store, enough for a number of years; be at rest, take food and wine and be happy.

神却对他说，无知的人哪，今夜必要你的灵魂。你所预备的，要归谁呢？
But God said to him, You foolish one, tonight I will take your soul from you, and who then will be the owner of all the things which you have got together?

凡为自己积财，在神面前却不富足的，也是这样。
So that is what comes to the man who gets wealth for himself, and has not wealth in the eyes of God.

耶稣又对门徒说，所以我告诉你们，不要为生命忧虑吃什么。为身体忧虑穿什么。
And he said to his disciples, For this reason I say to you, Take no thought for your life, about what food you will take, or for your body, how it may be clothed.

因为生命胜于饮食，身体胜于衣裳。
Is not life more than food, and the body than its clothing?

你想乌鸦，也不种，也不收。又没有仓，又没有库，神尚且养活它。你们比飞鸟是何等的贵重呢。
Give thought to the ravens; they do not put seeds into the earth, or get together grain; they have no store-houses or buildings; and God gives them their food: of how much greater value are you than the birds!

你们哪一个能用思虑，使寿数多加一刻呢？（或作使身量多加一肘呢？）
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself any taller?

这最小的事，你们尚且不能作，为什么还忧虑其余的事呢？
If, then, you are not able to do even that which is least, why are you troubled about the rest?

你想，百合花怎么长起来。它也不劳苦，也不纺线。然而我告诉你们，就是所罗门极荣华的时候，他所穿戴的，还不如这花一朵呢。
Give thought to the flowers: they do no work, they make no thread; and still I say to you, Even Solomon, in all his glory, was not clothed like one of these.

你们这小信的人哪，野地里的草，今天还在，明天就丢在炉里，神还给它这样的妆饰，何况你们呢。
But if God gives such clothing to the grass in the field, which today is living, and tomorrow will be burned in the oven, how much more will he give clothing to you, O men of little faith?

你们不要求吃什么，喝什么，也不要挂心。
And do not give overmuch thought to your food and drink, and let not your mind be full of doubts.

这都是外邦人所求的，你们必须用这些东西，你们的父是知道的。
For the nations of the world go in search of all these things: but your Father has knowledge that you have need of them.

你们只要求他的国，这些东西就必加给你们了。
But let your chief care be for his kingdom, and these other things will be given to you in addition.

你们这小群，不要惧怕，因为你们的父，乐意把国赐给你们。
Have no fear, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.

你们要变卖所有的，周济人。为自己预备永不坏的钱囊，用不尽的财宝在天上，就是贼不能近，虫不能蛀的地方。
Give what property you have in exchange for money, and give the money to the poor; make for yourselves money-bags which will not get old, wealth stored up in heaven which will be yours for ever, where thieves will not come nor worms put it to destruction.

因为你们的财宝在哪里，你们的心也在哪里。
For where your wealth is, there will your heart be.

你们腰里要束上带，灯也要点着。
Be ready, dressed as for a journey, with your lights burning.

自己好像仆人等候主人，从婚姻的筵席上回来。他来到叩门，就立刻给他开门。
And be like men who are looking for their lord, when he comes back from the bride-feast; so that when he comes to the door, it will be open to him quickly.

主人来了，看见仆人儆醒，那仆人就有福了。我实在告诉你们，主人必叫他们坐席，自己束上带，进前伺候他们。
Happy are those servants who are watching when the lord comes; truly I say to you, he will make himself their servant and, placing them at the table, he will come out and give them food.

或是二更天来，或是三更天来，看见仆人这样，那仆人就有福了。
And if he comes in the second division of the night or in the third, and they are watching for him, happy are those servants.

家主若知道贼什么时候来，就必儆醒，不容贼挖透房屋，这是你们所知道的。
But be certain of this, that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming, he would have been watching, and would not have let his house be broken into.

你们也要预备。因为你们想不到的时候，人子就来了。
So be ready: for the Son of man is coming at a time when you are not looking for him.

彼得说，主阿，这比喻是为我们说的呢？还是为众人呢？
And Peter said to him, Lord, are these words said to us only, or to all men?

主说，谁是那忠心有见识的管家，主人派他管理家里的人，按时分粮给他们呢？
And the Lord said, Who then is the wise and responsible servant whom his lord will put in control of his family, to give them their food at the right time?

主人来到，看见仆人这样行，那仆人就有福了。
Happy is that servant who, when his lord comes, is doing so.

我实在告诉你们，主人要派他管理一切所有的。
Truly I say to you, he will put him in control of all his goods.

那仆人若心里说，我的主人必来得迟。就动手打仆人和使女，并且吃喝醉酒。
But if that servant says to himself, My lord is a long time coming; and goes about giving blows to the men-servants and the women-servants, feasting and taking overmuch wine;

在他想不到的日子，不知道的时辰，那仆人的主人要来，重重地处治他（或作把他腰斩了），定他和不忠心的人同罪。
The lord of that servant will come at a time when he is not looking for him, and at an hour when he is not ready for him, and he will have him cut in two and will give him his part in the fate of those who have no faith;

仆人知道主人的意思，却不预备，又不顺他的意思行，那仆人必多受责打。
And the servant who had knowledge of his lord's desires and was not ready for him and did not do as he was ordered, will be given a great number of blows;

惟有那不知道的，作了当受责打的事，必少受责打因为多给谁，就向谁多取。多托谁，就向谁多要。
But he who, without knowledge, did things for which punishment is given, will get only a small number of blows. The man to whom much is given, will have to give much; if much is given into his care, of him more will be requested.

我来要把火丢在地上。倘若已经着起来，不也是我所愿意的吗？
I came to send a fire on the earth, and it may even now have been lighted.

我有当受的洗。还没有成就，我是何等的迫切呢。
But there is a baptism which I have to undergo; and how am I kept back till it is complete!

你们以为我来，是叫地上太平吗？我告诉你们，不是，乃是叫人分争。
Is it your opinion that I have come to give peace on earth? I say to you, No, but division:

从今以后，一家五个人将要分争，三个人和两个人相争，两个人和三个人相争。
For from this time, a family of five in one house will be on opposite sides, three against two and two against three.

父亲和儿子相争，儿子和父亲相争。母亲和女儿相争，女儿和母亲相争。婆婆和媳妇相争，媳妇和婆婆相争。
They will be at war, the father against his son, and the son against his father; mother against daughter, and daughter against mother; mother-in-law against daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.

耶稣又对众人说，你们看见西边起了云彩，就说，要下一阵雨。果然就有。
Then he said to the people, When you see a cloud coming up in the west, straight away you say, There will be rain; and so it is.

起了南风，就说，将要燥热。也就有了。
And when you see a south wind blowing, you say, There will be heat; and so it is.

假冒为善的人哪，你们知道分辨天地的气色。怎么不知道分辨这时候呢？
O false ones! the face of the earth and the heaven is clear to you; how is it that the signs of these times are not as clear to you?

你们又为何不自己审量，什么是合理的呢？
And why are you, in your hearts, unable to be judges of what is right?

你同告你的对头去见官，还在路上，务要尽力的和他了结。恐怕他拉你到官面前，官交付差役，差役把你下在监里
For if anyone has a cause at law against you, and you are going with him before the ruler, make an attempt, on the way, to come to an agreement with him, for if you do not, he may take you before the judge and the judge will give you up to the police, and they will put you in prison.

我告诉你，若有半文钱没有还清，你断不能从那里出来。
I say to you, You will not come out of it till you have made payment to the very last farthing.

正当那时，有人将彼拉多使加利利人的血搀杂在他们祭物中的事，告诉耶稣。
Now some people who were there at that time, gave him an account of how the blood of some Galilaeans had been mixed by Pilate with their offerings.

耶稣说，你们以为这些加利利人比众加利利人更有罪，所以受这害吗？
And he, in answer, said to them, Are you of the opinion that these Galilaeans were worse than all other Galilaeans, because these things were done to them?

我告诉你们，不是的。你们若不悔改，都要如此灭亡。
I say to you, It is not so: but if your hearts are not changed, you will all come to the same end.

从前西罗亚楼倒塌了，压死十八个人，你们以为那些人比一切住在耶路撒冷的人更有罪吗？
Or those eighteen men who were crushed by the fall of the tower of Siloam, were they worse than all the other men living in Jerusalem?

我告诉你们，不是的。你们若不悔改，都要如此灭亡。
I say to you, It is not so: but if your hearts are not changed, you will all come to an end in the same way.

于是用比喻说，一个人有一棵无花果树，栽在葡萄园里。他来到树前找果子，却找不着。
And he made up this story for them: A certain man had a fig-tree in his garden, and he came to get fruit from it, and there was no fruit.

就对管园的说，看哪，我这三年，来到这无花果树前找果子，竟找不着，把它砍了吧。何必白占地土呢？
And he said to the gardener, See, for three years I have been looking for fruit from this tree, and I have not had any: let it be cut down; why is it taking up space?

管园的说，主阿，今年且留着，等我周围掘开土，加上粪。
And he said, Lord, let it be for this year, and I will have the earth turned up round it, and put animal waste on it, to make it fertile:

以后若结果子便罢。不然再把它砍了。
And if, after that, it has fruit, it is well; if not, let it be cut down.

安息日，耶稣在会堂里教训人。
And he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath.

有一个女人，被鬼附着病了十八年。腰弯得一点直不起来。
And there was a woman who had had a disease for eighteen years; she was bent, and was not able to make herself straight.

耶稣看见，便叫过她来，对她说，女人，你脱离这病了。
And when Jesus saw her, he said to her, Woman, you are made free from your disease.

于是用两只手按着她。她立刻直起腰来，就归荣耀与神。
And he put his hands on her, and she was made straight, and gave praise to God.

管会堂的，因为耶稣在安息日治病，就气忿忿地对众人说，有六日应当作工。那六日之内，可以来求医，在安息日却不可。
And the ruler of the Synagogue was angry because Jesus had made her well on the Sabbath, and he said to the people, There are six days in which men may do work: so come on those days to be made well, and not on the Sabbath.

主说，假冒为善的人哪，难道你们各人在安息日不解开槽上的牛驴，牵去饮吗？
But the Lord gave him an answer and said, O you false men! do you not, every one of you, on the Sabbath, let loose his ox and his ass and take it to the water?

况且这女人本是亚伯拉罕的后裔，被撒但捆绑了这十八年，不当在安息日解开她的绑吗？
And is it not right for this daughter of Abraham, who has been in the power of Satan for eighteen years, to be made free on the Sabbath?

耶稣说这话，他的敌人都惭愧了。众人因他所行一切荣耀的事，就都欢喜了。
And when he said these things, those who were against him were shamed, and all the people were full of joy because of the great things which were done by him.

耶稣说，神的国，好像什么？我拿什么来比较呢？
Then he said, What is the kingdom of God like? what comparison may I make of it?

好像一粒芥菜种，有人拿去种在园子里。长大成树，天上的飞鸟，宿在它的枝上。
It is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his garden, and it became a tree, and the birds of heaven made their resting-places in its branches.

又说，我拿什么来比神的国呢？
And again he said, What is the kingdom of God like?

好比面酵，有妇人拿来藏在三斗面里，直等全团都发起来。
It is like leaven, which a woman put into three measures of meal, and it was all leavened.

耶稣往耶路撒冷去，在所经过的各城各乡教训人。
And he went on his way, through towns and country places, teaching and journeying to Jerusalem.

有一个人问他说，主阿，得救的人少吗？
And someone said to him, Lord, will only a small number have salvation? And he said to them,

耶稣对众人说，你们要努力进窄门。我告诉你们，将来有许多人想要进去，却是不能。
Do your best to go in by the narrow door, for I say to you, A number will make the attempt to go in, but will not be able to do so.

及至家主起来关了门，你们站在外面叩门，说，主阿，给我们开门，他就回答说，我不认识你们，不晓得你们是哪里来的。
When the master of the house has got up, and the door has been shut, and you, still outside, give blows on the door, saying, Lord, let us in; he will make answer and say, I have no knowledge of where you come from.

那时，你们要说，我们在你面前吃过喝过，你也在我们的街上教训过人。
Then you will say, We have taken food and drink with you, and you were teaching in our streets.

他要说，我告诉你们，我不晓得你们是哪里来的。你们这一切作恶的人，离开我去吧。
But he will say, Truly, I have no knowledge of you or where you come from; go away from me, you workers of evil.

你们要看见亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各，和众先知，都在神的国里，你们却被赶到外面。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
There will be weeping and cries of sorrow when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves are shut outside.

从东，从西，从南，从北，将有人来，在神的国里坐席。
And they will come from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south, and take their places in the kingdom of God.

只是有在后的将要在前，有在前的将要在后。
And the last will be first, and the first will be last.

正当那时，有几个法利赛人来对耶稣说，离开这里去吧。因为希律想要杀你。
At that time, certain Pharisees came to him and said, Go away from this place, because Herod's purpose is to put you to death.

耶稣说，你们去告诉那个狐狸说，今天明天我赶鬼治病，第三天我的事就成全了。
And he said, Go and say to that fox, I send out evil spirits and do works of mercy today and tomorrow, and on the third day my work will be complete.

虽然这样，今天明天后天我必须前行。因为先知在耶路撒冷之外丧命是不能的。
But I have to go on my way today and tomorrow and the third day, for it is not right for a prophet to come to his death outside Jerusalem.

耶路撒冷阿，耶路撒冷阿，你常杀害先知，又用石头打死那奉差遣到你这里来的人。我多次愿意聚集你的儿女，好像母鸡把小鸡聚集在翅膀底下，只是你们不愿意。
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, putting to death the prophets, and stoning those who were sent to her! again and again would I have taken your children to myself, as a bird takes her young ones under her wings, but you would not!

看哪，你们的家成为荒场留给你们。我告诉你们，从今以后你们不得再见我，直等到你们说，奉主名来的是应当称颂的。
Now see, your house is waste, and I say to you, You will not see me again till you say, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord.

安息日，耶稣到一个法利赛人的首领家里去吃饭，他们就窥探他。
And it came about that when he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees on the Sabbath, to have a meal, they were watching him.

在他面前有一个患水臌的人。
And a certain man was there who had a disease.

耶稣对律法师和法利赛人说，安息日治病，可以不可以。
And Jesus, answering, said to the scribes and Pharisees, Is it right to make people well on the Sabbath or not?

他们却不言语。耶稣就治好那人，叫他走了。
But they said nothing. And he made him well and sent him away.

便对他们说，你们中间谁有驴或有牛，在安息日掉在井里，不立时拉他上来呢？
And he said to them, Which of you, whose ox or ass has got into a water-hole, will not straight away get him out on the Sabbath?

他们不能对答这话。
And they had no answer to that question.

耶稣见所请的客拣择首位，就用比喻对他们说，
And he gave teaching in the form of a story to the guests who came to the feast, when he saw how they took the best seats; saying to them,

你被人请去赴婚姻的筵席，不要坐在首位上。恐怕有比你尊贵的客，被他请来。
When you get a request to come to a feast, do not take the best seat, for a more important man than you may be coming,

那请你们的人前来对你说，让座给这一位吧。你就羞羞惭惭地退到末位上去了。
And then the giver of the feast will come to you and say, Give your place to this man; and you, with shame, will have to take the lowest seat.

你被请的时候，就去坐在末位上，好叫那请你的人来，对你说，朋友，请上坐，那时你在同席的人面前，就有光彩了。
But when you come, go and take the lowest seat, so that when the giver of the feast comes, he may say to you, Friend, come up higher; and then you will have honour in the eyes of all the others who are there.

因为凡自高的必降为卑。自卑的必升为高。
For every man who gives himself a high place will be put down, but he who takes a low place will be lifted up.

耶稣又对请他的人说，你摆设午饭，或晚饭，不要请你的朋友，弟兄，亲属，和富足的邻舍。恐怕他们也请你，你就得了报答。
And he said to the master of the house, When you give a feast, do not send for your friends and your brothers and your family or your neighbours who have wealth, for they may give a feast for you, and so you will get a reward.

你摆设筵席，倒要请那贫穷的，残废的，瘸腿的，瞎眼的，你就有福了。
But when you give a feast, send for the poor and the blind and those who are broken in body:

因为他们没有什么可报答你。到义人复活的时候，你要得着报答。
And you will have a blessing, because they will not be able to give you any payment, and you will get your reward when the upright come back from the dead.

同席的有一人听见这话，就对耶稣说，在神国里吃饭的有福了。
And, hearing these words, one of those who were at table with him said to him, Happy is the man who will be a guest in the kingdom of God.

耶稣对他说，有一人摆设大筵席，请了许多客。
And he said to them, A certain man gave a great feast, and sent word of it to a number of people.

到了坐席的时候，打发仆人去对所请的人说，请来吧。样样都齐备了。
And when the time had come, he sent his servants to say to them, Come, for all things are now ready.

众人一口同音地推辞。头一个说，我买了一块地，必须去看看。请你准我辞了。
And they all gave reasons why they were not able to come. The first said to him, I have got a new field, and it is necessary for me to go and see it: I am full of regret that I am unable to come.

又有一个说，我买了五对牛，要去试一试。请你准我辞了。
And another said, I have got some cattle, and I am going to make a test of them: I am full of regret that I am unable to come.

又有一个说，我才娶了妻，所以不能去。
And another said, I have been married, and so I am not able to come.

那仆人回来，把这事都告诉了主人。家主就动怒，对仆人说，快出去到城里大街小巷，领那贫穷的，残废的，瞎眼的，瘸腿的来。
And the servant came back and gave his master an account of these things. Then the master of the house was angry and said to the servant, Go out quickly into the streets of the town and get the poor, the blind, and those who are broken in body.

仆人说，主阿，你所吩咐的已经办了，还有空座。
And the servant said, Lord, your orders have been done, and still there is room.

主人对仆人说，你出去到路上和篱笆那里，勉强人进来，坐满我的屋子。
And the lord said to the servant, Go out into the roads and the fields, and make them come in, so that my house may be full.

我告诉你们，先前所请的人，没有一个得尝我的筵席。
For I say to you that not one of those who were requested to come will have a taste of my feast.

有极多的人和耶稣同行。他转过来对他们说，
Now a great number of people went with him.

人到我这里来，若不爱我胜过爱自己的父母，妻子，儿女，弟兄，姐妹，和自己的性命，就不能作我的门徒。爱我胜过爱原文作恨
And turning round, he said to them, If any man comes to me, and has not hate for his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, and even for his life, he may not be my disciple.

凡不背着自己十字架跟从我的，也不能作我的门徒。
Whoever does not take up his cross and come after me may not be my disciple.

你们哪一个要盖一座楼，不先坐下算计花费，能盖成不能呢？
For which of you, desiring to put up a tower, does not first give much thought to the price, if he will have enough to make it complete?

恐怕安了地基，不能成功，看见的人都笑话他，
For fear that if he makes a start and is not able to go on with it to the end, all who see it will be laughing at him,

说，这个人开了工，却不能完工。
And saying, This man made a start at building and is not able to make it complete.

或是一个王，出去和别的王打仗，岂不先坐下酌量，能用一万兵，去敌那领二万兵来攻打他的吗？
Or what king, going to war with another king, will not first take thought if he will be strong enough, with ten thousand men, to keep off him who comes against him with twenty thousand?

若是不能，就趁敌人还远的时候，派使者去求和息的条款。
Or while the other is still a great distance away, he sends representatives requesting conditions of peace.

这样，你们无论什么人，若不撇下一切所有的，就不能作我的门徒。
And so whoever is not ready to give up all he has may not be my disciple.

盐本是好的，盐若失了味，可用什么叫它再咸呢？
For salt is good, but if the taste goes from it, of what use is it?

或用在田里，或堆在粪里，都不合式。只好丢在外面。有耳可听的，就应当听。
It is no good for the land or for the place of waste; no one has a use for it. He who has ears, let him give ear.

众税吏和罪人，都挨近耶稣要听他讲道。
Now all the tax-farmers and sinners came near to give ear to him.

法利赛人和文士，私下议论说，这个人接待罪人，又同他们吃饭。
And the Pharisees and scribes were angry, saying, This man gives approval to sinners, and takes food with them.

耶稣就用比喻，说，
And he made a story for them, saying,

你们中间谁有一百只羊，失去一只，不把这九十九只撇在旷野，去找那失去的羊直到找着呢？
What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if one of them gets loose and goes away, will not let the ninety-nine be in the waste land by themselves, and go after the wandering one, till he sees where it is?

找着了，就欢欢喜喜地扛在肩上，回到家里。
And when he has got it again, he takes it in his arms with joy.

就请朋友邻舍来，对他们说，我失去的羊已经找着了，你们和我一同欢喜吧。
And when he gets back to his house, he sends for his neighbours and friends, saying to them, Be glad with me, for I have got back my sheep which had gone away.

我告诉你们，一个罪人悔改，在天上也要这样为他欢喜，较比为九十九个不用悔改的义人，欢喜更大。
I say to you that even so there will be more joy in heaven when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing, than for ninety-nine good men, who have no need of a change of heart.

或是一个妇人，有十块钱，若失落一块，岂不点上灯，打扫屋子，细细的找，直到找着吗？
Or what woman, having ten bits of silver, if one bit has gone from her hands, will not get a light, and go through her house, searching with care till she sees it?

找着了，就请朋友邻舍来，对他们说，我失落的那块钱已经找着了，你们和我一同欢喜吧。
And when she has it again, she gets her friends and neighbours together, saying, Be glad with me, for I have got back the bit of silver which had gone from me.

我告诉你们，一个罪人悔改，在神的使者面前，也是这样为他欢喜。
Even so, I say to you, There is joy among the angels of God, when one sinner is turned away from his wrongdoing.

耶稣又说，一个人有两个儿子。
And he said, A certain man had two sons:

小儿子对父亲说，父亲，请你把我应得的家业分给我。他父亲就把产业分给他们。
And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me that part of your property which will be mine. And he made division of his goods between them.

过了不多几日，小儿子就把他一切所有的，都收拾起来，往远方去了。在那里任意放荡，浪费赀财。
And not long after, the younger son got together everything which was his and took a journey into a far-away country, and there all his money went in foolish living.

既耗尽了一切所有的，又遇着那地方大遭饥荒，就穷苦起来。
And when everything was gone, there was no food to be had in that country, and he was in need.

于是去投靠那地方的一个人，那人打发他到田里去放猪。
And he went and put himself into the hands of one of the people of that country, and he sent him into his fields to give the pigs their food.

他恨不得拿猪所吃的豆荚充饥。也没有人给他。
And so great was his need that he would have been glad to take the pigs' food, and no one gave him anything.

他醒悟过来，就说，我父亲有多少的雇工，口粮有余，我倒在这里饿死吗？
But when he came to his senses, he said, What numbers of my father's servants have bread enough, and more, while I am near to death here through need of food!

我要起来，到我父亲那里去，向他说，父亲，我得罪了天，又得罪了你。
I will get up and go to my father, and will say to him, Father, I have done wrong, against heaven and in your eyes:

从今以后，我不配称为你的儿子，把我当作一个雇工吧。
I am no longer good enough to be named your son: make me like one of your servants.

于是起来往他父亲那里去。相离还远，他父亲看见，就动了慈心，跑去抱着他的颈项，连连与他亲嘴。
And he got up and went to his father. But while he was still far away, his father saw him and was moved with pity for him and went quickly and took him in his arms and gave him a kiss.

儿子说，父亲，我得罪了天，又得罪了你，从今以后，我不配称为你的儿子。
And his son said to him, Father, I have done wrong, against heaven and in your eyes: I am no longer good enough to be named your son.

父亲却吩咐仆人说，把那上好的袍子快拿出来给他穿。把戒指戴在他指头上。把鞋穿在他脚上。
But the father said to his servants, Get out the first robe quickly, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet:

把那肥牛犊牵来宰了，我们可以吃喝快乐。
And get the fat young ox and put it to death, and let us have a feast, and be glad.

因为我这个儿子，是死而复活，失而又得的。他们就快乐起来。
For this, my son, who was dead, is living again; he had gone away from me, and has come back. And they were full of joy.

那时，大儿子正在田里。他回来离家不远，听见作乐跳舞的声音。
Now the older son was in the field: and when he came near the house, the sounds of music and dancing came to his ears.

便叫过一个仆人来，问是什么事。
And he sent for one of the servants, questioning him about what it might be.

仆人说，你兄弟来了。你父亲，因为得他无灾无病地回来，把肥牛犊宰了。
And he said to him, Your brother has come; and your father has had the young ox put to death because he has come back safely.

大儿子却生气，不肯进去。他父亲就出来劝他。
But he was angry and would not go in; and his father came out and made a request to him to come in.

他对父亲说，我服事你这多年，从来没有违背过你的命。你并没有给我一只山羊羔，叫我和朋友，一同快乐。
But he made answer and said to his father, See, all these years I have been your servant, doing your orders in everything: and you never gave me even a young goat so that I might have a feast with my friends:

但你这个儿子，和娼妓吞尽了你的产业，他一来了，你倒为他宰了肥牛犊。
But when this your son came, who has been wasting your property with bad women, you put to death the fat young ox for him.

父亲对他说，儿阿，你常和我同在，我一切所有的，都是你的。
And he said to him, Son, you are with me at all times, and all I have is yours.

只是你这个兄弟是死而复活，失而又得的，所以我们理当欢喜快乐。
But it was right to be glad and to have a feast; for this your brother, who was dead, is living again; he had gone away and has come back.

耶稣又对门徒说，有一个财主的管家。别人向他主人告他浪费主人的财物。
And another time he said to the disciples, There was a certain man of great wealth who had a servant; and it was said to him that this servant was wasting his goods.

主人叫他来，对他说，我听见你这事怎么样呢？把你所经管的交代明白。因你不能再作我的管家。
And he sent for him and said, What is this which is said about you? give me an account of all you have done, for you will no longer be the manager of my property.

那管家心里说，主人辞我，不用我再作管家，我将来作什么？锄地呢？无力。讨饭呢？怕羞。
And the servant said to himself, What am I to do now that my lord takes away my position? I have not enough strength for working in the fields, and I would be shamed if I made requests for money from people in the streets.

我知道怎么行，好叫人在我不作管家之后，接我到他们家里去。
I have come to a decision what to do, so that when I am put out of my position they will take me into their houses.

于是把欠他主人债的，一个一个地叫了来，问头一个说，你欠我主人多少。
And sending for every one who was in debt to his lord he said to the first, What is the amount of your debt to my lord?

他说，一百篓油。每篓约五十斤管家说，拿你的账快坐下写五十。
And he said, A hundred measures of oil. And he said, Take your account straight away and put down fifty.

又问一个说，你欠多少。他说，一百石麦子。管家说，拿你的账写八十。
Then he said to another, What is the amount of your debt? And he said, A hundred measures of grain. And he said to him, Take your account and put down eighty.

主人就夸奖这不义的管家作事聪明。因为今世之子，在世事之上，较比光明之子，更加聪明。
And his lord was pleased with the false servant, because he had been wise; for the sons of this world are wiser in relation to their generation than the sons of light.

我又告诉你们，要借着那不义的钱财，结交朋友。到了钱财无用的时候，他们可以接你们到永存的帐幕里去。
And I say to you, Make friends for yourselves through the wealth of this life, so that when it comes to an end, you may be taken into the eternal resting-places.

人在最小的事上忠心，在大事上也忠心。在最小的事上不义，在大事上也不义。
He who is true in a little, is true in much; he who is false in small things, is false in great.

倘若你们在不义的钱财上不忠心，谁还把那真实的钱财托付你们呢？
If, then, you have not been true in your use of the wealth of this life, who will give into your care the true wealth?

倘若你们在别人的东西上不忠心，谁还把你们自己的东西给你们呢？
And if you have not been true in your care of the property of other people, who will give you that which is yours?

一个仆人不能事奉两个主。不是恶这个爱那个，就是重这个轻那个。你们不能又事奉神，又事奉玛门。
No man may be a servant to two masters: for he will have hate for the one and love for the other; or he will keep to the one and have no respect for the other. You may not be servants of God and of wealth.

法利赛人是贪爱钱财的，他们听见这一切话，就嗤笑耶稣。
And the Pharisees, who had a great love of money, hearing these things, were making sport of him.

耶稣对他们说，你们是在人面前自称为义的。你们的心，神却知道。因为人所尊贵的是神看为可憎恶的。
And he said, You take care to seem right in the eyes of men, but God sees your hearts: and those things which are important in the opinion of men, are evil in the eyes of God.

律法和先知，到约翰为止。从此神国的福音传开了，人人努力要进去。
The law and the prophets were till John: but then came the preaching of the kingdom of God, and everyone makes his way into it by force.

天地废去，较比律法的一点一画落空还容易。
But heaven and earth will come to an end before the smallest letter of the law may be dropped out.

凡休妻另娶的，就是犯奸淫。娶被休之妻的，也是犯奸淫。
Everyone who puts away his wife and takes another, is a false husband: and he who is married to a woman whose husband has put her away, is no true husband to her.

有一个财主，穿着紫色袍和细麻布衣服，天天奢华宴乐。
Now there was a certain man of great wealth, who was dressed in fair clothing of purple and delicate linen, and was shining and glad every day.

又有一个讨饭的，名叫拉撒路，浑身生疮，被人放在财主门口，
And a certain poor man, named Lazarus, was stretched out at his door, full of wounds,

要得财主桌子上掉下来的零碎充饥。并且狗来舔他的疮。
Desiring the broken bits of food which came from the table of the man of wealth; and even the dogs came and put their tongues on his wounds.

后来那讨饭的死了，被天使带去放在亚伯拉罕的怀里。财主也死了，并且埋葬了。
And in time the poor man came to his end, and angels took him to Abraham's breast. And the man of wealth came to his end, and was put in the earth.

他在阴间受痛苦，举目远远地望见亚伯拉罕，又望见拉撒路在他怀里。
And in hell, being in great pain, lifting up his eyes he saw Abraham, far away, and Lazarus on his breast.

就喊着说，我祖亚伯拉罕哪，可怜我吧，打发拉撒路来，用指头尖蘸点水，凉凉我的舌头。因为我在这火焰里，极其痛苦。
And he gave a cry and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, so that he may put the end of his finger in water and put it on my tongue, for I am cruelly burning in this flame.

亚伯拉罕说，儿阿，你该回想你生前享过福，拉撒路也受过苦。如今他在这里得安慰，你倒受痛苦。
But Abraham said, Keep in mind, my son, that when you were living, you had your good things, while Lazarus had evil things: but now, he is comforted and you are in pain.

不但这样，并且在你我之间，有深渊限定，以致人要从这边过到你们那边，是不能的，要从那边过到我们这边，也是不能的。
And in addition, there is a deep division fixed between us and you, so that those who might go from here to you are not able to do so, and no one may come from you to us.

财主说，我祖阿，既是这样，求你打发拉撒路到我父家去。
And he said, Father, it is my request that you will send him to my father's house;

因为我还有五个弟兄。他可以对他们作见证，免得他们也来到这痛苦的地方。
For I have five brothers; and let him give them an account of these things, so that they may not come to this place of pain.

亚伯拉罕说，他们有摩西和先知的话，可以听从。
But Abraham said, They have Moses and the prophets; let them give ear to what they say.

他说，我祖亚伯拉罕哪，不是的。若有一个从死里复活的，到他们那里去的，他们必要悔改。
And he said, No, father Abraham, but if someone went to them from the dead, their hearts would be changed.

亚伯拉罕说，若不听从摩西和先知的话，就是有一个从死里复活的，他们也是不听劝。
And he said to him, If they will not give attention to Moses and the prophets, they will not be moved even if someone comes back from the dead.

耶稣又对门徒说，绊倒人的事是免不了的。但那绊倒人的有祸了。
And he said to his disciples, It is necessary for causes of trouble to come about, but unhappy is he by whom they come.

就是把磨石拴在这人的颈项上，丢在海里，还强如他把这小子里的一个绊倒了。
It would be well for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea, before he made trouble for any of these little ones.

你们要谨慎。若是你的弟兄得罪你，就劝戒他。他若懊悔，就饶恕他。
Give attention to yourselves: if your brother does wrong, say a sharp word to him; and if he has sorrow for his sin, let him have forgiveness.

倘若他一天七次得罪你，又七次回转说，我懊悔了，你总要饶恕他。
And if he does you wrong seven times in a day, and seven times comes to you and says, I have regret for what I have done; let him have forgiveness.

使徒对主说，求主加增我们的信心。
And the twelve said to the Lord, Make our faith greater.

主说，你们若有信心像一粒芥菜种，就是对这棵桑树说，你要拔起根来栽在海里，他也必听从你们。
And the Lord said, If your faith was only as great as a grain of mustard seed, you might say to this tree, Be rooted up and planted in the sea; and it would be done.

你们谁有仆人耕地，或是放羊，从田里回来，就对他说，你快来坐下吃饭呢？
But which of you, having a servant who is ploughing or keeping sheep, will say to him, when he comes in from the field, Come now and be seated and have a meal,

岂不对他说，你给我预备晚饭，束上带子伺候我，等我吃喝完了，你才可以吃喝吗？
Will he not say, Get a meal for me, and make yourself ready and see to my needs till I have had my food and drink; and after that you may have yours?

仆人照所吩咐的去作，主人还谢谢他吗？
Does he give praise to the servant because he did what was ordered?

这样，你们作完了一切所吩咐的，只当说，我们是无用的仆人。所作的本是我们应分作的。
In the same way, when you have done all the things which are given you to do, say, There is no profit in us, for we have only done what we were ordered to do.

耶稣往耶路撒冷去，经过撒玛利亚和加利利。
And it came about that when they were on the way to Jerusalem he went through Samaria and Galilee.

进入一个村子，有十个长大麻疯的迎面而来，远远地站着。
And when he went into a certain small town he came across ten men who were lepers, and they, keeping themselves at a distance,

高声说，耶稣，夫子，可怜我们吧。
Said, in loud voices, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.

耶稣看见，就对他们说，你们去把身体给祭司察看。他们去的时候就洁净了。
And when he saw them he said, Go, and let the priests see you. And, while they were going, they were made clean.

内中有一个见自己已经好了，就回来大声归荣耀与神。
And one of them, when he saw that he was clean, turning back, gave praise to God in a loud voice;

又俯伏在耶稣脚前感谢他。这人是撒玛利亚人。
And, falling down on his face at the feet of Jesus, he gave the credit to him; and he was a man of Samaria.

耶稣说，洁净了的不是十个人吗？那九个在哪里呢？
And Jesus said, Were there not ten men who were made clean? where are the nine?

除了这外族人，再没有别人回来归荣耀与神吗？
Have not any of them come back to give glory to God, but only this one from a strange land?

就对那人说，起来走吧。你的信救了你了。
And he said to him, Get up, and go on your way; your faith has made you well.

法利赛人问神的国几时来到。耶稣回答说，神的国来到，不是眼所能见的。
And when the Pharisees put questions to him about when the kingdom of God would come, he gave them an answer and said, The kingdom of God will not come through observation:

人也不得说，看哪，在这里。看哪，在那里。因为神的国就在你们心里。心里或作中间
And men will not say, See, it is here! or, There! for the kingdom of God is among you.

他又对门徒说，日子将到，你们巴不得看见人子的一个日子，却不得看见。
And he said to his disciples, The time will come when you will have a great desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, but you will not see it.

人将要对你们说，看哪，在那里，看哪，在这里。你们不要出去，也不要跟随他们。
And if they say to you, See, it is there! or, It is here! do not go away, or go after them.

因为人子在他降临的日子，好像闪电，从天这边一闪，直照到天那边。
For as in a thunderstorm the bright light is seen from one end of the sky to the other, so will the Son of man be when his time comes.

只是他必须先受许多苦，又被这世代弃绝。
But first, he will have to undergo much and be put on one side by this generation.

挪亚的日子怎样，人子的日子也要怎样。
And as it was in the days of Noah, so will it be in the day of the Son of man.

那时候的人又吃又喝，又娶又嫁，到挪亚进方舟的那日，洪水就来，把他们全都灭了。
They were feasting and taking wives and getting married, till the day of the overflowing of the waters, when Noah went into the ark, and they all came to destruction.

又好像罗得的日子。人又吃又喝，又买又卖，又耕种，又盖造。
In the same way, in the days of Lot; they were feasting and trading, they were planting and building;

到罗得出所多玛的那日，就有火与硫磺从天上降下来，把他们全都灭了。
But on the day when Lot went out of Sodom, fire came down from heaven and destruction came on them all.

人子显现的日子，也要这样。
So will it be in the day of the revelation of the Son of man.

当那日，人在房上，器具在屋里，不要下来拿。人在田里，也不要回家。
On that day, if anyone is on the roof of the house, and his goods are in the house, let him not go down to take them away; and let him who is in the field not go back to his house.

你们要回想罗得的妻子。
Keep in mind Lot's wife.

凡想要保全生命的，必丧掉生命。凡丧掉生命的，必救活生命。
If anyone makes an attempt to keep his life, it will be taken from him, but if anyone gives up his life, he will keep it.

我对你们说，当那一夜，两个人在一个床上。要取去一个，撇下一个。
I say to you, In that night there will be two men sleeping in one bed, and one will be taken away and the other let go.

两个女人一同推磨。要取去一个，撇下一个。有古卷在此有
Two women will be crushing grain together; one will be taken away and the other let go.

两个人在田里要取去一个撇下一个
[]

门徒说，主阿，在哪里有这事呢？耶稣说，尸首在哪里，鹰也必聚在哪里。
And they, answering him, said, Where, Lord? And he said to them, Where the body is, there will the eagles come together.

耶稣设一个比喻，是要人常常祷告，不可灰心。
And he made a story for them, the point of which was that men were to go on making prayer and not get tired;

说，某城里有一个官，不惧怕神，也不尊重世人。
Saying, There was a judge in a certain town, who had no fear of God or respect for man:

那城里有个寡妇，常到他那里，说，我有一个对头，求你给我伸冤。
And there was a widow in that town, and she kept on coming to him and saying, Give me my right against the man who has done me wrong.

他多日不准。后来心里说，我虽不惧怕神，也不尊重世人。
And for a time he would not: but later, he said to himself, Though I have no fear of God or respect for man,

只因这寡妇烦扰我，我就给她伸冤吧。免得她常来缠磨我。
Because this widow is a trouble to me, I will give her her right; for if not, I will be completely tired out by her frequent coming.

主说，你们听这不义之官所说的话。
And the Lord said, Give ear to the words of the evil judge.

神的选民，昼夜呼吁他，他纵然为他们忍了多时，岂不终久给他们伸冤吗？
And will not God do right in the cause of his saints, whose cries come day and night to his ears, though he is long in doing it?

我告诉你们，要快快地给他们伸冤了，然而人子来的时候，遇得见世上有信德吗？
I say to you that he will quickly do right in their cause. But when the Son of man comes, will there be any faith on earth?

耶稣向那些仗着自己是义人，藐视别人的，设一个比喻，
And he made this story for some people who were certain that they were good, and had a low opinion of others:

说，有两个人上殿里去祷告。一个是法利赛人，一个是税吏。
Two men went up to the Temple for prayer; one a Pharisee, and the other a tax-farmer.

法利赛人站着，自言自语的祷告说，神阿，我感谢你，我不像别人，勒索，不义，奸淫，也不像这个税吏。
The Pharisee, taking up his position, said to himself these words: God, I give you praise because I am not like other men, who take more than their right, who are evil-doers, who are untrue to their wives, or even like this tax-farmer.

我一个礼拜禁食两次，凡我所得的，都捐上十分之一。
Twice in the week I go without food; I give a tenth of all I have.

那税吏远远地站着，连举目望天也不敢，只捶着胸说，神阿，开恩可怜我这个罪人。
The tax-farmer, on the other hand, keeping far away, and not lifting up even his eyes to heaven, made signs of grief and said, God, have mercy on me, a sinner.

我告诉你们，这人回家去，比那人倒算为义了，因为凡自高的，必降为卑，自卑的，必升为高。
I say to you, This man went back to his house with God's approval, and not the other: for everyone who makes himself high will be made low and whoever makes himself low will be made high.

有人抱着自己的婴孩，来见耶稣，要他摸他们，门徒看见就责备那些人。
And they took their children to him, so that he might put his hands on them: but when the disciples saw it, they said sharp words to them

耶稣却叫他们来，说，让小孩子到我这里来，不要禁止他们，因为在神国的，正是这样的人
But Jesus sent for them, saying, Let the children come to me, and do not keep them away, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

我实在告诉你们，凡要承受神国的，若不像小孩子，断不能进去。
Truly I say to you, Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child, will not come into it at all.

有一个官问耶稣说，良善的夫子，我该作什么事，才可以承受永生。
And a certain ruler put a question to him, saying, Good Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?

耶稣对他说，你为什么称我是良善的，除了神一位之外，再没有良善的。
And Jesus said to him, Why do you say that I am good? No one is good, but only God.

诫命你是晓得的，不可奸淫，不可杀人，不可偷盗，不可作假见证，当孝敬父母。
You have knowledge of what the law says: Do not be untrue to your wife, Do not put anyone to death, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness, Give honour to your father and mother.

那人说，这一切我从小都遵守了。
And he said, All these things I have done from the time when I was a boy.

耶稣听见了，就说，你还缺少一件，要变卖你一切所有的，分给穷人，就必有财宝在天上。你还要来跟从我。
And Jesus, hearing it, said to him, One thing you still have need of; get money for your goods, and give it away to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven; and come after me.

他听见这话，就甚忧愁，因为他很富足。
But at these words he became very sad, for he had great wealth.

耶稣看见他就说，有钱财的人进神的国，是何等的难哪。
And Jesus, looking at him, said, How hard it is for those who have wealth to get into the kingdom of God!

骆驼穿过针的眼，比财主进神的国，还容易呢。
It is simpler for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a man who has much money to come into the kingdom of God.

听见的人说，这样，谁能得救呢？
And those who were present said, Then who may have salvation?

耶稣说，在人所不能的事，在神却能。
But he said, Things which are not possible with man are possible with God.

彼得说，看哪，我们已经撇下自己所有的跟从你了。
And Peter said, See, we have given up what is ours to come after you.

耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，人为神的国，撇下房屋，或是妻子，弟兄，父母，儿女，
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, There is no man who has given up house or wife or brothers or father or mother or children, because of the kingdom of God,

没有在今世不得百倍，在来世不得永生的。
Who will not get much more in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life.

耶稣带着十二个门徒，对他们说，看哪，我们上耶路撒冷去，先知所写的一切事，都要成就在人子身上。
And he took with him the twelve and said to them, Now we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things which were said by the prophets will be done to the Son of man.

他将要被交给外邦人，他们要戏弄他，凌辱他，吐唾沫在他脸上。
For he will be given up to the Gentiles, and will be made sport of and put to shame:

并要鞭打他，杀害他，第三日他要复活。
And he will be given cruel blows and put to death, and on the third day he will come back to life.

这些事门徒一样也不懂得，意思乃是隐藏的，他们不晓得所说的是什么。
But they did not take in the sense of any of these words, and what he said was not clear to them, and their minds were not able to see it.

耶稣将近耶利哥的时候，有一个瞎子坐在路旁讨饭。
And it came about that when he got near Jericho, a certain blind man was seated by the side of the road, making requests for money from those who went by.

听见许多人经过，就问是什么事。
And hearing the sound of a great number of people going by, he said, What is this?

他们告诉他，是拿撒勒人耶稣经过。
And they said to him, Jesus of Nazareth is going by.

他就呼叫说，大卫的子孙耶稣阿，可怜我吧。
And he said in a loud voice, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

在前头走的人，就责备他，不许他作声。他却越发喊叫说，大卫的子孙，可怜我吧。
And those who were in front made protests and said to him, Be quiet: but he said all the more, O Son of David, have mercy on me.

耶稣站住，吩咐把他领过来。到了跟前，就问他说，
And Jesus, stopping, gave orders that he was to come to him, and when he came near, he said to him,

你要我为你作什么。他说，主阿，我要能看见。
What would you have me do for you? And he said, Lord, that I may be able to see again.

耶稣说，你可以看见。你的信救了你了。
And Jesus said, See again: your faith has made you well.

瞎子立刻看见了，就跟随耶稣，一路归荣耀与神。众人看见这事，也赞美神。
And straight away he was able to see, and he went after him, giving glory to God; and all the people when they saw it gave praise to God.

耶稣进了耶利哥，正经过的时候，
And he went into Jericho, and when he was going through it,

有一个人名叫撒该，作税吏长，是个财主。
A man, named Zacchaeus, who was the chief tax-farmer, and a man of wealth,

他要看看耶稣是怎样的人。只因人多，他的身量又矮，所以不得看见。
Made an attempt to get a view of Jesus, and was not able to do so, because of the people, for he was a small man.

就跑到前头，爬上桑树，要看耶稣，因为耶稣必从那里经过。
And he went quickly in front of them and got up into a tree to see him, for he was going that way.

耶稣到了那里，抬头一看，对他说，撒该，快下来，今天我必住在你家里。
And when Jesus came to the place, looking up, he said to him, Zacchaeus, be quick and come down, for I am coming to your house today.

他就急忙下来，欢欢喜喜地接待耶稣。
And he came down quickly, and took him into his house with joy.

众人看见，都私下议论说，他竟到罪人家里去住宿。
And when they saw it, they were all angry, saying, He has gone into the house of a sinner.

撒该站着，对主说，主阿，我把所有的一半给穷人。我若讹诈了谁，就还他四倍。
And Zacchaeus, waiting before him, said to the Lord, See, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from anyone wrongly, I give him back four times as much.

耶稣说，今天救恩到了这家，因为他也是亚伯拉罕的子孙。
And Jesus said to him, Today salvation has come to this house, for even he is a son of Abraham.

人子来，为要寻找拯救失丧的人。
For the Son of man came to make search for those who are wandering from the way, and to be their Saviour.

众人正在听见这些话的时候，耶稣因为将近耶路撒冷，又因他们以为神的国快要显出来，就另设一个比喻说，
And while they were giving ear to these words, he made another story for them, because he was near Jerusalem, and because they were of the opinion that the kingdom of God was coming straight away.

有一个贵胄往远方去，要得国回来。
So he said, A certain man of high birth went into a far-away country to get a kingdom for himself, and to come back.

便叫了他的十个仆人来，交给他们十锭银子（锭原文作弥拿，一弥拿约银十两），说，你们去作生意，直等我回来。
And he sent for ten of his servants and gave them ten pounds and said to them, Do business with this till I come.

他本国的人却恨他，打发使者随后去说，我们不愿意这个人作我们的王。
But his people had no love for him, and sent representatives after him, saying, We will not have this man for our ruler.

他既得国回来，就吩咐叫那领银子的仆人来，要知道他们作生意赚了多少。
And when he came back again, having got his kingdom, he gave orders for those servants to whom he had given the money to come to him, so that he might have an account of what business they had done.

头一个上来说，主阿，你的一锭银子，已经赚了十锭。
And the first came before him, saying, Lord, your pound has made ten pounds.

主人说，好良善的仆人。你既在最小的事上有忠心，可以有权柄管十座城。
And he said to him, You have done well, O good servant: because you have done well in a small thing you will have authority over ten towns.

第二个来说，主阿，你的一锭银子，已经赚了五锭。
And another came, saying, Your pound has made five pounds.

主人说，你也可以管五座城。
And he said, You will be ruler over five towns.

又有一个来说，主阿，看哪，你的一锭银子在这里，我把他包在手巾里存着。
And another came, saying, Lord, here is your pound, which I put away in a cloth;

我原是怕你，因为你是严厉的人。没有放下的还要去拿，没有种下的还要去收。
Because I was in fear of you, for you are a hard man: you take up what you have not put down, and get in grain where you have not put seed.

主人对他说，你这恶仆，我要凭你的口，定你的罪。你既知道我是严厉的人，没有放下的还要去拿，没有种下的还要去收。
He said to him, By the words of your mouth you will be judged, you bad servant. You had knowledge that I am a hard man, taking up what I have not put down and getting in grain where I have not put seed;

为什么不把我的银子交给银行，等我来的时候，连本带利都可以要回来呢？
Why then did you not put my money in a bank, so that when I came I would get it back with interest?

就对旁边站着的人说，夺过他这一锭来，给那有十锭的。
And he said to the others who were near, Take the pound away from him, and give it to the man who has ten.

他们说，主阿，他已经有十锭了。
And they say to him, Lord, he has ten pounds.

主人说，我告诉你们，凡有的，还要加给他。没有的，连他所有的，也要夺过来。
And I say to you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.

至于我那些仇敌不要我作他们王的，把他们拉来，在我面前杀了吧。
And as for those who were against me, who would not have me for their ruler, let them come here, and be put to death before me.

耶稣说完了这话，就在前面走，上耶路撒冷去。
And when he had said this, he went on in front of them, going up to Jerusalem.

将近伯法其和伯大尼，在一座山名叫橄榄山那里。就打发两个门徒，说，
And it came about that when he got near Beth-phage and Bethany by the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives, he sent two of the disciples,

你们往对面村子里去。进去的时候，必看见一匹驴驹拴在那里，是从来没有人骑过的。可以解开牵来。
Saying, Go into the little town in front of you, and on going in you will see a young ass fixed with a cord, on which no man has ever been seated; let him loose and take him.

若有人问为什么解它，你们就说，主要用它。
And if anyone says to you, Why are you taking him? say, The Lord has need of him.

打发的人去了，所遇见的，正如耶稣所说的。
And those whom he sent went away, and it was as he said.

他们解驴驹的时候，主人问他们说，解驴驹作什么？
And when they were getting the young ass, the owners of it said to them, Why are you taking the young ass?

他们说，主要用它。
And they said, The Lord has need of him.

他们牵到耶稣那里，把自己的衣服搭在上面，扶着耶稣骑上。
And they took him to Jesus, and they put their clothing on the ass, and Jesus got on to him.

走的时候，众人把衣服铺在路上。
And while he went on his way they put their clothing down on the road in front of him.

将近耶路撒冷，正下橄榄山的时候，众门徒因所见过的一切异能，都欢乐起来，大声赞美神，
And when he came near the foot of the Mountain of Olives, all the disciples with loud voices gave praise to God with joy, because of all the great works which they had seen;

说，奉主名来的王，是应当称颂的。在天上有和平，在至高之处有荣光。
Saying, A blessing on the King who comes in the name of the Lord; peace in heaven and glory in the highest.

众人中有几个法利赛人对耶稣说，夫子，责备你的门徒吧。
And some of the Pharisees among the people said to him, Master, make your disciples be quiet.

耶稣说，我告诉你们，若是他们闭口不说，这些石头必要呼叫起来。
And he said in answer, I say to you, if these men keep quiet, the very stones will be crying out.

耶稣快到耶路撒冷看见城，就为他哀哭，
And when he got near and saw the town, he was overcome with weeping for it,

说，巴不得你在这日子，知道关系你平安的事。无奈这事现在是隐藏的，叫你的眼看不出来。
Saying, If you, even you, had knowledge today, of the things which give peace! but you are not able to see them.

因为日子将到，你的仇敌必筑起土垒，周围环绕你，四面困住你，
For the time will come when your attackers will put a wall round you, and come all round you and keep you in on every side,

并要扫灭你，和你里头的儿女，连一块石头也不留在石头上。因你不知道眷顾你的时候。
And will make you level with the earth, and your children with you; and there will not be one stone resting on another in you, because you did not see that it was your day of mercy.

耶稣进了殿，赶出里头作买卖的人，
And he went into the Temple and put out those who were trading there,

对他们说，经上说，我的殿，必作祷告的殿。你们倒使它成为贼窝了。
Saying to them, It has been said, My house is to be a house of prayer, but you have made it a hole of thieves.

耶稣天天在殿里教训人。祭司长，和文士，与百姓的尊长，都想要杀他。
And every day he was teaching in the Temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people were attempting to put him to death;

但寻不出法子来，因为百姓都侧耳听他。
But they were not able to do anything, because the people all kept near him, being greatly interested in his words.

有一天耶稣在殿里教训百姓，讲福音的时候，祭司长和文士并长老上前来，
And it came about on one of those days, when he was teaching the people in the Temple and preaching the good news,

问他说，你告诉我们，你仗着什么权柄作这些事？给你这权柄的是谁呢？
That the chief priests and the scribes and the rulers of the people came to him and said, Make clear to us by what authority you do these things and who gave you this authority.

耶稣回答说，我也要问你们一句话。你们且告诉我。
And in answer he said to them, I will put a question to you, and do you give me an answer:

约翰的洗礼，是从天上来的？是从人间来的呢？
The baptism of John, was it from heaven or of men?

他们彼此商议说，我们若说从天上来，他必说你们为什么不信他呢？
And they said among themselves, If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why did you not have faith in him?

若说从人间来，百姓都要用石头打死我们。因为他们信约翰是先知。
But if we say, Of men; we will be stoned by the people, for they are certain that John was a prophet.

于是回答说，不知道是从哪里来的。
And they made answer that they had no idea where it came from.

耶稣说，我也不告诉你们，我仗着什么权柄作这些事。
And Jesus said, And I will not make clear to you by what authority I do these things.

耶稣就设比喻，对百姓说，有人栽了一个葡萄园，租给园户，就往外国去住了许久。
And he gave the people this story: A man made a vine-garden and gave the use of it to some field-workers and went into another country for a long time.

到了时候，打发一个仆人到园户那里去，叫他们把园中当纳的果子交给他。园户竟打了他，叫他空手回去。
And at the right time he sent a servant to the workers to get part of the fruit from the vines; but the workmen gave him blows and sent him away with nothing.

又打发一个仆人去。他们也打了他，并且凌辱他，叫他空手回去。
And he sent another servant, and they gave blows to him in the same way, and put shame on him, and sent him away with nothing.

又打发第三个仆人去。他们也打伤了他，把他推出去了。
And he sent a third, and they gave him wounds and put him out.

园主说，我怎么办呢？我要打发我的爱子去。或者他们尊敬他。
And the lord of the garden said, What am I to do? I will send my dearly loved son; they may give respect to him.

不料，园户看见他，就彼此商量说，这是承受产业的。我们杀他吧，使产业归于我们。
But when the workmen saw him, they said to one another, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property: let us put him to death and the heritage will be ours.

于是把他推出葡萄园外杀了。这样，葡萄园的主人，要怎样处治他们呢？
And driving him out of the garden they put him to death. Now what will the lord do to these workmen?

他要来除灭这些园户，将葡萄园转给别人。听见的人说，这是万不可的。
He will come and put them to destruction and give the garden to others. And when he said this, they said, May it not be so.

耶稣看着他们说，经上记着，匠人所弃的石头，已作了房角的头块石头。这是什么意思呢？
But he, looking on them, said, Is it not in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same has become the chief stone of the building?

凡掉在那石头上的，必要跌碎。那石头掉在谁的身上，就要把谁砸得稀烂。
Everyone falling on that stone will be broken, but the man on whom the stone comes down will be crushed to dust.

文士和祭司长，看出这比喻是指着他们说的，当时就想要下手拿他。只是惧怕百姓。
And the chief priests and the scribes made attempts to get their hands on him in that very hour; and they were in fear of the people, for they saw that he had made up this story against them.

于是窥探耶稣，打发奸细装作好人，要在他的话上得把柄，好将他交在巡抚的政权之下。
And they kept watch on him, and sent out secret representatives, who were acting the part of good men, in order that they might get something from his words, on account of which they might give him up to the government and into the power of the ruler.

奸细就问耶稣说，夫子，我们晓得你所讲所传都是正道，也不取人的外貌，乃是诚诚实实传神的道。
And they put a question to him, saying, Master, we are certain that your teaching and your words are right, and that you have no respect for a man's position, but you are teaching the true way of God:

我们纳税给该撒，可以不可以。
Is it right for us to make payment of taxes to Caesar or not?

耶稣看出他们的诡诈，就对他们说，
But he saw through their trick and said to them,

拿一个银钱来给我看。这像和这号是谁的。他们说，是该撒的。
Let me see a penny. Whose image and name are on it? And they said, Caesar's.

耶稣说，这样，该撒的物当归给该撒，神的物当归给神。
And he said, Then give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.

他们当着百姓，在这话上得不着把柄。又希奇他的应对，就闭口无言了。
And they were not able to get anything from these words before the people: but they were full of wonder at his answer, and said nothing.

撒都该人常说没有复活的事。有几个来问耶稣说，
And some of the Sadducees came to him, who say that there is no coming back from the dead; and they said to him,

夫子，摩西为我们写着说，人若有妻无子就死了，他兄弟当娶他的妻，为哥哥生子立后。
Master, Moses said that if a man's brother comes to his end, having a wife, but no children, his brother is to take the wife, and get a family for his brother.

有弟兄七人。第一个娶了妻，没有孩子死了。
Now there were seven brothers, and the first had a wife and came to his end, having no children;

第二个，第三个，也娶过她。
And the second;

那七个人，都娶过她，没有留下孩子就死了。
And the third took her; and in the same way, all the seven, without having any children, came to their end.

后来妇人也死了。
And last of all, the woman came to her end.

这样当复活的时候，她是哪一个的妻子呢？因为他们七个人都娶过她。
When they come back from the dead, whose wife will she be? for all the seven had her.

耶稣说，这世界的人，有娶有嫁。
And Jesus said to them, The sons of this world are married and have wives;

惟有算为配得那世界，与从死里复活的人，也不娶也不嫁。
But those to whom is given the reward of the world to come, and to come back from the dead, have no wives, and are not married;

因为他们不能再死。和天使一样。既是复活的人，就为神的儿子。
And death has no more power over them, for they are equal to the angels, and are sons of God, being of those who will come back from the dead.

至于死人复活，摩西在荆棘篇上，称主是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神，就指示明白了。
But even Moses made it clear that the dead come back to life, saying, in the story of the burning thorn-tree, The Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

神原不是死人的神，乃是活人的神。因为在他那里，人都是活的。（那里或作看来）
Now he is not the God of the dead but of the living: for all men are living to him.

有几个文士说，夫子，你说得好。
And some of the scribes, in answer to this, said, Master, you have said well.

以后他们不敢再问他什么。
And they had fear of putting any more questions to him.

耶稣对他们说，人怎么说基督是大卫的子孙呢？
And he said to them, Why do they say that the Christ is the son of David?

诗篇上，大卫自己说，主对我主说，你坐在我的右边，
For David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Take your seat at my right hand,

等我使你仇敌作你的脚凳。
Till I put under your feet all those who are against you.

大卫既称他为主，他怎么又是大卫的子孙呢？
David then gives him the name of Lord, so how is it possible for him to be his son?

众百姓听的时候，耶稣对门徒说，
And in the hearing of all the people he said to his disciples,

你们要防备文士。他们好穿长衣游行，喜爱人在街市上问他们安，又喜爱会堂里的高位，筵席上的首座。
Keep away from the scribes, whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes, and to have words of respect said to them in the market-places, and to take the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts;

他们侵吞寡妇的家产，假意作很长的祷告。这些人要受更重的刑罚。
Who take the property of widows and before the eyes of men make long prayers; they will get a greater punishment.

耶稣抬头观看，见财主把捐项投在库里。
And looking up, he saw the men of wealth putting their offerings in the money-box.

又见一个穷寡妇，投了两个小钱。
And he saw a certain poor widow putting in a farthing.

就说，我实在告诉你们。这穷寡妇，所投的比众人还多。
And he said, Truly I say to you, This poor widow has given more than all of them:

因为众人都是自己有余，拿出来投在捐项里。但这寡妇是自己不足，把他一切养生的都投上了。
For they gave out of their wealth, having more than enough for themselves: but she, even out of her need, has put in all her living.

有人谈论圣殿，是用美石和供物妆饰的。
And some were talking about the Temple, how it was made fair with beautiful stones and with offerings, but he said,

耶稣就说，论到你们所看见的这一切，将来日子到了，在这里没有一块石头留在石头上，不被拆毁了。
As for these things which you see, the days will come when not one stone will be resting on another, but all will be broken down.

他们问他说，夫子，什么时候有这事呢？这事将到的时候，有什么预兆呢？
And they said to him, Master, when will these things be? and what sign will there be when these events are to take place?

耶稣说，你们要谨慎，不要受迷惑，因为将来有好些人冒我的名来，说，我是基督，又说，时候近了，你们不要跟从他们。
And he said, Take care that you are not tricked: for a number of people will come in my name, saying, I am he; and, The time is near: do not go after them.

你们听见打仗和扰乱的事，不要惊惶，因为这些事必须先有，只是末期不能立时就到。
And when news of wars and troubled times comes to your ears, have no fear; for these things have to be, but the end will not be now.

当时耶稣对他们说，民要攻打民，国要攻打国。
Then he said to them, Nation will be moved against nation and kingdom against kingdom:

地要大大震动，多处必有饥荒瘟疫。又有可怕的异象，和大神迹，从天上显现。
There will be great earth-shocks and outbursts of disease in a number of places, and men will be without food; and there will be wonders and great signs from heaven.

但这一切的事以先，人要下手拿住你们，逼迫你们，把你们交给会堂，并且收在监里，又为我的名拉你们到君王诸侯面前。
But before all this, they will take you and be very cruel to you, giving you up to the Synagogues and to prisons, taking you before kings and rulers, because of my name.

但这些事终必为你们的见证。
And it will be turned to a witness for you.

所以你们当立定心意，不要预先思想怎样分诉。
So take care not to be troubled before the time comes, about what answers you will give:

因为我必赐你们口才智慧，是你们一切敌人所敌不住，驳不倒的。
For I will give you words and wisdom, so that not one of those who are against you will be able to get the better of you, or to put you in the wrong.

连你们的父母，弟兄，亲族，朋友，也要把你们交官。你们也有被他们害死的。
But you will be given up even by your fathers and mothers, your brothers and relations and friends; and some of you will be put to death.

你们要为我的名，被众人恨恶。
And you will be hated by all men, because of me.

然而你们连一根头发，也必不损坏。
But not a hair of your head will come to destruction.

你们常存忍耐，就必保全灵魂。或作必得生命
By going through all these things, you will keep your lives.

你们看见耶路撒冷被兵围困，就可知道他成荒场的日子近了。
But when you see armies all round about Jerusalem, then be certain that her destruction is near.

那时，在犹太的，应当逃到山上。在城里的，应当出来。在乡下的，不要进城。
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains; and those who are in the middle of the town go out; and let not those who are in the country come in.

因为这是报应的日子，使经上所写的都得应验。
For these are the days of punishment, in which all the things in the Writings will be put into effect.

当那些日子，怀孕的和奶孩子的有祸了。因为将有大灾难降在这地方，也有震怒临到这百姓。
It will be hard for women who are with child, and for her with a baby at the breast, in those days. For great trouble will come on the land, and wrath on this people.

他们要倒在刀下，又被掳到各国去，耶路撒冷要被外邦人践踏，直到外邦人的日期满了。
And they will be put to death with the sword, and will be taken as prisoners into all the nations; and Jerusalem will be crushed under the feet of the Gentiles, till the times of the Gentiles are complete.

日月星辰要显出异兆。地上的邦国也有困苦。因海中波浪的响声，就慌慌不定。
And there will be signs in the sun and moon and stars; and on the earth, fear among the nations and doubt because of the loud noise of the sea and the waves;

天势都要震动。人想起那将要临到世界的事，就都吓得魂不附体。
Men's strength will go from them in fear and in waiting for the things which are coming on the earth; for the powers of the heavens will be moved.

那时，他们要看见人子，有能力，有大荣耀，驾云降临。
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory.

一有这些事，你们就当挺身昂首。因为你们得赎的日子近了。
But when these things come about, let your heads be lifted up, because your salvation is near.

耶稣又设比喻对他们说，你们看无花果树，和各样的树。
And he made a story for them: See the fig-tree, and all the trees;

他发芽的时候，你们一看见自然晓得夏天近了。
When they put out their young leaves, you take note of it, and it is clear to you that summer is coming.

这样，你们看见这些事渐渐地成就，也该晓得神的国近了。
In the same way, when you see these things taking place you may be certain that the kingdom of God is near.

我实在告诉你们，这世代还没有过去，这些事都要成就。
Truly I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all things are complete.

天地要废去，我的话却不能废去。
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.

你们要谨慎，恐怕因贪食醉酒并今生的思虑，累住你们的心，那日子就如同网罗忽然临到你们。
But give attention to yourselves, for fear that your hearts become over-full of the pleasures of food and wine, and the cares of this life, and that day may come on you suddenly, and take you as in a net:

因为那日子要这样临到全地上一切居住的人。
For so it will come on all those who are living on the face of all the earth.

你们要时时儆醒，常常祈求，使你们能逃避这一切要来的事，得以站立在人子面前。
But keep watch at all times with prayer, that you may be strong enough to come through all these things and take your place before the Son of man.

耶稣每日在殿里教训人，每夜出城在一座山，名叫橄榄山住宿。
And every day he was teaching in the Temple and every night he went out to the mountain which is named the Mountain of Olives to take his rest.

众百姓清早上圣殿，到耶稣那里，要听他讲道。
And all the people came early in the morning to give ear to his words in the Temple.

除酵节，又名逾越节，近了。
Now the feast of unleavened bread was near, which is called the Passover.

祭司长和文士，想法子怎么才能杀害耶稣，是因他们惧怕百姓。
And the chief priests and the scribes were looking for a chance to put him to death, but they went in fear of the people.

这时，撒但入了那称为加略人犹大的心，他本是十二门徒里的一个，
And Satan came into Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve.

他去和祭司长并守殿官商量，怎么可以把耶稣交给他们。
And he went away and had a discussion with the chief priests and the rulers, about how he might give him up to them.

他们欢喜，就约定给他银子。
And they were glad, and undertook to give him money.

他应允了，就找机会要趁众人不在跟前的时候，把耶稣交给他们。
And he made an agreement with them to give him up to them, if he got a chance, when the people were not present.

除酵节，须宰逾越羊羔的那一天到了。
And the day of unleavened bread came, when the Passover lamb is put to death.

耶稣打发彼得，约翰，说，你们去为我们预备逾越节的筵席，好叫我们吃。
And Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, Go and make the Passover ready for us, so that we may take it.

他们问他说，要我们在哪里预备？
And they said to him, Where are we to get it ready?

耶稣说，你们进了城，必有人拿着一瓶水迎面而来。你们就跟着他，到他所进的房子里去。
And he said to them, When you go into the town you will see a man coming to you with a vessel of water; go after him into the house into which he goes.

对那家的主人说，夫子说，客房在哪里？我与门徒好在那里吃逾越节的筵席。
And say to the master of the house, The Master says, Where is the guest-room, where I may take the Passover with my disciples?

他必指给你们摆设整齐的一间大楼，你们就在那里预备。
And he will take you up to a great room with a table and seats: there make ready.

他们去了，所遇见的，正如耶稣所说的。他们就预备了逾越节的筵席。
And they went, and it was as he had said: and they made the Passover ready.

时候到了，耶稣坐席，使徒也和他同坐。
And when the time had come, he took his seat, and the Apostles with him.

耶稣对他们说，我很愿意在受害以先，和你们吃这逾越节的筵席。
And he said, I have had a great desire to keep this Passover with you before I come to my death;

我告诉你们，我不再吃这筵席，直到成就在神的国里。
For I say to you, I will not take it till it is made complete in the kingdom of God.

耶稣接过杯来，祝谢了，说，你们拿这个，大家分着喝。
And he took a cup and, having given praise, he said, Make division of this among yourselves;

我告诉你们，从今以后，我不再喝这葡萄汁，直等神的国来到。
For I say to you, I will not take of the fruit of the vine till the kingdom of God has come.

又拿起饼来祝谢了，就掰开递给他们，说，这是我的身体，为你们舍的。你们也应当如此行，为的是记念我。
And he took bread and, having given praise, he gave it to them when it had been broken, saying, This is my body, which is given for you: do this in memory of me.

饭后也照样拿起杯来，说，这杯是用我血所立的新约，是为你们流出来的。
And in the same way, after the meal, he took the cup, saying, This cup is the new testament, made with my blood which is given for you.

看哪，那卖我之人的手，与我一同在桌子上。
But the hand of him who is false to me is with me at the table.

人子固然要照所预定的去世。但卖人子的人有祸了。
For it will be done to the Son of man after the purpose of God, but unhappy is that man by whom he is given up.

他们就彼此对问，是哪一个要作这事。
And they were wondering among themselves which of them it was who would do this thing.

门徒起了争论，他们中间哪一个可算为大。
And there was an argument among them about which of them was the greatest.

耶稣说，外邦人有君王为主治理他们。那掌权管他们的称为恩主。
And he said, The kings of the Gentiles are lords over them, and those who have authority are given names of honour.

但你们不可这样。你们里头为大的，倒要像年幼的。为首领的，倒要像服事人的。
But let it not be so with you; but he who is greater, let him become like the younger; and he who is chief, like a servant.

是谁为大？是坐席的呢？是服事人的呢？不是坐席的大吗？然而我在你们中间，如同服事人的。
For which is greater, the guest who is seated at a meal or the servant who is waiting on him? is it not the guest? but I am among you as a servant.

我在磨炼之中，常和我同在的就是你们。
But you are those who have kept with me through my troubles;

我将国赐给你们，正如我父赐给我一样。
And I will give you a kingdom as my Father has given one to me,

叫你们在我国里，坐在我的席上吃喝。并且坐在宝座上，审判以色列十二个支派。
So that you may take food and drink at my table in my kingdom, and be seated like kings, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

主又说，西门，西门，撒但想要得着你们，好筛你们，像筛麦子一样。
Simon, Simon, Satan has made a request to have you, so that he may put you to the test as grain is tested:

但我已经为你祈求，叫你不至于失了信心。你回头以后，要坚固你的弟兄。
But I have made prayer for you, that your faith may not go from you: and when you are turned again, make your brothers strong.

彼得说，主阿，我就是同你下监，同你受死，也是甘心。
And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death.

耶稣说，彼得，我告诉你，今日鸡还没有叫，你要三次说不认得我。
And he said, I say to you, Peter, before the cock's second cry today, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.

耶稣又对他们说，我差你们出去的时候，没有钱囊，没有口袋，没有鞋，你们缺少什么没有。他们说，没有。
And he said to them, When I sent you out without money or bag or shoes, were you in need of anything? And they said, Nothing.

耶稣说，但如今有钱囊的可以带着，有口袋的也可以带着。没有刀的要卖衣服买刀。
And he said to them, But now, he who has a money-bag, or a bag for food, let him take it: and he who has not, let him give his coat for money and get a sword.

我告诉你们，经上写着说，他被列在罪犯之中。这话必应验在我身上，因为那关系我的事，必然成就。
For I say to you that these words will be put into effect in me, And he was numbered among the evil-doers: for what has been said in the Writings about me has an end.

他们说，主阿，请看，这里有两把刀。耶稣说，够了。
And they said, Lord, here are two swords. And he said, It is enough.

耶稣出来，照常往橄榄山去。门徒也跟随他。
And he came out, and went, as his way was, to the Mountain of Olives, and the disciples went with him.

到了那地方，就对他们说，你们要祷告，免得入了迷惑。
And when he came to the place, he said to them, Make a prayer that you may not be put to the test.

于是离开他们，约有扔一块石头那么远，跪下祷告，
And he went a little distance away from them and, falling on his knees in prayer, he said,

说，父阿，你若愿意，就把这杯撤去。然而不要成就我的意思，只要成就你的意思。
Father, if it is your pleasure, take this cup from me: but still, let your pleasure, not mine, be done.

有一位天使，从天上显现，加添他的力量。
And an angel from heaven came to him, to give him strength.

耶稣极其伤痛，祷告更加恳切。汗珠如大血点，滴在地上。
And being in great trouble of soul, the force of his prayer became stronger, and great drops, like blood, came from him, falling to the earth.

祷告完了，就起来，到门徒那里，见他们因为忧愁都睡着了。
And, getting up from prayer, he came to the disciples, and saw that they were sleeping for sorrow.

就对他们说，你们为什么睡觉呢？起来祷告，免得入了迷惑。
And he said, Why are you sleeping? Get up, and give yourselves to prayer, so that you may not be put to the test.

说话之间，来了许多人，那十二个门徒里名叫犹大的，走在前头，就近耶稣，要与他亲嘴。
And while he was saying these words, there came a band of people, and Judas, one of the twelve, was in front of them, and he came near to Jesus to give him a kiss.

耶稣对他说，犹大，你用亲嘴的暗号卖人子吗？
But Jesus said to him, Judas, will you be false to the Son of man with a kiss?

左右的人见光景不好，就说，主阿，我们拿刀砍可以不可以？
And when those who were with him saw what was coming, they said, Lord, may we not make use of our swords?

内中有一个人，把大祭司的仆人砍了一刀，削掉了他的右耳。
And one of them gave a blow to the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.

耶稣说，到了这个地步，由他们吧。就摸那人的耳朵，把他治好了。
But Jesus, answering, said, Put up with this, at least. And touching his ear, he made it well.

耶稣对那些来拿他的祭司长，和守殿官，并长老，说，你们带着刀棒，出来拿我，如同拿强盗吗？
And Jesus said to the chief priests and the captains of the Temple and the rulers, who had come against him, Have you come out as against a thief, with swords and sticks?

我天天同你们在殿里，你们不下手拿我。现在却是你们的时候，黑暗掌权了。
When I was in the Temple with you every day, your hands were not stretched out against me: but this is your hour, and the authority of the dark power.

他们拿住耶稣，把他带到大祭司的宅里。彼得远远地跟着。
And they made him a prisoner and took him away to the house of the high priest. But Peter went after them at a distance.

他们在院子里生了火，一同坐着。彼得也坐在他们中间。
And a fire was lighted in the middle of the open square, and they were seated together, and Peter was among them.

有一个使女，看见彼得坐在火光里，就定睛看他，说，这个人素来也是同那人一伙的。
And a certain woman-servant, seeing him in the light of the fire, and looking at him with attention, said, This man was with him.

彼得却不承认，说，女子，我不认得他。
But he said, Woman, it is not true; I have no knowledge of him.

过了不多的时候，又有一个人看见他，说，你也是他们一党的。彼得说，你这个人，我不是。
And after a little time, another saw him and said, You are one of them; and he said, Man, I am not.

约过了一小时，又有一个人极力地说，他实在是同那人一伙的。因为他也是加利利人。
And after about an hour, another man said, with decision, Certainly this man was with him, for he is a Galilaean.

彼得说，你这个人，我不晓得你说的是什么。正说话之间鸡就叫了。
And Peter said, Man, I have no knowledge of these things of which you are talking. And straight away, while he was saying these words, there came the cry of a cock.

主转过身来，看彼得。彼得便想起主对他所说的话，今日鸡叫以先，你要三次不认我。
And the Lord, turning, gave Peter a look. And the words of the Lord came to Peter's mind, how he had said, This night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will be false to me three times.

他就出去痛哭。
And he went out, weeping bitterly.

看守耶稣的人戏弄他，打他，
And the men in whose hands Jesus was, made sport of him and gave him blows.

又蒙着他的眼，问他说，你是先知，告诉我们，打你的是谁。
And, covering his eyes, they said to him, Are you prophet enough to say who gave you that blow?

他们还用许多别的话辱骂他。
And they said a number of other evil things against him.

天一亮，民间的众长老连祭司长带文士都聚会。把耶稣带到他们的公会里，
And when it was day, the rulers of the people came together, with the chief priests and the scribes, and they took him before their Sanhedrin, saying,

说，你若是基督，就告诉我们。耶稣说，我若告诉你们，你们也不信。
If you are the Christ, say so. But he said, If I say so you will not have belief;

我若问你们，你们也不回答。
And if I put a question to you, you will not give an answer.

从今以后，人子要坐在神权能的右边。
But in the future the Son of man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God.

他们都说，这样，你是神的儿子吗？耶稣说，你们所说的是。
And they all said, Are you then the Son of God? and he said, You say that I am.

他们说，何必再用见证呢？他亲口所说的，我们都亲自听见了。
And they said, What more need have we of witness? we have the very words of his mouth.

众人都起来，把耶稣解到彼拉多面前。
And they all went and took him before Pilate.

就告他说，我们见这人诱惑国民，禁止纳税给该撒，并说自己是基督，是王。
And they made statements against him, saying, This man has to our knowledge been teaching our nation to do wrong, and not to make payment of taxes to Caesar, even saying that he himself is Christ, a king.

彼拉多问耶稣说，你是犹太人的王吗？耶稣回答说，你说的是。
And Pilate said to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And he said in answer, You say so.

彼拉多对祭司长和众人说，我查不出这人有什么罪来。
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the people, In my opinion this man has done no wrong.

但他们越发极力地说，他煽惑百姓，在犹太遍地传道，从加利利起，直到这里了。
But they became more violent than before, saying, He has made trouble among the people, teaching through all Judaea from Galilee to this place.

彼拉多一听见，就问这人是加利利人吗？
But at these words Pilate said, Is the man a Galilaean?

既晓得耶稣属希律所管，就把他送到希律那里去。那时希律正在耶路撒冷。
And when he saw that he was under the authority of Herod, he sent him to Herod, who was in Jerusalem himself at that time.

希律看见耶稣，就很欢喜。因为听见过他的事，久已想要见他。并且指望看他行一件神迹。
Now when Herod saw Jesus he was very glad, having for a long time had a desire to see him, for he had had accounts of him, and was hoping to see some wonders done by him.

于是问他许多的话。耶稣却一言不答。
And he put a great number of questions to him, but he said nothing.

祭司长和文士，都站着极力地告他。
And the chief priests and the scribes were there, making statements against him violently.

希律和他的兵丁就藐视耶稣，戏弄他，给他穿上华丽衣服，把他送回彼拉多那里去。
And Herod, with the men of his army, put shame on him and made sport of him, and dressing him in shining robes, he sent him back to Pilate.

从前希律和彼拉多彼此有仇。在那一天就成了朋友。
And that day Herod and Pilate became friends with one another, for before they had been against one another.

彼拉多传齐了祭司长，和官府，并百姓，
And Pilate sent for the chief priests and the rulers and the people, and said to them,

就对他们说，你们解这人到我这里，说他是诱惑百姓的。看哪，我也曾将你们告他的事，在你们面前审问他，并没有查出他什么罪来。
You say that this man has been teaching the people evil things: now I, after going into the question before you, see nothing wrong in this man in connection with the things which you have said against him:

就是希律也是如此，所以把他送回来。可见他没有作什么该死的事。
And Herod is of the same opinion, for he has sent him back to us; for, you see, he has done nothing for which I might put him to death.

故此我要责打他，把他释放了。（有古卷在此有
And so I will give him punishment and let him go.

每逢这节期巡抚必须释放一个囚犯给他们。）
[]

众人却一齐喊着说，除掉这个人，释放巴拉巴给我们。
But with loud voices they said all together, Put this man to death, and make Barabbas free.

这巴拉巴是因在城里作乱杀人下在监里的。
Now this man was in prison because of an attack against the government in the town, in which there had been loss of life.

彼拉多愿意释放耶稣，就又劝解他们。
And Pilate again said to them that it was his desire to let Jesus go free.

无奈他们喊着说，钉他十字架，钉他十字架
But crying out they said, To the cross with him!

彼拉多第三次对他们说，为什么呢？这人作了什么恶事呢？我并没有查出他什么该死的罪来。所以我要责打他，把他释放了。
And he said to them a third time, Why, what evil has he done? I see no reason for putting him to death: I will give him punishment and let him go.

他们大声催逼彼拉多，求他把耶稣钉在十字架上。他们的声音就得了胜，
But they went on crying out loudly, Let him be put to death on the cross. And they had their way.

彼拉多这才照他们所求的定案。
And Pilate gave his decision for their desire to be put into effect.

把他们所求的那作乱杀人下在监里的，释放了。把耶稣交给他们，任凭他们的意思行。
And in answer to their request, he let that man go free who had been in prison for acting against the government and causing death, and Jesus he gave up to their pleasure.

带耶稣去的时候，有一个古利奈人西门，从乡下来。他们就抓住他，把十字架搁在他身上，叫他背着跟随耶稣。
And while they were taking him away, they put their hands on Simon of Cyrene, who was coming from the country, and made him take the cross after Jesus.

有许多百姓，跟随耶稣，内中有好些妇女，妇女们为他号啕痛哭。
And a great band of people went after him, and of women making signs of grief and weeping for him.

耶稣转身对她们说，耶路撒冷的女子，不要为我哭，当为自己和自己的儿女哭。
But Jesus, turning to them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, let not your weeping be for me, but for yourselves and for your children.

因为日子要到，人必说，不生育的，和未曾怀胎的，未曾乳养婴孩的，有福了。
For the days are coming in which they will say, Happy are those who have had no children, whose bodies have never given birth, whose breasts have never given milk.

那时，人要向大山说，倒在我们身上。向小山说，遮盖我们。
And they will say to the mountains, Come down on us, and to the hills, Be a cover over us.

这些事既行在有汁水的树上，那枯干的树，将来怎么样呢？
For if they do these things when the tree is green, what will they do when it is dry?

又有两个犯人，和耶稣一同带来处死。
And two others, evil-doers, were taken with him to be put to death.

到了一个地方，名叫髑髅地，就在那里把耶稣钉在十字架上，又钉了两个犯人，一个在左边，一个在右边。
And when they came to the place which is named Golgotha, they put him on the cross, and the evil-doers, one on the right side, and the other on the left.

当下耶稣说，父阿，赦免他们。因为他们所作的，他们不晓得。兵丁就拈阄分他的衣服。
And Jesus said, Father, let them have forgiveness, for they have no knowledge of what they are doing. And they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.

百姓站在那里观看。官府也嗤笑他说，他救了别人。他若是基督，神所拣选的，可以救自己吧。
And the people were looking on. And the rulers made sport of him, saying, He was a saviour of others; let him do something for himself, if he is the Christ, the man of God's selection.

兵丁也戏弄他，上前拿醋送给他喝，
And the men of the army made sport of him, coming to him and giving him bitter wine,

说，你若是犹太人的王，可以救自己吧。
And saying, If you are the King of the Jews, get yourself free.

在耶稣以上有一个牌子，有古卷在此有用希利尼罗马希伯来的文字写着，这是犹太人的王。
And these words were put in writing over him, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

那同钉的两个犯人，有一个讥诮他说，你不是基督吗？可以救自己和我们吧。
And one of the evil-doers on the cross, with bitter feeling, said to him, Are you not the Christ? Get yourself and us out of this.

那一个就应声责备他说，你既是一样受刑的，还不怕神吗？
But the other, protesting, said, Have you no fear of God? for you have a part in the same punishment,

我们是应该的。因我们所受的，与我们所作的相称。但这个人没有作过一件不好的事。
And with reason; for we have the right reward of our acts, but this man has done nothing wrong.

就说，耶稣阿，你得国降临的时候，求你记念我。
And he said, Jesus, keep me in mind when you come in your kingdom.

耶稣对他说，我实在告诉你，今日你要同我在乐园里了。
And he said to him, Truly I say to you, Today you will be with me in Paradise.

那时约有午正，遍地都黑暗了，直到申初，
And it was now about the sixth hour; and all the land was dark till the ninth hour;

日头变黑了。殿里的幔子从当中裂为两半。
The light of the sun went out, and the curtain in the Temple was parted in two.

耶稣大声喊着说，父阿，我将我的灵魂交在你手里。说了这话，气就断了。
And Jesus gave a loud cry and said, Father, into your hands I give my spirit: and when he had said this, he gave up his spirit.

百夫长看见所成的事，就归荣耀与神说，这真是个义人。
And when the captain saw what was done, he gave praise to God, saying, Without doubt this was an upright man.

聚集观看的众人，见了这所成的事，都捶着胸回去了。
And all the people who had come together to see it, when they saw the things which were done, went back again making signs of grief.

还有一切与耶稣熟识的人，和从加利利跟着他来的妇女们，都远远地站着，看这些事。
And all his friends and the women who came with him from Galilee, were waiting at a distance, watching these things.

有一个人名叫约瑟，是个议士，为人善良公义。
Now there was a man named Joseph, a man of authority and a good and upright man

众人所谋所为，他并没有附从。他本是犹太亚利马太城里素常盼望神国的人。
(He had not given his approval to their decision or their acts), of Arimathaea, a town of the Jews, who was waiting for the kingdom of God:

这人去见彼拉多，求耶稣的身体。
This man went to Pilate and made a request for the body of Jesus.

就取下来用细麻布裹好，安放在石头凿成的坟墓里，那里头从来没有葬过人。
And he took it down, and folding it in a linen cloth, he put it in a place cut in the rock for a dead body; and no one had ever been put in it.

那日是预备日，安息日也快到了。
Now it was the day of making ready and the Sabbath was coming on.

那些从加利利和耶稣同来的妇女，跟在后面，看见了坟墓，和他的身体怎样安放。
And the women who had come with him from Galilee went after him and saw the place and how his body had been put to rest;

她们就回去，预备了香料香膏。她们在安息日，便遵着诫命安息了。
And they went back and got ready spices and perfumes; and on the Sabbath they took their rest, in agreement with the law.

七日的头一日，黎明的时候，那些妇女带着所预备的香料，来到坟墓前。
But on the first day of the week, at dawn, they came to the place where his body had been put, taking the spices which they had got ready.

看见石头已经从坟墓滚开了。
And they saw that the stone had been rolled away.

她们就进去，只是不见主耶稣的身体。
And they went in, but the body of the Lord Jesus was not there.

正在猜疑之间，忽然有两个人站在旁边。衣服放光。
And while they were in doubt about it, they saw two men in shining clothing by them:

妇女们惊怕，将脸伏地。那两个人就对她们说，为什么在死人中找活人呢？
And while their faces were bent down to the earth in fear, these said to them, Why are you looking for the living among the dead?

他不在这里，已经复活了。当记念他还在加利利的时候，怎样告诉你们，
He is not here, he has come back to life: have in mind what he said to you when he was still in Galilee, saying,

说，人子必须被交在罪人手里，钉在十字架上，第三日复活。
The Son of man will be given up into the hands of evil-doers, and be put to death on the cross, and on the third day he will come back to life.

她们就想起耶稣的话来，
And his words came back into their minds,

便从坟墓那里回去，把这一切事告诉十一个使徒和其余的人。
And they went away from that place and gave an account of all these things to the eleven disciples and all the others.

那告诉使徒的，就是抹大拉的马利亚，和约亚拿，并雅各的母亲马利亚，还有与她们在一处的妇女。
Now they were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary, the mother of James: and the other women with them said these things to the Apostles.

她们这些话，使徒以为是胡言，就不相信。
But these words seemed foolish to them, and they had no belief in them.

彼得起来，跑到坟墓前，低头往里看，见细麻布独在一处，就回去了，心里希奇所成的事。
But Peter got up and went to the place where the body had been put, and looking in he saw nothing but the linen cloths, and he went to his house full of wonder at what had taken place.

正当那日，门徒中有两个人往一个村子去，这村子名叫以马忤斯，离耶路撒冷约有二十五里。
And then, two of them, on that very day, were going to a little town named Emmaus, which was about seven miles from Jerusalem.

他们彼此谈论所遇见的这一切事。
And they were talking together about all those things which had taken place.

正谈论相问的时候，耶稣亲自就近他们，和他们同行。
And while they were talking and questioning together, Jesus himself came near and went with them.

只是他们的眼睛迷糊了，不认识他。
But their eyes were not open that they might have knowledge of him.

耶稣对他们说，你们走路彼此谈论的是什么事呢？他们就站住，脸上带着愁容。
And he said to them, What are you talking about together while you go?

二人中有一个名叫革流巴的，回答说，你在耶路撒冷作客，还不知道这几天在那里所出的事吗？
Then stopping, and looking sadly at him, one of them, named Cleopas, said to him, Are you the only man living in Jerusalem who has not had news of the things which have taken place there at this time?

耶稣说，什么事呢？他们说，就是拿撒勒人耶稣的事。他是个先知，在神和众百姓面前，说话行事都有大能。
And he said to them, What things? And they said, The things to do with Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, great in his acts and his words, before God and all the people:

祭司长和我们的官府，竟把他解去定了死罪，钉在十字架上。
And how the chief priests and our rulers gave him up to be put to death on the cross.

但我们素来所盼望要赎以色列民的就是他。不但如此，而且这事成就，现在已经三天了。
But we were hoping that he would be the Saviour of Israel. In addition to all this he has now let three days go by from the time when these things took place;

再者，我们中间有几个妇女使我们惊奇，她们清早到了坟墓那里。
And certain women among us gave us cause for wonder, for they went early to the place where his body had been put,

不见他的身体，就回来告诉我们说，看见了天使显现，说他活了。
And it was not there; then they came saying that they had seen a vision of angels who said that he was living.

又有我们的几个人，往坟墓那里去，所遇见的，正如妇女们所说的，只是没有看见他。
And some of those who were with us went to the place, and saw that it was as the women had said, but him they did not see.

耶稣对他们说，无知的人哪，先知所说的一切话，你们的心，信得太迟钝了。
And he said, O foolish men! how slow you are to give belief to what the prophets have said.

基督这样受害，又进入他的荣耀，岂不是应当的吗？
Was it not necessary for the Christ to go through these things, and to come into his glory?

于是从摩西和众先知起，凡经上所指着自己的话，都给他们讲解明白了。
And he made clear to them all the things in the Writings, from Moses and from all the prophets, which had to do with himself.

将近他们所去的村子，耶稣好像还要往前行
And they came near the town to which they were going, and he seemed as if he was going on;

他们却强留他说，时候晚了，日头已经平西了，请你同我们住下吧。耶稣就进去，要同他们住下。
But they kept him back, saying, Do not go, for evening is near, the day is almost gone. And he went in with them.

到了坐席的时候，耶稣拿起饼来，祝谢了，掰开，递给他们。
And when he was seated with them at table, he took the bread, and said words of blessing and, making division of it, he gave it to them.

他们的眼睛明亮了，这才认出他来。忽然耶稣不见了。
And then their eyes were open, and they had knowledge of him, but he went from their view.

他们彼此说，在路上，他和我们说话，给我们讲解圣经的时候，我们的心岂不是火热的吗？
And they said to one another, Were not our hearts burning in us while he was talking to us on the way, making clear to us the holy Writings?

他们就立时起身，回耶路撒冷去，正遇见十一个使徒，和他们的同人，聚集在一处。
And that very hour they got up and went back to Jerusalem, where the eleven and the others had come together.

说，主果然复活，已经现给西门看了。
And they said to them, The Lord has truly come back to life again, and Simon has seen him.

两个人就把路上所遇见，和掰饼的时候怎么被他们认出来的事，都述说了一遍。
And they gave an account of the things which had taken place on the way, and how, when he gave them bread, they had knowledge of him.

正说这话的时候，耶稣亲自站在他们当中，说，愿你们平安。
And while they were saying these things, he himself was among them, and said to them, Peace be with you!

他们却惊慌害怕，以为所看见的是魂。
But they were full of fear, being of the opinion that they were seeing a spirit.

耶稣说，你们为什么愁烦？为什么心里起疑念呢？
And he said to them, Why are you troubled, and why are your hearts full of doubt?

你们看我的手，我的脚，就知道实在是我了。摸我看看。魂无骨无肉，你们看我是有的。
See; my hands and my feet: it is I myself; put your hands on me and make certain; for a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see that I have.

说了这话，就把手和脚给他们看。
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his feet.

他们正喜得不敢信，并且希奇，耶稣就说，你们这里有什么吃的没有。
And because, for joy and wonder, they were still in doubt, he said to them, Have you any food here?

他们便给他一片烧鱼。（有古卷在此有和一块蜜房）
And they gave him a bit of cooked fish.

他接过来，在他们面前吃了。
And before their eyes he took a meal.

耶稣对他们说，这就是我从前与你们同在之时，所告诉你们的话，说，摩西的律法，先知的书，和诗篇上所记的，凡指着我的话，都必须应验。
And he said to them, These are the words which I said to you when I was still with you, how it was necessary for all the things which are in the writings of Moses and the prophets and in the Psalms about me, to be put into effect.

于是耶稣开他们的心窍，使他们能明白圣经。
Then he made the holy Writings clear to their minds.

又对他们说，照经上所写的，基督必受害，第三日从死里复活。
And he said to them, So it is in the Writings that the Christ would undergo death, and come back to life again on the third day;

并且人要奉他的名传悔改赦罪的道，从耶路撒冷起直传到万邦。
And that teaching about a change of heart and forgiveness of sins is to be given to Jerusalem first and to all nations in his name.

你们就是这些事的见证。
You are witnesses of these things.

我要将我父所应许的降在你们身上。你们要在城里等候，直到你们领受从上头来的能力。
And now I will send to you what my father has undertaken to give you, but do not go from the town, till the power from heaven comes to you.

耶稣领他们到伯大尼的对面，就举手给他们祝福。
And he took them out till they were near Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he gave them a blessing.

正祝福的时候，他就离开他们，被带到天上去了。
And while he was doing so, he went from them and was taken up into heaven.

他们就拜他，大大地欢喜，回耶路撒冷去。
And they gave him worship and went back to Jerusalem with great joy.

常在殿里称颂神。
And they were in the Temple at all times, giving praise to God.

