奉神旨意，作基督耶稣使徒的保罗，写信给在以弗所的圣徒，就是在基督耶稣里有忠心的人。
Paul, an Apostle of Christ Jesus by the purpose of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and those who have faith in Christ Jesus:

愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父，和主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

愿颂赞归与我们主耶稣基督的父神，他在基督里，曾赐给我们天上各样属灵的福气。
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has given us every blessing of the Spirit in the heavens in Christ:

就如神从创立世界以前，在基督里拣选了我们，使我们在他面前成为圣洁，无有瑕疵。
Even as he made selection of us in him from the first, so that we might be holy and free from all evil before him in love:

又因爱我们，就按着自己意旨所喜悦的，预定我们，借着耶稣基督得儿子的名分，
As we were designed before by him for the position of sons to himself, through Jesus Christ, in the good pleasure of his purpose,

使他荣耀的恩典得着称赞。这恩典是他在爱子里所赐给我们的。
To the praise of the glory of his grace, which he freely gave to us in the Loved One:

我们借这爱子的血，得蒙救赎，过犯得以赦免，乃是照他丰富的恩典。
In whom we have salvation through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins, through the wealth of his grace,

这恩典是神用诸般智慧聪明，充充足足赏给我们的，
Which he gave us in full measure in all wisdom and care;

都是照他自己所预定的美意，叫我们知道他旨意的奥秘，
Having made clear to us the secret of his purpose, in agreement with the design which he had in mind, to put into his hands

要照所安排的，在日期满足的时候，使天上地上一切所有的，都在基督里面同归于一。
The ordering of the times when they are complete, so that all things might come to a head in Christ, the things in heaven and the things on the earth; in him, I say,

我们也在他里面得了基业，（得或作成）这原是那位随己意行作万事的，照着他旨意所预定的。
In whom we have a heritage, being marked out from the first in his purpose who does all things in agreement with his designs;

叫他的荣耀，从我们这首先在基督里有盼望的人，可以得着称赞。
So that his glory might have praise through us who first had hope in Christ:

你们既听见真理的道，就是那叫你们得救的福音，也信了基督，既然信他，就受了所应许的圣灵为印记。
In whom you, having been given the true word, the good news of your salvation, and through your faith in him, were given the sign of the Holy Spirit of hope,

这圣灵，是我们得基业的凭据，（原文作质）直等到神之民（民原文作产业）被赎，使他的荣耀得着称赞。
Which is the first-fruit of our heritage, till God gets back that which is his, to the praise of his glory.

因此，我既听见你们信从主耶稣，亲爱众圣徒，
For this cause I, having had news of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and which you make clear to all the saints,

就为你们不住地感谢神，祷告的时候，常提到你们。
Give praise without end for you, keeping you in mind in my prayers;

求我们主耶稣基督的神，荣耀的父，将那赐人智慧和启示的灵，赏给你们，使你们真知道他。
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;

并且照明你们心中的眼睛，使你们知道他的恩召有何等指望。他在圣徒中得的基业，有何等丰盛的荣耀。
And that having the eyes of your heart full of light, you may have knowledge of what is the hope of his purpose, what is the wealth of the glory of his heritage in the saints,

并知道他向我们这信的人所显的能力，是何等浩大，
And how unlimited is his power to us who have faith, as is seen in the working of the strength of his power,

就是照他在基督身上，所运行的大能大力，使他从死里复活，叫他在天上坐在自己的右边，
By which he made Christ come back from the dead, and gave him a place at his right hand in heaven,

远超过一切执政的，掌权的，有能的，主治的，和一切有名的。不但是今世的，连来世的也都超过了。
Far over all rule and authority and power and every name which is named, not only in the present order, but in that which is to come:

又将万有服在他的脚下，使他为教会作万有之首。
And he has put all things under his feet, and has made him to be head over all things to the church,

教会是他的身体，是那充满万有者所充满的。
Which is his body, the full measure of him in whom all things are made complete.

你们死在过犯罪恶之中，他叫你们活过来，
And to you did he give life, when you were dead through your wrongdoing and sins,

那时你们在其中行事为人随从今世的风俗，顺服空中掌权者的首领，就是现今在悖逆之子心中运行的邪灵。
In which you were living in the past, after the ways of this present world, doing the pleasure of the lord of the power of the air, the spirit who is now working in those who go against the purpose of God;

我们从前也都在他们中间，放纵肉体的私欲，随着肉体和心中所喜好的去行，本为可怒之子，和别人一样。
Among whom we all at one time were living in the pleasures of our flesh, giving way to the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and the punishment of God was waiting for us even as for the rest.

然而神既有丰富的怜悯。因他爱我们的大爱，
But God, being full of mercy, through the great love which he had for us,

当我们死在过犯中的时候，便叫我们与基督一同活过来。（你们得救是本乎恩）
Even when we were dead through our sins, gave us life together with Christ (by grace you have salvation),

他又叫我们与基督耶稣一同复活，一同坐在天上，
So that we came back from death with him, and are seated with him in the heavens, in Christ Jesus;

要将他极丰富的恩典，就是他在基督耶稣里向我们所施的恩慈，显明给后来的世代看。
That in the time to come he might make clear the full wealth of his grace in his mercy to us in Christ Jesus:

你们得救是本乎恩，也因着信，这并不是出于自己，乃是神所赐的。
Because by grace you have salvation through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is given by God:

也不是出于行为，免得有人自夸。
Not by works, so that no man may take glory to himself.

我们原是他的工作，在基督耶稣里造成的，为要叫我们行善，就是神所预备叫我们行的。
For by his act we were given existence in Christ Jesus to do those good works which God before made ready for us so that we might do them.

所以你们应当记念，你们从前按肉体是外邦人，是称为没受割礼的，这名原是那些凭人手在肉身上称为受割礼之人所起的。
For this reason keep it in mind that in the past you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are looked on as being outside the circumcision by those who have circumcision, in the flesh, made by hands;

那时你们与基督无关，在以色列国民以外，在所应许的诸约上是局外人。并且活在世上没有指望，没有神。
That you were at that time without Christ, being cut off from any part in Israel's rights as a nation, having no part in God's agreement, having no hope, and without God in the world.

你们从前远离神的人，如今却在基督耶稣里，靠着他的血，已经得亲近了。
But now in Christ Jesus you who at one time were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.

因他使我们和睦，（原文作因他是我们的和睦）将两下合而为一，拆毁了中间隔断的墙。
For he is our peace, who has made the two into one, and by whom the middle wall of division has been broken down,

而且以自己的身体，废掉冤仇，就是那记在律法上的规条。为要将两下，借着自己造成一个新人，如此便成就了和睦。
Having in his flesh put an end to that which made the division between us, even the law with its rules and orders, so that he might make in himself, of the two, one new man, so making peace;

既在十字架上灭了冤仇，便借这十字架，使两下归为一体，与神和好了。
And that the two might come into agreement with God in one body through the cross, so putting an end to that division.

并且来传和平的福音给你们远处的人，也给那近处的人。
And he came preaching peace to you who were far off, and to those who were near;

因为我们两下借着他被一个圣灵所感得以进到父面前。
Because through him the two of us are able to come near in one Spirit to the Father.

这样，你们不再作外人，和客旅，是与圣徒同国，是神家里的人了。
So then you are no longer as those who have no part or place in the kingdom of God, but you are numbered among the saints, and of the family of God,

并且被建造在使徒和先知的根基上，有基督耶稣自己为房角石。
Resting on the base of the Apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief keystone,

各（或作全）房靠他联络得合式，渐渐成为主的圣殿。
In whom all the building, rightly joined together, comes to be a holy house of God in the Lord;

你们也靠他同被建造成为神借着圣灵居住的所在。
In whom you, with the rest, are united together as a living-place of God in the Spirit.

因此，我保罗为你们外邦人作了基督耶稣被囚的，替你们祈祷（此句乃照对十四节所加）
For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for you Gentiles,

谅必你们曾听见神赐恩给我，将关切你们的职分托付我，
If that ordering of the grace of God has come to your knowledge, which was given to me for you,

用启示使我知道福音的奥秘，正如我以前略略写过的。
How by revelation the secret was made clear to me, as I said before in a short letter,

你们念了，就能晓得我深知基督的奥秘。
By the reading of which you will be clear about my knowledge of the secret of Christ;

这奥秘在以前的世代，没有叫人知道，像如今借着圣灵启示他的圣使徒和先知一样。
Which in other generations was not given to the sons of men, but the revelation of it has now been made to his holy Apostles and prophets in the Spirit;

这奥秘就是外邦人在基督耶稣里，借着福音，得以同为后嗣，同为一体，同蒙应许。
Which is that the Gentiles have a part in the heritage, and in the same body, and in the same hope in Christ through the good news,

我作了这福音的执事，是照神的恩赐。这恩赐是照他运行的大能赐给我的。
Of which I was made a preacher, through that grace of God which was given to me in the measure of the working of his power.

我本来比众圣徒中最小的还小。然而他还赐我这恩典，叫我把基督那测不透的丰富，传给外邦人。
To me, who am less than the least of all the saints, was this grace given, so that I might make clear to the Gentiles the good news of the unending wealth of Christ:

又使众人都明白，这历代以来隐藏在创造万物之神里的奥秘，是如何安排的。
And make all men see what is the ordering of the secret which from the first has been kept in God who made all things;

为要借着教会使天上执政的，掌权的，现在得知神百般的智慧。
So that now to the rulers and the authorities in the heavens might be made clear through the church the wide-shining wisdom of God,

这是照神从万世以前，在我们主基督耶稣里所定的旨意。
Which is seen in his eternal purpose in Christ Jesus our Lord:

我们因信耶稣，就在他里面放胆无惧，笃信不疑的来到神面前。
By whom we come near to God without fear through faith in him.

所以我求你们，不要因我为你们所受的患难丧胆。这原是你们的荣耀。
For this reason it is my prayer that you may not become feeble because of my troubles for you, which are your glory.

因此，我在父面前屈膝，
For this cause I go down on my knees before the Father,

（天上地上的各（或作全）家，都是从他得名）
From whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,

求他按着他丰盛的荣耀，借着他的灵，叫你们心里的力量刚强起来，
That in the wealth of his glory he would make you strong with power through his Spirit in your hearts;

使基督因你们的信，住在你们心里，叫你们的爱心，有根有基，
So that Christ may have his place in your hearts through faith; and that you, being rooted and based in love,

能以和众圣徒一同明白基督的爱，是何等长阔高深，
May have strength to see with all the saints how wide and long and high and deep it is,

并知道这爱是过于人所能测度的，便叫神一切所充满的，充满了你们。
And to have knowledge of the love of Christ which is outside all knowledge, so that you may be made complete as God himself is complete.

神能照着运行在我们心里的大力，充充足足的成就一切超过我们所求所想的。
Now to him who is able to do in full measure more than all our desires or thoughts, through the power which is working in us,

但愿他在教会中，并在基督耶稣里，得着荣耀，直到世世代代，永永远远。阿们。
To him be the glory in the church and in Christ Jesus to all generations for ever and ever. So be it.

我为主被囚的劝你们，既然蒙召，行事为人就当与蒙召的恩相称。
I then, the prisoner in the Lord, make this request from my heart, that you will see that your behaviour is a credit to the position which God's purpose has given you,

凡事谦虚，温柔，忍耐，用爱心互相宽容，
With all gentle and quiet behaviour, taking whatever comes, putting up with one another in love;

用和平彼此联络，竭力保守圣灵所赐合而为一的心。
Taking care to keep the harmony of the Spirit in the yoke of peace.

身体只有一个，圣灵只有一个，正如你们蒙召，同有一个指望，
There is one body and one Spirit, even as you have been marked out by God in the one hope of his purpose for you;

一主，一信，一洗，
One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

一神，就是众人的父，超乎众人之上，贯乎众人之中，也住在众人之内。
One God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in all.

我们各人蒙恩，都是照基督所量给各人的恩赐。
But to every one of us has grace been given in the measure of the giving of Christ.

所以经上说，他升上高天的时候，掳掠了仇敌，将各样的恩赐赏给人。
For this reason he says, He went up on high, taking his prisoners with him, and gave freely to men.

（既说升上，岂不是先降在地下吗？
(Now this, He went up, what is it but that he first went down into the lower parts of the earth?

那降下的，就是远升诸天之上要充满万有的。）
He who went down is the same who went up far over all the heavens so that he might make all things complete.)

他所赐的有使徒，有先知。有传福音的。有牧师和教师。
And he gave some as Apostles, and some, prophets; and some, preachers of the good news; and some to give care and teaching;

为要成全圣徒，各尽其职，建立基督的身体。
For the training of the saints as servants in the church, for the building up of the body of Christ:

直等到我们众人在真道上同归于一，认识神的儿子，得以长大成人，满有基督长成的身量。
Till we all come to the harmony of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to full growth, to the full measure of Christ:

使我们不再作小孩子，中了人的诡计，和欺骗的法术，被一切异教之风摇动，飘来飘去，就随从各样的异端。
So that we may be no longer children, sent this way and that, turned about by every wind of teaching, by the twisting and tricks of men, by the deceits of error;

惟用爱心说诚实话，凡事长进，连于元首基督。
But saying true words in love, may come to full growth in him, who is the head, even Christ;

全身都靠他联络得合式，百节各按各职，照着各体的功用，彼此相助，便叫身体渐渐增长，在爱中建立自己。
Through whom all the body, being rightly formed and united together, by the full working of every part, is increased to the building up of itself in love.

所以我说，且在主里确实地说，你们行事，不要再像外邦人存虚妄的心行事。
This I say, then, and give witness in the Lord, that you are to go no longer in the way of the Gentiles whose minds are turned to that which has no profit,

他们心地昏昧，与神所赐的生命隔绝了，都因自己无知，心里刚硬。
Whose thoughts are dark, to whom the life of God is strange because they are without knowledge, and their hearts have been made hard;

良心既然丧尽，就放纵私欲，贪行种种的污秽。
Who having no more power of feeling, have given themselves up to evil passions, to do all unclean things with overmuch desire.

你们学了基督，却不是这样。
For this was not the teaching of Christ which was given to you;

如果你们听过他的道，领了他的教，学了他的真理，
If in fact you gave ear to him, and were given teaching in him, even as what is true is made clear in Jesus:

就要脱去你们从前行为上的旧人。这旧人是因私欲的迷惑，渐渐变坏的。
That you are to put away, in relation to your earlier way of life, the old man, which has become evil by love of deceit;

又要将你们的心志改换一新。
And be made new in the spirit of your mind,

并且穿上新人。这新人是照着神的形像造的，有真理的仁义，和圣洁。
And put on the new man, to which God has given life, in righteousness and a true and holy way of living.

所以你们要弃绝谎言，各人与邻舍说实话。因为我们是互相为肢体。
And so, putting away false words, let everyone say what is true to his neighbour: for we are parts one of another.

生气却不要犯罪。不可含怒到日落。
Be angry without doing wrong; let not the sun go down on your wrath;

也不可给魔鬼留地步。
And do not give way to the Evil One.

从前偷窃的，不要再偷。总要劳力，亲手作正经事，就可有余分给那缺少的人。
Let him who was a thief be so no longer, but let him do good work with his hands, so that he may have something to give to him who is in need.

污秽的言语，一句不可出口，只要随事说造就人的好话，叫听见的人得益处。
Let no evil talk come out of your mouth, but only what is good for giving necessary teaching, and for grace to those who give ear.

不要叫神的圣灵担忧。你们原是受了他的印记，等候得赎的日子来到。
And do not give grief to the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were marked for the day of salvation.

一切苦毒，恼恨，忿怒，嚷闹，毁谤，并一切的恶毒，（或作阴毒）都当从你们中间除掉。
Let all bitter, sharp and angry feeling, and noise, and evil words, be put away from you, with all unkind acts;

并要以恩慈相待，存怜悯的心，彼此饶恕，正如神在基督里饶恕了你们一样。
And be kind to one another, full of pity, having forgiveness for one another, even as God in Christ had forgiveness for you.

所以你们该效法神，好像蒙慈爱的儿女一样。
Let it then be your desire to be like God, as well-loved children;

也要凭爱心行事，正如基督爱我们，为我们舍了自己，当作馨香的供物，和祭物，献与神。
And be living in love, even as Christ had love for you, and gave himself up for us, an offering to God for a perfume of a sweet smell.

至于淫乱，并一切污秽，或是贪婪，在你们中间连提都不可，方合圣徒的体统。
But evil acts of the flesh and all unclean things, or desire for others' property, let it not even be named among you, as is right for saints;

淫词，妄语，和戏笑的话，都不相宜，总要说感谢的话。
And let there be no low behaviour, or foolish talk, or words said in sport, which are not right, but in place of them the giving of praise.

因为你们确实的知道，无论是淫乱的，是污秽的，是有贪心的，在基督和神的国里，都是无分的。有贪心的，就与拜偶像的一样。
Being certain of this, that no man who gives way to the passions of the flesh, no unclean person, or one who has desire for the property of others, or who gives worship to images, has any heritage in the kingdom of Christ and God.

不要被人虚浮的话欺哄。因这些事，神的忿怒必临到那悖逆之子。
Do not be turned from the right way by foolish words; for because of these things the punishment of God comes on those who do not put themselves under him.

所以你们不要与他们同伙。
Have no part with such men;

从前你们是暗昧的，但如今在主里面是光明的，行事为人就当像光明的子女。
For you at one time were dark, but now are light in the Lord: let your behaviour be that of children of light

光明所结的果子，就是一切良善，公义，诚实。
(Because the fruit of the light is in all righteousness and in everything which is good and true),

总要察验何为主所喜悦的事。
Testing by experience what is well-pleasing to the Lord;

那暗昧无益的事，不要与人同行，倒要责备行这事的人
And have no company with the works of the dark, which give no fruit, but make their true quality clear;

因为他们暗中所行的，就是提起来，也是可耻的。
For the things which are done by them in secret it is shame even to put into words.

凡事受了责备，就被光显明出来。因为一切能显明的，就是光。
But all things, when their true quality is seen, are made clear by the light: because everything which is made clear is light.

所以主说，你这睡着的人，当醒过来，从死里复活，基督就要光照你了。
For this reason he says, Be awake, you who are sleeping, and come up from among the dead, and Christ will be your light.

你们要谨慎行事，不要像愚昧人，当像智慧人。
Take care then how you are living, not as unwise, but as wise;

要爱惜光阴，因为现今的世代邪恶。
Making good use of the time, because the days are evil.

不要作糊涂人，要明白主的旨意如何。
For this reason, then, do not be foolish, but be conscious of the Lord's pleasure.

不要醉酒，酒能使人放荡，乃要被圣灵充满。
And do not take overmuch wine by which one may be overcome, but be full of the Spirit;

当用诗章，颂词，灵歌，彼此对说，口唱心和地赞美主。
Joining with one another in holy songs of praise and of the Spirit, using your voice in songs and making melody in your heart to the Lord;

凡事要奉我们主耶稣基督的名，常常感谢父神。
Giving praise at all times for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;

又当存敬畏基督的心，彼此顺服。
Letting yourselves be ruled by one another in the fear of Christ.

你们作妻子的，当顺服自己的丈夫，如同顺服主。
Wives, be under the authority of your husbands, as of the Lord.

因为丈夫是妻子的头，如同基督是教会的头。他又是教会全体的救主。
For the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the head of the church, being himself the saviour of the body.

教会怎样顺服基督，妻子也要怎样凡事顺服丈夫。
And as the church is under Christ's authority, so let wives be under the rule of their husbands in all things.

你们作丈夫的，要爱你们的妻子，正如基督爱教会，为教会舍己。
Husbands, have love for your wives, even as Christ had love for the church, and gave himself for it;

要用水借着道，把教会洗净，成为圣洁，
So that he might make it holy, having made it clean with the washing of water by the word,

可以献给自己，作个荣耀的教会，毫无玷污皱纹等类的病，乃是圣洁没有瑕疵的。
And might take it for himself, a church full of glory, not having one mark or fold or any such thing; but that it might be holy and complete.

丈夫也当照样爱妻子，如同爱自己的身子。爱妻子，便是爱自己了。
Even so it is right for husbands to have love for their wives as for their bodies. He who has love for his wife has love for himself:

从来没有人恨恶自己的身子，总是保养顾惜，正像基督待教会一样。
For no man ever had hate for his flesh; but he gives it food and takes care of it, even as Christ does for the church;

因我们是他身上的肢体。（有古卷在此有就是他的骨他的肉）。
Because we are parts of his body.

为这个缘故，人要离开父母，与妻子连合，二人成为一体。
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.

这是极大的奥秘，但我是指着基督和教会说的。
This is a great secret: but my words are about Christ and the church.

然而你们各人都当爱妻子，如同爱自己一样。妻子也当敬重她的丈夫。
But do you, everyone, have love for his wife, even as for himself; and let the wife see that she has respect for her husband.

你们作儿女的，要在主里听从父母，这是理所当然的。
Children, do what is ordered by your fathers and mothers in the Lord: for this is right.

要孝敬父母，使你得福，在世长寿。这是第一条带应许的诫命。
Give honour to your father and mother (which is the first rule having a reward),


So that all may be well for you, and your life may be long on the earth.

你们作父亲的，不要惹儿女的气，只要照着主的教训和警戒，养育他们。
And, you fathers, do not make your children angry: but give them training in the teaching and fear of the Lord.

你们作仆人的，要惧怕战兢，用诚实的心听从你们肉身的主人，好像听从基督一般。
Servants, do what is ordered by those who are your natural masters, having respect and fear for them, with all your heart, as to Christ;

不要只在眼前事奉，像是讨人喜欢的，要像基督的仆人，从心里遵行神的旨意。
Not only under your master's eye, as pleasers of men; but as servants of Christ, doing the pleasure of God from the heart;

甘心事奉，好像服事主，不像服事人。
Doing your work readily, as to the Lord, and not to men:

因为晓得各人所行的善事，不论是为奴的，是自主的，都必按所行的得主的赏赐
In the knowledge that for every good thing anyone does, he will have his reward from the Lord, If he is a servant or if he is free.

你们作主人的待仆人，也是一理，不要威吓他们。因为知道他们和你们，同有一位主在天上，他并不偏待人。
And, you masters, do the same things to them, not making use of violent words: in the knowledge that their Master and yours is in heaven, and he has no respect for a man's position.

我还有末了的话，你们要靠着主，倚赖他的大能大力，作刚强的人。
Lastly, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his power.

要穿戴神所赐的全副军装，就能抵挡魔鬼的诡计。
Take up God's instruments of war, so that you may be able to keep your position against all the deceits of the Evil One.

因我们并不是与属血气的争战，乃是与那些执政的，掌权的，管辖这幽暗世界的，以及天空属灵气的恶魔争战。（两争战原文都作摔跤）
For our fight is not against flesh and blood, but against authorities and powers, against the world-rulers of this dark night, against the spirits of evil in the heavens.

所以要拿起神所赐的全副军装，好在磨难的日子，抵挡仇敌，并且成就了一切，还能站立得住。
For this reason take up all the arms of God, so that you may be able to be strong in the evil day, and, having done all, to keep your place.

所以要站稳了，用真理当作带子束腰，用公义当作护心镜遮胸。
Take your place, then, having your body clothed with the true word, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness;

又用平安的福音，当作预备走路的鞋穿在脚上，
Be ready with the good news of peace as shoes on your feet;

此外又拿着信德当作藤牌，可以灭尽那恶者一切的火箭。
And most of all, using faith as a cover to keep off all the flaming arrows of the Evil One.

并戴上救恩的头盔，拿着圣灵的宝剑，就是神的道。
And take salvation for your head-dress and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

靠着圣灵，随时多方祷告祈求，并要在此儆醒不倦，为众圣徒祈求，
With prayers and deep desires, making requests at all times in the Spirit, and keeping watch, with strong purpose, in prayer for all the saints,

也为我祈求，使我得着口才，能以放胆，开口讲明福音的奥秘，
And for me, that words may be given to me in the opening of my mouth, to make clear without fear the secret of the good news,

（我为这福音的奥秘，作了带锁链的使者）并使我照着当尽的本分，放胆讲论。
For which I am a representative in chains, and that I may say without fear the things which it is right for me to say.

今有所亲爱忠心事奉主的兄弟推基古，他要把我的事情并我的景况如何，全告诉你们叫你们知道。
But so that you may have knowledge of my business, and how I am, Tychicus, the well-loved brother and tested servant in the Lord, will give you news of all things:

我特意打发他到你们那里去，好叫你们知道我们的光景，又叫他安慰你们的心。
Whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, so that you may have knowledge of our position, and that he may give comfort to your hearts.

愿平安，仁爱，信心，从父神和主耶稣基督，归与弟兄们。
Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

并愿所有诚心爱我们主耶稣基督的人，都蒙恩惠。
Grace be with all those who have true love for our Lord Jesus Christ.

