使徒行传 Acts


提阿非罗阿，我已经作了前书，论到耶稣开头一切所行所教训的，
I have given an earlier account, O Theophilus, of all the things which Jesus did, and of his teaching from the first,

直到他借着圣灵吩咐所拣选的使徒，以后被接上升的日子为止。
Till the day when he was taken up to heaven after he had given his orders, through the Holy Spirit, to the Apostles of whom he had made selection:

他受害之后，用许多的凭据，将自己活活地显给使徒看，四十天之久向他们显现，讲说神国的事。
And to whom he gave clear and certain signs that he was living, after his death; for he was seen by them for forty days, and gave them teaching about the kingdom of God:

耶稣和他们聚集的时候，嘱咐他们说，不要离开耶路撒冷，要等候父所应许的，就是你们听见我说过的。
And when they were all together, with him, he gave them orders not to go away from Jerusalem, but to keep there, waiting till the word of the Father was put into effect, of which, he said, I have given you knowledge:

约翰是用水施洗。但不多几日，你们要受圣灵的洗。
For the baptism of John was with water, but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit, after a little time.

他们聚集的时候，问耶稣说，主阿，你复兴以色列国，就在这时候吗？
So, when they were together, they said to him, Lord, will you at this time give back the kingdom to Israel?

耶稣对他们说，父凭着自己的权柄，所定的时候日期，不是你们可以知道的。
And he said to them, It is not for you to have knowledge of the time and the order of events which the Father has kept in his control.

但圣灵降临在你们身上，你们就必得着能力。并要在耶路撒冷，犹太全地，和撒玛利亚，直到地极，作我的见证。
But you will have power, when the Holy Spirit has come on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and all Judaea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.

说了这话，他们正看的时候，他就被取上升，有一朵云彩把他接去，便看不见他了。
And when he had said these things, while they were looking, he was taken up, and went from their view into a cloud.

当他往上去，他们定睛望天的时候，忽然有两个人，身穿白衣，站在旁边，说，
And while they were looking up to heaven with great attention, two men came to them, in white clothing,

加利利人哪，你们为什么站着望天呢？这离开你们被接升天的耶稣，你们见他怎样往天上去，他还要怎样来。
And said, O men of Galilee, why are you looking up into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken from you into heaven, will come again, in the same way as you saw him go into heaven.

有一座山名叫橄榄山，离耶路撒冷不远，约有安息日可走的路程。当下门徒从那里回耶路撒冷去。
Then they went back to Jerusalem from the mountain named Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.

进了城，就上了所住的一间楼房。在那里有彼得，约翰，雅各，安得烈，腓力，多马，巴多罗买，马太，亚勒腓的儿子雅各，奋锐党的西门，和雅各的儿子（或作兄弟）犹大。
And when they came in, they went up into the room where they were living; Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James, the son of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot, and Judas, the son of James.

这些人，同着几个妇人，和耶稣的母亲马利亚，并耶稣的弟兄，都同心合意地恒切祷告。
And they all with one mind gave themselves up to prayer, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.

那时，有许多人聚会，约有一百二十名，彼得就在弟兄中间站起来，说，
And in those days Peter got up among the brothers (there were about one hundred and twenty of them), and said,

弟兄们，圣灵借大卫的口，在圣经上，预言领人捉拿耶稣的犹大。这话是必须应验的。
My brothers, the word of God had to be put into effect, which the Holy Spirit had said before, by the mouth of David, about Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus,

他本来列在我们数中，并且在使徒的职任上得了一分。
For he was numbered among us, and had his part in our work.

这人用他作恶的工价，买了一块田，以后身子仆倒，肚腹崩裂，肠子都流出来。
(Now this man, with the reward of his evil-doing, got for himself a field, and falling head first, came to a sudden and violent end there.

住在耶路撒冷的众人都知道这事，所以按着他们那里的话，给那块田起名叫亚革大马，就是血田的意思。
And this came to the knowledge of all those who were living in Jerusalem, so that the field was named in their language, Akel-dama, or, The field of blood.)

因为诗篇上写着说，愿他的住处，变为荒场，无人在内居住。又说，愿别人得他的职分。
For in the book of Psalms it says, Let his house be waste, and let no man be living in it: and, Let his position be taken by another.

所以主耶稣在我们中间始终出入的时候，
For this reason, of the men who have been with us all the time, while the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

就是从约翰施洗起，直到主离开我们被接上升的日子为止，必须从那常与我们作伴的人中，立一位与我们同作耶稣复活的见证。
Starting from the baptism of John till he went up from us, one will have to be a witness with us of his coming back from death.

于是选举两个人，就是那叫作巴撒巴又称呼犹士都的约瑟，和马提亚。
And they made selection of two, Joseph, named Barsabbas, whose other name was Justus, and Matthias.

众人就祷告说，主阿，你知道万人的心，求你从这两个人中，指明你所拣选的是谁，叫他得这使徒的位分。这位分犹大已经丢弃，往自己的地方去了。
And they made prayers and said, Lord, having knowledge of the hearts of all men, make clear which of these two has been marked out by you,


To take that position as a servant and Apostle, from which Judas by his sin was shut out, so that he might go to his place.

于是众人为他们摇签，摇出马提亚来。他就和十一个使徒同列。
And they put it to the decision of chance, and the decision was given for Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles.

五旬节到了，门徒都聚集在一处。
And when the day of Pentecost was come, they were all together in one place.

忽然从天上有响声下来，好像一阵大风吹过，充满了他们所坐的屋子。
And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like the rushing of a violent wind, and all the house where they were was full of it.

又有舌头如火焰显现出来，分开落在他们各人头上。
And they saw tongues, like flames of fire, coming to rest on every one of them.

他们就都被圣灵充满，按着圣灵所赐的口才，说起别国的话来。
And they were all full of the Holy Spirit, and were talking in different languages, as the Spirit gave them power.

那时，有虔诚的犹太人，从天下各国来，住在耶路撒冷。
Now there were living at Jerusalem, Jews, God-fearing men, from every nation under heaven.

这声音一响，众人都来聚集，各人听见门徒用众人的乡谈说话，就甚纳闷。
And when this sound came to their ears, they all came together, and were greatly surprised because every man was hearing the words of the disciples in his special language.

都惊讶希奇说，看哪，这说话的不都是加利利人吗？
And they were full of wonder and said, Are not all these men Galilaeans?

我们各人，怎么听见他们说我们生来所用的乡谈呢？
And how is it that every one of us is hearing their words in the language which was ours from our birth?

我们帕提亚人，玛代人，以拦人，和住在米所波大米，犹太，加帕多家，本都，亚西亚，
Men of Parthia, Media, and Elam, and those living in Mesopotamia, in Judaea and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia,

弗吕家，旁非利亚，埃及的人，并靠近古利奈的吕彼亚一带地方的人，从罗马来的客旅中，或是犹太人，或是进犹太教的人，
In Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt and the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and those who have come from Rome, Jews by birth and others who have become Jews,

革哩底和亚拉伯人，都听见他们用我们的乡谈，讲说神的大作为。
Men of Crete and Arabia, to all of us they are talking in our different languages, of the great works of God.

众人就都惊讶猜疑，彼此说，这是什么意思呢？
And they were all surprised and in doubt saying to one another, What is the reason of this?

还有人讥诮说，他们无非是新酒灌满了。
But others, making sport of them, said, They are full of new wine.

彼得和十一个使徒，站起，高声说，犹太人，和一切住在耶路撒冷的人哪，这件事你们当知道，也当侧耳听我的话。
But Peter, getting up, with the eleven, said in a loud voice, O men of Judaea, and all you who are living in Jerusalem, take note of this and give ear to my words.

你们想这些人是醉了，其实不是醉了，因为时候刚到巳初。
For these men are not overcome with wine, as it seems to you, for it is only the third hour of the day;

这正是先知约珥所说的。
But this is the thing which was said by the prophet Joel;

神说，在末后的日子，我要将我的灵浇灌凡有血气的。你们的儿女要说预言。你们的少年人要见异象。老年人要作异梦。
And it will come about, in the last days, says God, that I will send out my Spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters will be prophets, and your young men will see visions, and your old men will have dreams:

在那些日子，我要将我的灵浇灌我的仆人和使女，他们就要说预言。
And on my men-servants and my women-servants I will send my Spirit, and they will be prophets.

在天上我要显出奇事，在地下我要显出神迹，有血，有火，有烟雾。
And wonders will be seen in heaven, and signs on the earth, blood and fire and smoke:

日头要变为黑暗，月亮要变为血，这都在主大而明显的日子未到以前。
The sun will become dark and the moon will be turned to blood, before that great day of the Lord comes in glory:

到那时候，凡求告主名的，就必得救。
And whoever makes his prayer to the Lord will have salvation.

以色列人哪，请听我的话。神借着拿撒勒人耶稣，在你们中间施行异能，奇事，神迹，将他证明出来，这是你们自己知道的。
Men of Israel, give ear to these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man who had the approval of God, as was made clear to you by the great works and signs and wonders which God did by him among you, as you yourselves have knowledge,

他既按着神的定旨先见，被交与人，你们就借着无法之人的手，把他钉在十字架上杀了。
Him, when he was given up, by the decision and knowledge of God, you put to death on the cross, by the hands of evil men:

神却将死的痛苦解释了，叫他复活。因为他原不能被死拘禁。
But God gave him back to life, having made him free from the pains of death because it was not possible for him to be overcome by it.

大卫指着他说，我看见主常在我眼前，他在我右边，叫我不至于摇动。
For David said of him, I saw the Lord before my face at all times, for he is at my right hand, so that I may not be moved:

所以我心里欢喜，我的灵（原文作舌）快乐。并且我的肉身要安居在指望中。
And for this cause my heart was glad and my tongue full of joy, and my flesh will be resting in hope:

因你必不将我的灵魂撇在阴间，也不叫你的圣者见朽坏。
For you will not let my soul be in hell and you will not give up your Holy One to destruction.

你已将生命的道路指示我，必叫我因见你的面，（或作叫我在你面前）得着满足的快乐。
You have made me see the ways of life; I will be full of joy when I see your face.

弟兄们，先祖大卫的事，我可以明明地对你们说，他死了，也葬埋了，并且他的坟墓，直到今日还在我们这里。
My brothers, I may say to you openly that David came to his death, and was put in the earth, and his resting-place is with us today.

大卫既是先知，又晓得神曾向他起誓，要从他的后裔中，立一位坐在他的宝座上。
But being a prophet, and having in mind the oath which God had given to him, that of the fruit of his body one would take his place as a king,

就预先看明这事，讲论基督复活说，他的灵魂，不撇在阴间，他的肉身，也不见朽坏。
He, having knowledge of the future, was talking of the coming again of Christ from the dead, that he was not kept in hell and his body did not see destruction.

这耶稣，神已经叫他复活了，我们都为这事作见证。
This Jesus God has given back to life, of which we all are witnesses.

他既被神的右手高举，（或作他既高举在神的右边）又从父受了所应许的圣灵，就把你们所看见所听见的，浇灌下来。
And so, being lifted up to the right hand of God, and having the Father's word that the Holy Spirit would come, he has sent this thing, which now you see and have knowledge of.

大卫并没有升到天上，但自己说，主对我主说，你坐在我的右边，
For David has not gone up into heaven, but says, himself, The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand,

等我使你仇敌作你的脚凳。
Till I put all those who are against you under your feet.

故此，以色列全家当确实的知道，你们钉在十字架上的这位耶稣，神已经立他为主为基督了。
For this reason, let all Israel be certain that this Jesus, whom you put to death on the cross, God has made Lord and Christ.

众人听见这话，觉得扎心，就对彼得和其余的使徒说，弟兄们，我们当怎样行。
Now when these words came to their ears their hearts were troubled, and they said to Peter and the other Apostles, Brothers, what are we to do?

彼得说，你们各人要悔改，奉耶稣基督的名受洗，叫你们的罪得赦，就必领受所赐的圣灵。
And Peter said, Let your hearts be changed, every one of you, and have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins; and you will have the Holy Spirit given to you.

因为这应许是给你们，和你们的儿女，并一切在远方的人，就是主我们神所召来的。
For the word of God is for you and for your children and for all those who are far off, even all those who may be marked out by the Lord our God.

彼得还用许多话作见证，劝勉他们说，你们当救自己脱离这弯曲的世代。
And with more such words he gave his witness, offering them salvation and saying, Come out from this evil generation.

于是领受他话的人，就受了洗，那一天，门徒约添了三千人。
Then those who gave hearing to his words had baptism: and about three thousand souls were joined to them that day.

都恒心遵守使徒的教训，彼此交接，掰饼，祈祷。
And they kept their attention fixed on the Apostles' teaching and were united together in the taking of broken bread and in prayer.

众人都惧怕。使徒又行了许多奇事神迹。
But fear came on every soul: and all sorts of wonders and signs were done by the Apostles.

信的人都在一处，凡物公用。
And all those who were of the faith kept together, and had all things in common;

并且卖了田产家业，照各人所需用的分给各人。
And exchanging their goods and property for money, they made division of it among them all, as they had need.

他们天天同心合意，恒切地在殿里且在家中掰饼，存着欢喜诚实的心用饭，
And day by day, going in agreement together regularly to the Temple and, taking broken bread together in their houses, they took their food with joy and with true hearts,

赞美神，得众民的喜爱。主将得救的人，天天加给他们。
Giving praise to God, and having the approval of all the people; and every day the number of those who had salvation was increased by the Lord.

申初祷告的时候，彼得，约翰，上圣殿去。
Now Peter and John were going up to the Temple at the ninth hour, the hour of prayer;

有一个人，生来是瘸腿的，天天被人抬来，放在殿的一个门口，那门名叫美门，要求进殿的人周济。
And a certain man who from birth had had no power in his legs, was taken there every day, and put down at the door of the Temple which is named Beautiful, requesting money from those who went into the Temple;

他看见彼得约翰将要进殿，就求他们周济。
He then, seeing Peter and John going into the Temple, made a request to them.

彼得约翰定睛看他。彼得说，你看我们。
And Peter, looking at him, with John, said, Keep your eyes on us.

那人就留意看他们，指望得着什么。
And he gave attention to them, hoping to get something from them.

彼得说，金银我都没有，只把我所有的给你，我奉拿撒勒人耶稣基督的名，叫你起来行走。
But Peter said, I have no silver or gold, but what I have, that I give to you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up on your feet.

于是拉着他的右手，扶他起来，他的脚和踝子骨，立刻健壮了。
And he took him by his right hand, lifting him up; and straight away his feet and the bones of his legs became strong,

就跳起来，站着，又行走。同他们进了殿，走着，跳着，赞美神。
And, jumping up, he got on to his feet and went into the Temple with them, walking and jumping and giving praise to God.

百姓都看见他行走，赞美神。
And all the people saw him walking and praising God:

认得他是那素常坐在殿的美门口求周济的，就因他所遇着的事，满心希奇惊讶。
And they saw that it was the man who made requests for money at the door of the Temple, and they were full of wonder and surprise at what had taken place.

那人正在称为所罗门的廊下，拉着彼得，约翰。众百姓一齐跑到他们那里，很觉希奇。
And while he kept his hands on Peter and John, all the people came running together to the covered way which is named Solomon's, full of wonder.

彼得看见，就对百姓说，以色列人哪，为什么把这事当作希奇呢？为什么定睛看我们，以为我们凭自己的能力和虔诚，使这人行走呢？
And when Peter saw it he said to the people, You men of Israel, why are you so greatly surprised at this man? or why are you looking at us as if by our power or virtue we had given him the use of his legs?

亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各的神，就是我们列祖的神，已经荣耀了他的仆人耶稣。（仆人或作儿子）你们却把他交付彼拉多。彼拉多定意要释放他，你们竟在彼拉多面前弃绝了他。
The God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has given glory to his servant Jesus; whom you gave up, turning your backs on him, when Pilate had made the decision to let him go free.

你们弃绝了那圣洁公义者，反求着释放一个凶手给你们。
But you would have nothing to do with the Holy and Upright One, and made request for a man of blood to be given to you,

你们杀了那生命的主，神却叫他从死里复活了。我们都是为这事作见证。
And put to death the Lord of life; whom God gave back from the dead; of which fact we are witnesses.

我们因信他的名，他的名便叫你们所看见所认识的这人，健壮了。正是他所赐的信心，叫这人在你们众人面前全然好了。
And his name, through faith in his name, has made this man strong, whom you see and have knowledge of: yes, the faith which is through him has made him well, before you all.

弟兄们，我晓得你们作这事，是出于不知，你们的官长也是如此。
And now, my brothers, I am conscious that you did this, as did your rulers, without knowledge.

但神曾借众先知的口，预言基督将要受害，就这样应验了。
But the things which God had made clear before, by the mouth of all the prophets, that the Christ would have to undergo, he has put into effect in this way.

所以你们当悔改归正，使你们的罪得以涂抹，这样，那安舒的日子，就必从主面前来到。
So then, let your hearts be changed and be turned to God, so that your sins may be completely taken away, and times of blessing may come from the Lord;

主也必差遣所预定给你们的基督耶稣降临。
And that he may send the Christ who was marked out for you from the first, even Jesus:

天必留他，等到万物复兴的时候，就是神从创世以来，借着圣先知的口所说的。
Who is to be kept in heaven till the time when all things are put right, of which God has given word by the mouth of his holy prophets, who have been from the earliest times.

摩西曾说，主神要从你们弟兄中间，给你们兴起一位先知像我，凡他向你们所说的，你们都要听从。
For Moses said, The Lord will give you a prophet from among your people, like me; you will give ear to everything which he will say to you.

凡不听从那先知的，必要从民中全然灭绝。
And every soul who does not give attention to that prophet, will be cut off from among the people.

从撒母耳以来的众先知，凡说预言的，也都说到这些日子。
And all the prophets from Samuel and those who came after, every one of them, gave word of these days.

你们是先知的子孙，也承受神与你们祖宗所立的约，就是对亚伯拉罕说，地上万族，都要因你的后裔得福。
You are the sons of the prophets, and of the agreement which God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, Through your seed a blessing will come on all the families of the earth.

神既兴起他的仆人，（或作儿子）就先差他到你们这里来，赐福给你们，叫你们各人回转，离开罪恶。
To you, first, God sent his servant, blessing you by turning every one of you from his sins.

使徒对百姓说话的时候，祭司们和守殿官，并撒都该人，忽然来了。
And while they were talking to the people, the priests and the captain of the Temple and the Sadducees came up to them,

因他们教训百姓，本着耶稣，传说死人复活，就很烦恼。
Being greatly troubled because they were teaching the people and preaching Jesus as an example of the coming back from the dead.

于是下手拿住他们。因为天已经晚了，就把他们押到第二天。
And they took them and put them in prison till the morning, for it was now evening.

但听道之人，有许多信的，男丁数目，约到五千。
But a number of those who gave hearing to the word had faith; and they were now about five thousand.

第二天，官府，长老，和文士，在耶路撒冷聚会。
And on the day after, the rulers and those in authority and the scribes came together in Jerusalem;

又有大祭司亚那，和该亚法，约翰，亚力山大，并大祭司的亲族都在那里。
And Annas, the high priest, was there, and Caiaphas and John and Alexander, and all the relations of the high priest.

叫使徒站在当中，就问他们说，你们用什么能力，奉谁的名，作这事呢？
Then sending for Peter and John, they said, By what power and in whose name have you done this?

那时，彼得被圣灵充满，对他们说，
Then Peter, being full of the Holy Spirit, said to them, O you rulers of the people and men of authority,

治民的官府，和长老阿，倘若今日，因为在残疾人身上所行的善事，查问我们他是怎么得了痊愈。
If we are questioned today about a good work done to a man who was ill, as to how he has been made well,

你们众人，和以色列百姓，都当知道，站在你们面前的这人得痊愈，是因你们所钉十字架，神叫他从死里复活的，拿撒勒人耶稣基督的名。
Take note, all of you, and all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you put to death on the cross, whom God gave back from the dead, even through him is this man now before you completely well.

他是你们匠人所弃的石头，已成了房角的头块石头。
He is the stone which you builders had no use for, but which has been made the chief stone of the building.

除他以外，别无拯救。因为在天下人间，没有赐下别的名，我们可以靠着得救。
And in no other is there salvation: for there is no other name under heaven, given among men, through which we may have salvation.

他们见彼得约翰的胆量，又看出他们原是没有学问的小民，就希奇，认明他们是跟过耶稣的。
Now when they saw that Peter and John were without fear, though they were men of no education or learning, they were greatly surprised; and they took note of them that they had been with Jesus.

又看见那治好了的人，和他们一同站着，就无话可驳。
And, seeing that the man who had been made well was there with them, they were not able to say anything against it.

于是吩咐他们从公会出去，就彼此商议说，
But when they had given them orders to go out of the Sanhedrin, they had a discussion among themselves,

我们当怎样办这两个人呢？因为他们诚然行了一件明显的神迹，凡住耶路撒冷的人都知道，我们也不能说没有。
Saying, What are we to do with these men? for certainly it is clear to all who are living in Jerusalem that a most important sign has been done by them, and it is not possible to say that it is not so.

惟恐这事越发传扬在民间，我们必须恐吓他们，叫他们不再奉这名对人讲论。
But so that it may not go farther among the people, let us put them in fear of punishment if they say anything in future in this name.

于是叫了他们来，禁止他们，总不可奉耶稣的名讲论教训人。
And they sent for them, and gave them orders not to make statements or give teaching in the name of Jesus.

彼得约翰说，听从你们，不听从神，这在神面前合理不合理，你们自己酌量吧。
But Peter and John in answer said to them, It is for you to say if it is right in the eyes of God to give attention to you more than to God:

我们所看见所听见的，不能不说。
For it is not possible for us to keep from saying what we have seen and have knowledge of.

官长为百姓的缘故，想不出法子刑罚他们，又恐吓一番，把他们释放了。这是因众人为所行的奇事，都归荣耀与神。
And when they had said more sharp words to them, they let them go, not seeing what punishment they might give them, because of the people; for all men were giving praise to God for what had taken place.

原来借着神迹医好的那人，有四十多岁了。
For the man on whom this act of power was done was more than forty years old.

二人既被释放，就到会友那里去，把祭司长和长老所说的话，都告诉他们。
And when they had been made free, they came back to their friends, and gave an account of all the things which the chief priests and the authorities had said to them.

他们听见了，就同心合意地，高声向神说，主阿，你是造天，地，海，和其中万物的。
And hearing it, they all, with one mind, made prayer to God and said, O Lord, maker of heaven and earth and the sea and all things in them:

你曾借着圣灵，托你仆人我们祖宗大卫的口，说，外邦为什么争闹，万民为什么谋算虚妄的事。
Who has said, by the Holy Spirit, through the mouth of our father David your servant, Why are the nations so violently moved, and why are the thoughts of the people so foolish?

世上的君王一齐起来，臣宰也聚集，要敌挡主，并主的受膏者。（或作基督）
The kings of the earth were lifted up, the rulers came together, against the Lord, and against his Christ:

希律和本丢彼拉多，外邦人和以色列民，果然在这城里聚集，要攻打你所膏的圣仆耶稣，（仆或作子）。
For, truly, in this town, against your holy servant, Jesus, who was marked out by you as Christ, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, came together,

成就你手和你意旨所预定必有的事。
To do that which had been fixed before by your hand and your purpose.

他们恐吓我们，现在求主鉴察。一面叫你仆人大放胆量，讲你的道，一面伸出你的手来，医治疾病，并且使神迹奇事，因着你圣仆耶稣的名行出来（仆或作子）。
And now, Lord, take note of their cruel words, and give your servants power to be preachers of your word without fear,


While your hand is stretched out to do works of mercy; so that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy servant Jesus.

祷告完了，聚会的地方震动，他们就都被圣灵充满，放胆讲论神的道。
And when their prayer was ended, the place where they were was violently moved, and they all became full of the Holy Spirit, preaching the word of God without fear.

那许多信的人，都是一心一意的，没有一人说，他的东西有一样是自己的，都是大家公用。
And all those who were of the faith were one in heart and soul: and not one of them said that any of the things which he had was his property only; but they had all things in common.

使徒大有能力，见证主耶稣复活。众人也都蒙大恩。
And with great power the Apostles gave witness of the coming back of the Lord Jesus from the dead; and grace was on them all.

内中也没有一个缺乏的，因为人人将田产房屋都卖了，把所卖的价银拿来，放在使徒脚前。
And no one among them was in need; for everyone who had land or houses, exchanging them for money, took the price of them,

照各人所需用的，分给各人。
And put it at the feet of the Apostles for distribution to everyone as he had need.

有一个利未人，生在居比路，名叫约瑟，使徒称他为巴拿巴。（巴拿巴翻出来，就是劝慰子）。
And Joseph, who was given by the Apostles the name of Barnabas (the sense of which is, Son of comfort), a Levite and a man of Cyprus by birth,

他有田地，也卖了，把价银拿来，放在使徒脚前。
Having a field, got money for it and put the money at the feet of the Apostles.

有一个人，名叫亚拿尼亚，同他的妻子撒非喇，卖了田产。
But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, got money for his property,

把价银私自留下几分，他的妻子也知道，其余的几分，拿来放在使徒脚前。
And kept back part of the price, his wife having knowledge of it, and took the rest and put it at the feet of the Apostles.

彼得说，亚拿尼亚为什么撒但充满了你的心，叫你欺哄圣灵，把田地的价银私自留下几分呢？
But Peter said, Ananias, why has the Evil One put it into your heart to be false to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the land?

田地还没有卖，不是你自己的吗？既卖了，价银不是你作主吗？你怎么心里起这意念呢？你不是欺哄人，是欺哄神了。
While you had it, was it not your property? and after you had given it in exchange, was it not still in your power? how has this purpose come into your mind? you have been false, not to men, but to God.

亚拿尼亚听见这话，就仆倒断了气。听见的人都甚惧怕。
And at these words, Ananias went down on the earth, and his life went from him: and great fear came on all who were present.

有些少年人起来，把他包裹抬出去埋葬了。
And the young men went and made ready his body, and took it out, and put it in the earth.

约过了三小时，他的妻子进来，还不知道这事。
And about three hours after, his wife, having no knowledge of what had taken place, came in.

彼得对她说，你告诉我，你们卖田地的价银，就是这些吗？她说，就是这些。
And Peter said to her, Give me an answer: was this amount of money the price of the land? And she said, Yes, it was.

彼得说，你们为什么同心试探主的灵呢？埋葬你丈夫之人的脚，已到门口，他们也要把你抬出去。
But Peter said to her, Why have you made an agreement together to be false to the Spirit of the Lord? See, the feet of the young men who have put the body of your husband in the earth, are at the door, and they will take you out.

妇人立刻仆倒在彼得脚前，断了气。那些少年人进来，见她已经死了，就抬出去，埋在她丈夫旁边。
And straight away she went down at his feet, and her life went from her: and the young men came in and saw her dead, and they took her out and put her in the earth with her husband.

全教会，和听见这事的人，都甚惧怕。
Then great fear came on all the church and on all who had knowledge of these things.

主借使徒的手，在民间行了许多神迹奇事，（他们（或作信的人）都同心合意地在所罗门的廊下。
Now a number of signs and wonders were done among the people by the hands of the Apostles; and they were all together in Solomon's covered way.

其余的人，没有一个敢贴近他们。百姓却尊重他们。
The others, in fear, kept back from joining them: but the people made much of them;

信而归主的人越发增添，连男带女很多）。
And a great number of men and women had faith, and were joined to the Lord;

甚至有人将病人抬到街上，放在床上，或褥子上，指望彼得过来的时候，或者得他的影儿照在什么人身上。
And they even took into the streets people who were ill, and put them on beds, so that when Peter went by, some of them might be in his shade.

还有许多人，带着病人，和被污鬼缠磨的，从耶路撒冷四围的城邑来，全都得了医治。
And numbers of people came together from the towns round about Jerusalem, with those who were ill and those who were troubled with unclean spirits: and they were all made well.

大祭司和他的一切同人，就是撒都该教门的人，都起来，满心忌恨。
But the high priest and those who were with him (the Sadducees) were full of envy,

就下手拿住使徒，收在外监。
And they took the Apostles and put them in the common prison.

但主的使者，夜间开了监门，领他们出来，
But in the night an angel of the Lord, opening the doors of the prison, took them out and said,

说，你们去站在殿里，把这生命的道，都讲给百姓听。
Go, take your place in the Temple and give the people all the teaching about this Life.

使徒听了这话，天将亮的时候，就进殿里去教训人。大祭司和他的同人来了，叫齐公会的人，和以色列族的众长老，就差人到监里去，要把使徒提出来。
And hearing this, they went into the Temple at dawn, and were teaching. But the high priest and those who were with him got together the Sanhedrin and the representatives of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to get them.

但差役到了，不见他们在监里，就回来禀报说，
But the men who were sent saw that they were not in the prison, and came back with the news,

我们看见监牢关得极妥当，看守的人也站在门外，及至开了门，里面一个人都不见。
Saying, The doors of the prison were safely shut, and the keepers were at the doors, but when they were open, there was nobody inside.

守殿官和祭司长听见这话，心里犯难，不知这事将来如何。
Now, at these words, the captain of the Temple and the chief priests were greatly troubled about what might be the end of this business.

有一个人来禀报说，你们收在监里的人，现在站在殿里教训百姓。
And someone came and said to them, The men, whom you put in prison, are in the Temple teaching the people.

于是守殿官和差役去带使徒来，并没有用强暴。因为怕百姓用石头打他们。
Then the captain and some of the police went and took them, but not violently, for fear that they might be stoned by the people.

带到了，便叫使徒站在公会前，大祭司问他们说，
And they took them into the Sanhedrin, and the high priest said to them,

我们不是严严地禁止你们，不可奉这名教训人吗？你们倒把你们的道理充满了耶路撒冷，想要叫这人的血归到我们身上。
We gave you very clear orders not to give teaching in this name: and now Jerusalem is full of your teaching, and you are attempting to make us responsible for this man's death.

彼得和众使徒回答说，顺从神，不顺从人，是应当的。
But Peter and the Apostles, answering, said, We have to do the orders of God, not of man.

你们挂在木头上杀害的耶稣，我们祖宗的神已经叫他复活。
The God of our fathers gave Jesus back to life, whom you had put to death, hanging him on a tree.

神且用右手将他高举，（或作他就是神高举在自己的右边）叫他作君王，作救主，将悔改的心，和赦罪的恩，赐给以色列人。
Him God has put on high at his right hand, as a Ruler and a Saviour, to give to Israel a change of heart and forgiveness of sins.

我们为这事作见证。神赐给顺从之人的圣灵，也为这事作见证。
And we are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who keep his laws.

公会的人听见就极其恼怒，想要杀他们。
But when these words came to their ears, they were cut to the heart, and had a mind to put them to death.

但有一个法利赛人，名叫迦玛列，是众百姓所敬重的教法师，在公会中站起来，吩咐人把使徒暂且带到外面去。
But one of the Sanhedrin, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a man of learning in the law, of whom all the people had a high opinion, got up and made a suggestion for the men to be put outside for a little time.

就对众人说，以色列人哪，论到这些人，你们应当小心怎样办理。
And he said to them, Men of Israel, take care what you do about these men.

从前丢大起来，自夸为大。附从他的人约有四百。他被杀后，附从他的全都散了，归于无有。
For before this there was Theudas, who said he was someone important, to whom about four hundred men gave their support: he was put to death, and his band was broken up and came to nothing.

此后报名上册的时候，又有加利利的犹大起来，引诱些百姓跟从他，他也灭亡，附从他的人也都四散了。
After this man, there was Judas of Galilee, at the time of the numbering, and some of the people went after him: he was put to death, and all his supporters were put to flight.

现在我劝你们不要管这些人，任凭他们吧，他们所谋的，所行的，若是出于人，必要败坏。
And now I say to you, Do nothing to these men, but let them be: for if this teaching or this work is of men, it will come to nothing:

若是出于神，你们就不能败坏他们。恐怕你们倒是攻击神了。
But if it is of God, you will not be able to overcome them, and you are in danger of fighting against God.

公会的人听从了他，便叫使徒来，把他们打了，又吩咐他们不可奉耶稣的名讲道，就把他们释放了。
And he seemed to them to be right: and they sent for the Apostles, and, after having them whipped and giving them orders to give no teaching in the name of Jesus, they let them go.

他们离开公会，心里欢喜。因被算是配为这名受辱。
So they went away from the Sanhedrin, happy to undergo shame for the Name.

他们就每日在殿里，在家里，不住地教训人，传耶稣是基督。
And every day, in the Temple and privately, they went on teaching and preaching Jesus as the Christ.

那时，门徒增多，有说希利尼话的犹太人，向希伯来人发怨言。因为在天天的供给上忽略了他们的寡妇。
Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was increasing, protests were made by the Greek Jews against the Hebrews, because their widows were not taken care of in the distribution of food every day.

十二使徒叫众门徒来，对他们说，我们撇下神的道，去管理饭食，原是不合宜的。
And the Apostles sent for all the disciples and said, It is not right for us to give up preaching the word of God in order to make distribution of food.

所以弟兄们，当从你们中间选出七个有好名声，被圣灵充满，智慧充足的人，我们就派他们管理这事。
Take then from among you seven men of good name, full of the Spirit and of wisdom, to whom we may give control of this business.

但我们要专心以祈祷传道为事。
Then we will give all our time to prayer and the teaching of the word.

大众都喜悦这话，就拣选了司提反，乃是大有信心，圣灵充满的人，又拣选腓利，伯罗哥罗，尼迦挪，提门，巴米拿，并进犹太教的安提阿人尼哥拉。
And this saying was pleasing to all of them: and they made selection of Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolas of Antioch, who had become a Jew:

叫他们站在使徒面前。使徒祷告了，就按手在他们头上。
These they took to the Apostles, who, after prayer, put their hands on them.

神的道兴旺起来。在耶路撒冷门徒数目加增的甚多。也有许多祭司信从了这道。
And the word of God was increasing in power; and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem became very great, and a great number of priests were in agreement with the faith.

司提反满得恩惠能力，在民间行了大奇事和神迹。
And Stephen, full of grace and power, did great wonders and signs among the people.

当时有称利百地拿会堂的几个人，并有古利奈，亚力山太，基利家，亚西亚，各处会堂的几个人，都起来，和司提反辩论。
But some of those who were of the Synagogue named that of the Libertines, and some of the men of Cyrene and of Alexandria and those from Cilicia and Asia, had arguments with Stephen.

司提反是以智慧和圣灵说话，众人敌挡不住。
But they were not able to get the better of him, for his words were full of wisdom and of the Spirit.

就买出人来说，我们听见他说谤？？摩西，和神的话。
Then they got men to say, He has said evil against Moses and against God, in our hearing.

他们又耸动了百姓，长老，并文士，就忽然来捉拿他，把他带到公会去，
And the people, with the rulers and the scribes, were moved against him, and they came and took him before the Sanhedrin,

设下假见证说，这个人说话，不住地糟践圣所和律法。
And they got false witnesses who said, This man is for ever saying things against this holy place and against the law:

我们曾听见他说，这拿撒勒人耶稣，要毁坏此地，也要改变摩西所交给我们的规条。
For he has said in our hearing that this Jesus of Nazareth will put this place to destruction and make changes in the rules which were handed down to us by Moses.

在公会里坐着的人，都定睛看他，见他的面貌，好像天使的面貌。
And all those who were in the Sanhedrin, looking at him, saw that his face was like the face of an angel.

大祭司就说，这些事果然有吗？
Then the high priest said, Are these things true?

司提反说，诸位父兄请听。当日我们的祖宗亚伯拉罕在米所波大米还未住哈兰的时候，荣耀的神向他显现，
And he said, My brothers and fathers, give hearing. The God of glory came to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he was living in Haran,

对他说，你要离开本地和亲族，往我所要指示你的地方去。
And said to him, Go out of your land, and away from your family, and come into the land to which I will be your guide.

他就离开迦勒底人之地住在哈兰。他父亲死了以后，神使他从那里搬到你们现在所住之地。
Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and went into Haran; and from there, when his father was dead, he was guided by God into this land, where you are living now:

在这地方神并没有给他产业，连立足之地也没有给他。但应许要将这地赐给他和他的后裔为业。那时他还没有儿子。
And God gave him no heritage in it, not even enough to put his foot on: but he gave him an undertaking that he would give it to him and to his children after him, though he had no child at that time.

神说，他的后裔，必寄居外邦，那里的人，要叫他们作奴仆，苦待他们四百年。
And God said that his seed would be living in a strange land, and that they would make them servants, and be cruel to them for four hundred years.

神又说，使他们作奴仆的那国，我要惩罚，以后他们要出来，在这地方事奉我。
And I will be the judge, said God, of that nation which made them servants: and after that, they will come out and give me worship in this place.

神又赐他割礼的约。于是亚伯拉罕生了以撒，第八日给他行了割礼。以撒生雅各，雅各生十二位先祖。
And he made with him the agreement of which circumcision was the sign. And so Abraham had a son, Isaac, and gave him circumcision on the eighth day; and Isaac had a son, Jacob, and Jacob was the father of the twelve heads of the families of Israel.

先祖嫉妒约瑟，把他卖到埃及去。神却与他同在，
And the brothers, moved with envy against Joseph, gave him to the Egyptians for money: but God was with him,

救他脱离一切苦难，又使他在埃及王法老面前，得恩典有智慧。法老就派他作埃及国的宰相兼管全家。
And made him free from all his troubles, and gave him wisdom and the approval of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who made him ruler over Egypt and all his house.

后来埃及和迦南全地遭遇饥荒，大受艰难，我们的祖宗，就绝了粮。
Now there was no food to be had in all Egypt and Canaan, and there was great trouble: and our fathers were not able to get food.

雅各听见在埃及有粮，就打发我们的祖宗，初次往那里去。
But Jacob, hearing that there was grain in Egypt, sent out our fathers the first time.

第二次约瑟与弟兄们相认，他的亲族也被法老知道了。
And the second time his brothers had a meeting with Joseph, and Pharaoh had knowledge of Joseph's family.

约瑟就打发弟兄请父亲雅各，和全家七十五个人都来。
Then Joseph sent for Jacob his father and all his family, seventy-five persons.

于是雅各下了埃及，后来他和我们的祖宗都死在那里。
And Jacob went down to Egypt, and came to his end there, and so did our fathers;

又被带到示剑，葬于亚伯拉罕在示剑用银子从哈抹子孙买来的坟墓里。
And they were taken over to Shechem, and put to rest in the place which Abraham got for a price in silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.

及至神应许亚伯拉罕的日期将到，以色列民在埃及兴盛众多，
But when the time was near for putting into effect the undertaking which God had given to Abraham, the people were increasing in Egypt,

直到有不晓得约瑟的新王兴起。
Till another king came to power, who had no knowledge of Joseph.

他用诡计待我们的宗族，苦害我们的祖宗，叫他们丢弃婴孩，使婴孩不能存活。
He, having evil designs against our nation, was cruel to our fathers, and they were forced to put out their young children, so that they might not go on living.

那时，摩西生下来，俊美非凡，在他父亲家里抚养了三个月。
At which time Moses came to birth, and he was very beautiful; and he was kept for three months in his father's house:

他被丢弃的时候，法老的女儿拾了去，养为自己的儿子。
And when he was put out, Pharaoh's daughter took him and kept him as her son.

摩西学了埃及人一切的学问，说话行事，都有才能。
And Moses was trained in all the wisdom of Egypt, and was great in his words and works.

他将到四十岁，心中起意，去看望他的弟兄以色列人。
But when he was almost forty years old, it came into his heart to go and see his brothers, the children of Israel.

到了那里，见他们一个人受冤屈，就护庇他，为那受欺压的人报仇，打死了那埃及人。
And seeing one of them being attacked, he went to his help and gave the Egyptian a death-blow:

他以为弟兄必明白神是借他的手搭救他们。他们却不明白。
And he was hoping that his brothers would see that God had sent him to be their saviour; but they did not see.

第二天，遇见两个以色列人争斗，就劝他们和睦，说，你们二位是弟兄，为什么彼此欺负呢？
And the day after, he came to them, while they were having a fight, and would have made peace between them, saying, Sirs, you are brothers; why do you do wrong to one another?

那欺负邻舍的，把他推开说，谁立你作我们的首领，和审判官呢？
But the man who was doing wrong to his neighbour, pushing him away, said, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?

难道你要杀我，像昨天杀那埃及人吗？
Will you put me to death as you did the Egyptian yesterday?

摩西听见这话就逃走了，寄居于米甸。在那里生了两个儿子。
And at these words, Moses went in flight to the land of Midian, and was living there for a time, and had two sons.

过了四十年，在西乃山的旷野，有一位天使，从荆棘火焰中，向摩西显现。
At the end of forty years, an angel came to him in the waste land of Sinai, in the flame of a burning thorn-tree.

摩西见了那异象，便觉希奇。正进前观看的时候，有主的声音说，
And Moses, seeing it, was full of wonder, and when he came up to have a nearer view of it, the voice of the Lord came to him, saying,

我是你列祖的神，就是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神。摩西战战兢兢，不敢观看。
I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob. And Moses, shaking with fear, kept his eyes from looking at it.

主对他说，把你脚上的鞋脱下来。因为你所站之地是圣地。
And the Lord said, Take off the shoes from your feet, for the place where you are is holy.

我的百姓在埃及所受的困苦，我实在看见了。他们悲叹的声音，我也听见了。我下来要救他们，你来，我要差你往埃及去。
Truly, I have seen the sorrows of my people in Egypt, and their cries have come to my ears, and I have come down to make them free: and now, come, I will send you to Egypt.

这摩西，就是百姓弃绝说，谁立你作我们的首领，和审判官的。神却借那在荆棘中显现之使者的手，差派他作首领，作救赎的。
This Moses, whom they would not have, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge? him God sent to be a ruler and a saviour, by the hand of the angel whom he saw in the thorn-tree.

这人领百姓出来，在埃及，在红海，在旷野，四十年间行了奇事神迹。
This man took them out, having done wonders and signs in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the waste land, for forty years.

那曾对以色列人说，神要从你们弟兄中间，给你们兴起一位先知像我的，就是这位摩西。
This is the same Moses, who said to the children of Israel, God will give you a prophet from among your brothers, like me.

这人曾在旷野会中，和西乃山上与那对他说话的天使同在，又与我们的祖宗同在，并且领受活泼的圣言传给我们。
This is the man who was in the church in the waste land with the angel who was talking to him in Sinai, and with our fathers; and to him were given the living words of God, so that he might give them to you.

我们的祖宗不肯听从，反弃绝他，心里归向埃及，
By whom our fathers would not be controlled; but they put him on one side, turning back in their hearts to Egypt,

对亚伦说，你且为我们造些神像，在我们前面引路。因为领我们出埃及地的那个摩西，我们不知道他遭了什么事。
And saying to Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: as for this Moses, who took us out of the land of Egypt, we have no idea what has become of him.

那时，他们造了一个牛犊，又拿祭物献给那像，欢喜自己手中的工作。
And they made the image of a young ox in those days, and made an offering to it, and had joy in the work of their hands.

神就转脸不顾，任凭他们事奉天上的日月星辰，正如先知书上所写的说，以色列家阿，你们四十年间在旷野，岂是将牺牲和祭物献给我吗？
But God was turned from them and let them give worship to the stars of heaven, as it says in the book of the prophets, Did you make offerings to me of sheep and oxen for forty years in the waste land, O house of Israel?

你们抬着摩洛的帐幕，和理番神的星。就是你们所造为要敬拜的像。因此，我要把你们迁到巴比伦外去。
And you took up the tent of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan, images which you made to give worship to them: and I will take you away, farther than Babylon.

我们的祖宗在旷野，有法柜的帐幕，是神吩咐摩西叫他照所看见的样式作的。
Our fathers had the Tent of witness in the waste land, as God gave orders to Moses to make it after the design which he had seen.

这帐幕，我们的祖宗相继承受，当神在他们面前赶出外邦人去的时候，他们同约书亚把帐幕搬进承受为业之地，直存到大卫的日子。
Which our fathers, in their turn, took with them when, with Joshua, they came into the heritage of the nations whom God was driving out before the face of our fathers, till the time of David,

大卫在神面前蒙恩，祈求为雅各的神预备居所。
Who was pleasing to God; and he had a desire to make a holy tent for the God of Jacob.

却是所罗门为神造成殿宇。
But Solomon was the builder of his house.

其实至高者并不住人手所造的。就如先知所言，
But still, the Most High has not his resting-place in houses made with hands, as the prophet says,

主说，天是我的座位，地是我的脚凳。你们要为我造何等的殿宇？哪里是我安息的地方呢？
Heaven is the seat of my power, and earth is a resting-place for my feet: what sort of house will you make for me, says the Lord, or what is my place of rest?

这一切不都是我手所造的吗？
Did not my hand make all these things?

你们这硬着颈项，心与耳未受割礼的人，常时抗拒圣灵。你们的祖宗怎样，你们也怎样。
You whose hearts are hard and whose ears are shut to me; you are ever working against the Holy Spirit; as your fathers did, so do you.

那一个先知，不是你们祖宗逼迫呢？他们也把预先传说那义者要来的人杀了。如今你们又把那义者卖了，杀了。
Which of the prophets was not cruelly attacked by your fathers? and they put to death those who gave them the news of the coming of the Upright One; whom you have now given up and put to death;

你们受了天使所传的律法，竟不遵守。
You, to whom the law was given as it was ordered by angels, and who have not kept it.

众人听见这话，就极其恼怒，向司提反咬牙切齿。
Hearing these things, they were cut to the heart and moved with wrath against him.

但司提反被圣灵充满，定睛望天，看见神的荣耀，又看见耶稣站在神的右边。
But he was full of the Holy Spirit, and looking up to heaven, he saw the glory of God and Jesus at the right hand of God.

就说，我看见天开了，人子站在神的右边。
And he said, Now I see heaven open, and the Son of man at the right hand of God.

众人大声喊叫，捂着耳朵，齐心拥上前去。
But with loud cries, and stopping their ears, they made an attack on him all together,

把他推到城外，用石头打他。作见证的人，把衣裳放在一个少年人名叫扫罗的脚前。
Driving him out of the town and stoning him: and the witnesses put their clothing at the feet of a young man named Saul.

他们正用石头打的时候，司提反呼吁主说，求主耶稣接收我的灵魂。
And Stephen, while he was being stoned, made prayer to God, saying, Lord Jesus, take my spirit.

又跪下大声喊着说，主阿，不要将这罪归于他们。说了这话就睡了。扫罗也喜悦他被害。
And going down on his knees, he said in a loud voice, Lord, do not make them responsible for this sin. And when he had said this, he went to his rest.

从这日起，耶路撒冷的教会，大遭逼迫。除了使徒以外，门徒都分散在犹太和撒玛利亚各处。
And Saul gave approval to his death. Now at that time a violent attack was started against the church in Jerusalem; and all but the Apostles went away into all parts of Judaea and Samaria.

有虔诚的人，把司提反埋葬了，为他捶胸大哭。
And God-fearing men put Stephen's body in its last resting-place, making great weeping over him.

扫罗却残害教会，进各人的家，拉着男女下在监里。
But Saul was burning with hate against the church, going into every house and taking men and women and putting them in prison.

那些分散的人，往各处去传道。
But those who had gone in flight went everywhere preaching the word.

腓利下撒玛利亚城去，宣讲基督。
And Philip went down to Samaria and was teaching them about Christ.

众人听见了，又看见腓利所行的神迹，就同心合意地听从他的话。
And all the people gave attention to the words which Philip said, when they saw the signs which he did.

因为有许多人被污鬼附着，那些鬼大声呼叫，从他们身上出来。还有许多瘫痪的，瘸腿的，都得了医治。
For unclean spirits came out from those who had them, crying with a loud voice; and a number of those who were ill and broken in body were made well.

在那城里，就大有欢喜。
And there was much joy in that town.

有一个人，名叫西门，向来在那城里行邪术，妄自尊大，使撒玛利亚的百姓惊奇。
But there was a certain man named Simon, who in the past had been a wonder-worker and a cause of surprise to the people of Samaria, saying that he himself was a great man:

无论大小，都听从他，说，这人就是那称为神的大能者。
To whom they all gave attention, from the smallest to the greatest, saying, This man is that power of God which is named Great.

他们听从他，因他久用邪术，使他们惊奇。
And they gave attention to him, because for a long time his wonder-working powers had kept them under his control.

及至他们信了腓利所传神国的福音，和耶稣基督的名，连男带女就受了洗。
But when they had faith in the good news given by Philip about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, a number of men and women had baptism.

西门自己也信了。既受了洗，就常与腓利在一处。看见他所行的神迹和大异能，就甚惊奇。
And Simon himself had faith and, having had baptism, he went with Philip and, seeing the signs and the great wonders which he did, he was full of surprise.

使徒在耶路撒冷，听见撒玛利亚人领受了神的道，就打发彼得约翰往他们那里去。
Now when the Apostles at Jerusalem had news that the people of Samaria had taken the word of God into their hearts, they sent to them Peter and John;

两个人到了，就为他们祷告，要叫他们受圣灵。
Who, when they came there, made prayer for them, that the Holy Spirit might be given to them:

因为圣灵还没有降在他们一个人身上。他们只奉主耶稣的名受了洗。
For up to that time he had not come on any of them; only baptism had been given to them in the name of the Lord Jesus.

于是使徒按手在他们头上，他们就受了圣灵。
Then they put their hands on them, and the Holy Spirit came on them.

西门看见使徒按手，便有圣灵赐下。就拿钱给使徒，
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the touch of the Apostles' hands, he made them an offering of money, saying,

说，把这权柄也给我，叫我手按着谁。谁就可以受圣灵。
Give me this power, so that when I put my hands on anyone he may get the Holy Spirit.

彼得说，你的银子，和你一同灭亡吧。因你想神的恩赐，是可以用钱买的。
But Peter said, May your money come to destruction with you, because you had the idea that what is freely given by God may be got for a price.

你在这道上，无分无关。因为在神面前，你的心不正。
You have no part in this business, because your heart is not right before God.

你当懊悔你这罪恶，祈求主。或者你心里的意念可得赦免。
Let your heart be changed, and make prayer to God that you may have forgiveness for your evil thoughts.

我看出你正在苦胆之中，被罪恶捆绑。
For I see that you are prisoned in bitter envy and the chains of sin.

西门说，愿你们为我求主，叫你们所说的，没有一样临到我身上。
And Simon, answering, said, Make prayer for me to the Lord, so that these things which you have said may not come on me.

使徒既证明主道，而且传讲，就回耶路撒冷去，一路在撒玛利亚好些村庄传扬福音。
So they, having given their witness and made clear the word of the Lord, went back to Jerusalem, giving the good news on their way in a number of the small towns of Samaria.

有主的一个使者对腓利说，起来，向南走，往那从耶路撒冷下迦萨的路上去。那路是旷野。
But an angel of the Lord said to Philip, Get up, and go to the south, to the road which goes from Jerusalem to Gaza, through the waste land.

腓利就起身去了。不料，有一个埃提阿伯（即古实，见以赛亚十八章一节）人，是个有大权的太监，在埃提阿伯女王干大基的手下总管银库，他上耶路撒冷礼拜去了。
And he went and there was a man of Ethiopia, a servant of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, and controller of all her property, who had come up to Jerusalem for worship;

现在回来，在车上坐着，念先知以赛亚的书。
He was going back, seated in his carriage, and was reading the book of the prophet Isaiah.

圣灵对腓利说，你去贴近那车走。
And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and get on his carriage.

腓利就跑到太监那里，听见他念先知以赛亚的书，便问他说，你所念的，你明白吗？
And Philip, running up to him, saw that he was reading Isaiah the prophet, and said to him, Is the sense of what you are reading clear to you?

他说，没有人指教我，怎能明白呢？于是请腓利上车，与他同坐。
And he said, How is that possible when I have no guide? And he made Philip get up by his side.

他所念的那段经，说，他像羊被牵到宰杀之地，又像羊羔在剪毛的人手下无声，他也是这样不开口。
Now the place in the book where he was reading was this: He was taken, like a sheep, to be put to death; and as a lamb is quiet when its wool is being cut, so he made no sound:

他卑微的时候，人不按公义审判他。（原文作他的审判被夺去）谁能述说他的世代，因为他的生命从地上夺去。
Being of low degree, his cause was not given a hearing: who has knowledge of his family? for his life is cut off from the earth.

太监对腓利说，请问先知说这话，是指着谁，是指着自己呢？是指着别人呢？
And the Ethiopian said to Philip, About whom are these words said by the prophet? about himself, or some other?

腓利就开口从这经上起，对他传讲耶稣
So Philip, starting from this writing, gave him the good news about Jesus.

二人正往前走，到了有水的地方，太监说，看哪，这里有水，我受洗有什么妨碍呢？（有古卷在此有
And while they were going on their way, they came to some water, and the Ethiopian said, See, here is water; why may I not have baptism?

腓利说，你若是一心相信就可以，他回答说，我信耶稣基督是神的儿子）
[]

于是吩咐车站住，腓利和太监二人同下水里去，腓利就给他施洗。
And he gave orders for the carriage to be stopped, and the two of them went down into the water, and Philip gave him baptism.

从水里上来，主的灵把腓利提了去，太监也不再见他了，就欢欢喜喜地走路。
And when they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord took Philip away; and the Ethiopian saw him no more, for he went on his way full of joy.

后来有人在亚锁都遇见腓利，他走遍那地方，在各城宣传福音，直到该撒利亚。
But Philip came to Azotus, and went through all the towns, preaching the good news, till he came to Caesarea.

扫罗仍然向主的门徒，口吐威吓凶杀的话，去见大祭司，
But Saul, still burning with desire to put to death the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,

求文书给大马色的各会堂，若是找着信奉这道的人，无论男女，都准他捆绑带到耶路撒冷。
And made a request for letters from him to the Synagogues of Damascus, so that if there were any of the Way there, men or women, he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem.

扫罗行路，将到大马色，忽然从天上发光，四面照着他。
And while he was journeying, he came near Damascus; and suddenly he saw a light from heaven shining round him;

他就仆倒在地，听见有声音对他说，扫罗，扫罗，你为什么逼迫我。
And he went down on the earth, and a voice said to him, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly?

他说，主阿，你是谁。主说，我就是你所逼迫的耶稣。
And he said, Who are you, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking:

起来，进城去，你所当作的事，必有人告诉你。
But get up, and go into the town, and it will be made clear to you what you have to do.

同行的人，站在那里，说不出话来，听见声音，却看不见人。
And the men who were with him were not able to say anything; hearing the voice, but seeing no one.

扫罗从地上起来，睁开眼睛，竟不能看见什么。有人拉他的手，领他进了大马色。
And Saul got up from the earth, and when his eyes were open, he saw nothing; and he was guided by the hand into Damascus.

三日不能看见，也不吃，也不喝。
And for three days he was not able to see, and he took no food or drink.

当下在大马色，有一个门徒，名叫亚拿尼亚。主在异象中对他说，亚拿尼亚。他说，主，我在这里。
Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias! and he said, Here I am, Lord.

主对他说，起来，往直街去，在犹大的家里，访问一个大数人名叫扫罗。他正祷告。
And the Lord said to him, Get up, and go to the street which is named Straight, and make search at the house of Judas for one named Saul of Tarsus: for he is at prayer;

又看见了一个人，名叫亚拿尼亚，进来按手在他身上，叫他能看见。
And he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and putting his hands on him, so that he may be able to see.

亚拿尼亚回答说，主阿，我听见许多人说，这人怎样在耶路撒冷多多苦害你的圣徒。
But Ananias said, Lord, I have had accounts of this man from a number of people, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem:

并且他在这里有从祭司长得来的权柄捆绑一切求告你名的人。
And here he has authority from the chief priests to make prisoners all who give worship to your name.

主对亚拿尼亚说，你只管去。他是我所拣选的器皿，要在外邦人和君王并以色列人面前，宣扬我的名。
But the Lord said, Go without fear: for he is a special vessel for me, to give to the Gentiles and kings and to the children of Israel the knowledge of my name:

我也要指示他，为我的名必须受许多的苦难。
For I will make clear to him what troubles he will have to undergo for me.

亚拿尼亚就去了，进入那家，把手按在扫罗身上说，兄弟扫罗，在你来的路上，向你显现的主，就是耶稣，打发我来，叫你能看见，又被圣灵充满。
And Ananias went out and came to the house, and putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, whom you saw when you were on your journey, has sent me, so that you may be able to see, and be full of the Holy Spirit.

扫罗的眼睛上，好像有鳞立刻掉下来，他就能看见，于是起来受了洗。
And straight away it seemed as if a veil was taken from his eyes, and he was able to see; and he got up, and had baptism;

吃过饭就健壮了。扫罗和大马色的门徒同住了些日子。
And when he had taken food his strength came back. And for some days he kept with the disciples who were in Damascus.

就在各会堂里宣传耶稣，说他是神的儿子。
And straight away, in the Synagogues, he was preaching Jesus as the Son of God.

凡听见的人，都惊奇说，在耶路撒冷残害求告这名的，不是这人吗？并且他到这里来，特要捆绑他们带到祭司长那里。
And all those hearing him were full of wonder and said, Is not this the man who in Jerusalem was attacking all the worshippers of this name? and he had come here so that he might take them as prisoners before the chief priests.

但扫罗越发有能力，驳倒住大马色的犹太人，证明耶稣是基督。
But Saul went on increasing in power, and the Jews in Damascus were not able to give answers to the arguments by which he made it clear that Jesus was the Christ.

过了好些日子，犹太人商议要杀扫罗。
Then, after some days, the Jews made an agreement together to put him to death:

但他们的计谋，被扫罗知道了。他们又昼夜在城门守候要杀他。
But Saul got knowledge of their design. And they kept watch day and night on the roads out of the town, so that they might put him to death:

他的门徒就在夜间，用筐子把他从城墙上缒下去。
But his disciples took him by night and let him down from the wall in a basket.

扫罗到了耶路撒冷，想与门徒结交。他们却都怕他，不信他是门徒。
And when he came to Jerusalem, he made an attempt to be joined to the disciples, but they were all in fear of him, not taking him for a disciple.

惟有巴拿巴接待他，领去见使徒，把他在路上怎么看见主，主怎么向他说话，他在大马色，怎么奉耶稣的名放胆传道，都述说出来。
But Barnabas took him to the Apostles and gave them an account of how he had seen the Lord on the road, and had given hearing to his words, and how at Damascus he had been preaching in the name of Jesus without fear.

于是扫罗在耶路撒冷，和门徒出入来往，
And he was with them, going in and out at Jerusalem,

奉主的名，放胆传道。并与说希利尼话的犹太人，讲论辩驳。他们却想法子要杀他。
Preaching in the name of the Lord without fear; and he had discussions with the Greek Jews; but they were working for his death.

弟兄们知道了，就送他下该撒利亚，打发他往大数去。
And when the brothers had knowledge of it, they took him to Caesarea and sent him to Tarsus.

那时犹太，加利利，撒玛利亚，各处的教会都得平安，被建立。凡事敬畏主，蒙圣灵的安慰，人数就增多了。
And so the church through all Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace and was made strong; and, living in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, was increased greatly.

彼得周流四方的时候，也到了居住吕大的圣徒那里。
And it came about that while Peter was going through all parts of the country he came to the saints who were living at Lydda.

遇见一个人，名叫以尼雅，得了瘫痪，在褥子上躺卧八年。
And there was a certain man there, named Aeneas, who for eight years had been in bed, without power of moving.

彼得对他说，以尼雅，耶稣基督医好你了。起来收拾你的褥子。他就立刻起来了。
And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ makes you well: get up and make your bed. And straight away he got up.

凡住吕大和沙仑的人都看见了他，就归服主。
And all those living in Lydda and Sharon saw him, and were turned to the Lord.

在约帕有一个女徒，名叫大比大，翻希利尼话，就是多加。（多加就是羚羊的意思）她广行善事，多施周济。
Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, that is, Dorcas: this woman was given to good works and acts of mercy at all times.

当时，她患病而死。有人把她洗了。停在楼上。
And it came about, in those days, that she got ill and came to her death: and when she had been washed, they put her in a room which was high up.

吕大原与约帕相近。门徒听见彼得在那里，就打发两个人去见他，央求他说，快到我们那里去，不要耽延。
And because Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, having knowledge that Peter was there, sent two men to him, requesting him to come to them straight away.

彼得就起身和他们同去。到了，便有人领他上楼。众寡妇都站在彼得旁边哭，拿多加与她们同在时，所做的里衣外衣给他看。
And Peter went with them. And when he had come, they took him into the room: and all the widows were there, weeping and putting before him the coats and clothing which Dorcas had made while she was with them.

彼得叫她们都出去，就跪下祷告，转身对着死人说，大比大，起来，她就睁开眼睛，见了彼得，便坐起来。
But Peter made them all go outside, and went down on his knees in prayer; and turning to the body, he said, Tabitha, get up. And, opening her eyes, she saw Peter and got up.

彼得伸手扶她起来，叫众圣徒和寡妇进去，把多加活活地交给他们。
And he took her hand, lifting her up; and, sending for the saints and widows, he gave her to them, living.

这事传遍了约帕，就有许多人信了主。
And news of it went all through Joppa, and a number of people had faith in the Lord.

此后彼得在约帕一个硝皮匠西门的家里，住了多日。
And he was living in Joppa for some time with Simon, a leather-worker.

在该撒利亚有一个人，名叫哥尼流，是义大利营的百夫长。
Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, named Cornelius, the captain of the Italian band of the army;

他是个虔诚人，他和全家都敬畏神，多多周济百姓，常常祷告神。
A serious-minded man, fearing God with all his family; he gave much money to the poor, and made prayer to God at all times.

有一天，约在申初，他在异象中，明明看见神的一个使者进去，到他那里，说，哥尼流。
He saw in a vision, clearly, at about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of the Lord coming to him and saying to him, Cornelius!

哥尼流定睛看他，惊怕说，主阿，什么事呢？天使说，你的祷告，和你的周济，达到神面前已蒙记念了。
And he, looking on him in fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Your prayers and your offerings have come up to God, and he has kept them in mind.

现在你当打发人往约帕去，请那称呼彼得的西门来。
Now send men to Joppa, and get one Simon, named Peter,

他住在海边一个硝皮匠西门的家里。房子在海边上。
Who is living with Simon, a leather-worker, whose house is by the sea.

向他说话的天使去后，哥尼流叫了两个家人，和常伺候他的一个虔诚兵来。
And when the angel who said these words to him had gone away, he sent for two of his house-servants, and a God-fearing man of the army, one of those who were waiting on him at all times;

把这事都述说给他们听，就打发他们往约帕去。
And having given them an account of everything, he sent them to Joppa.

第二天，他们行路将近那城，彼得约在午正，上房顶去祷告。
Now the day after, when they were on their journey and were near the town, Peter went up to the top of the house for prayer, about the sixth hour:

觉得饿了，想要吃。那家的人正预备饭的时候，彼得魂游象外。
And he was in need of food: but while they were getting it ready, a deep sleep came on him;

看见天开了，有一物降下，好像一块大布。系着四角，缒在地上。
And he saw the heavens opening, and a vessel coming down, like a great cloth let down on the earth,

里面有地上各样四足的走兽，和昆虫，并天上的飞鸟。
In which were all sorts of beasts and birds.

又有声音向他说，彼得起来，宰了吃。
And a voice came to him, saying, Come, Peter; take them for food.

彼得却说，主阿，这是不可的，凡俗物，和不洁净的物，我从来没有吃过。
But Peter said, No, Lord; for I have never taken food which is common or unclean.

第二次有声音向他说，神所洁净的，你不可当作俗物。
And the voice came to him a second time, What God has made clean, do not you make common.

这样一连三次，那物随即收回天上去了。
And this was done three times: and then the vessel was taken back into heaven.

彼得心里正在猜疑之间，不知所看见的异象是什么意思，哥尼流所差来的人，已经访问到西门的家，站在门外，
Now while Peter was in doubt as to the purpose of this vision, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made search for Simon's house, came to the door,

喊着问，有称呼彼得的西门住在这里没有。
To see if Simon, named Peter, was living there.

彼得还思想那异象的时候，圣灵向他说，有三个人来找你。
And, while Peter was turning the vision over in his mind, the Spirit said to him, See, three men are looking for you.

起来，下去，和他们同往，不要疑惑。因为是我差他们来的。
Go down, then, and go with them, doubting nothing, for I have sent them.

于是彼得下去见那些人，说，我就是你们所找的人。你们来是为什么缘故。
And Peter went down to the men, and said, I am the man you are looking for: why have you come?

他们说，百夫长哥尼流是个义人，敬畏神，为犹太通国所称赞，他蒙一位圣天使指示，叫他请你到他家里去，听你的话。
And they said, Cornelius, a captain, an upright and God-fearing man, respected by all the nation of the Jews, had word from God by an angel to send for you to his house, and to give hearing to your words.

彼得就请他们进去，住了一宿。次日起身和他们同去，还有约帕的几个弟兄同着他去。
So he took them in for the night. And the day after, he went with them, taking some of the brothers from Joppa with him.

又次日，他们进入该撒利亚。哥尼流已经请了他的亲属密友，等候他们。
And the day after that, they came to Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having got together his relations and his near friends.

彼得一进去，哥尼流就迎接他，俯伏在他脚前拜他。
And when Peter came in, Cornelius came to him and, falling down at his feet, gave him worship.

彼得却拉他说，你起来，我也是人。
But Peter, lifting him up, said, Get up, for I am a man as you are.

彼得和他说着话进去，见有好些人在那里聚集，
And saying these words, he went in, and saw that a great number of people had come together;

就对他们说，你们知道犹太人，和别国的人亲近来往，本是不合例的。但神已经指示我，无论什么人，都不可看作俗而不洁净的。
And he said to them, You yourselves have knowledge that it is against the law for a man who is a Jew to be in the company of one who is of another nation; but God has made it clear to me that no man may be named common or unclean:

所以我被请的时候，就不推辞而来。现在请问，你们叫我来有什么意思呢？
And so I came without question, when I was sent for. What then is your purpose in sending for me?

哥尼流说，前四天这个时候，我在家中守着申初的祷告，忽然有一个人，穿着光明的衣裳，站在我面前，
And Cornelius said, Four days from now I was in my house in prayer at the ninth hour; and I saw before me a man in shining clothing,

说，哥尼流，你的祷告，已蒙垂听，你的周济，达到神面前已蒙记念了。
Who said, Cornelius, your prayer has come to the ears of God, and your offerings are kept in his memory.

你当打发人往约帕去，请那称呼彼得的西门来，他住在海边一个硝皮匠西门的家里。
Send, then, to Joppa, and get Simon, named Peter, to come to you; he is living in the house of Simon, a leather-worker, by the sea.

所以我立时打发人去请你，你来了很好。现今我们都在神面前，要听主所吩咐你的一切话。
So, straight away, I sent for you; and you have done well to come. And now, we are all present before God, ready to give attention to all the things which the Lord has given you to say.

彼得就开口说，我真看出神是不偏待人。
Then Peter said, Truly, I see clearly that God is no respecter of persons:

原来各国中，那敬畏主行义的人，都为主所悦纳。
But in every nation, the man who has fear of him and does righteousness is pleasing to him.

神借着耶稣基督（他是万有的主）传和平的福音，将这道赐给以色列人。
The word which he sent to the children of Israel, giving the good news of peace through Jesus Christ (who is Lord of all)--

这话在约翰宣传洗礼以后，从加利利起，传遍了犹太。
That word you yourselves have knowledge of, which was made public through all Judaea, starting from Galilee, after the baptism of which John was the preacher,

神怎样以圣灵和能力，膏拿撒勒人耶稣，这都是你们知道的。他周流四方行善事，医好凡被魔鬼压制的人。因为神与他同在。
About Jesus of Nazareth, how God gave the Holy Spirit to him, with power: and how he went about doing good and making well all who were troubled by evil spirits, for God was with him.

他在犹太人之地，并耶路撒冷，所行的一切事，有我们作见证。他们竟把他挂在木头上杀了。
And we are witnesses of all the things which he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they put to death, hanging him on a tree.

第三日神叫他复活，显现出来，
On the third day God gave him back to life, and let him be seen,

不是显现给众人看，乃是显现给神预先所拣选为他作见证的人看，就是我们这些在他从死里复活以后，和他同吃同喝的人。
Not by all the people, but by witnesses marked out before by God, even by us, who took food and drink with him after he came back from the dead.

他吩咐我们传道给众人，证明他是神所立定的，要作审判活人死人的主。
And he gave us orders to give news of this to the people, and to give public witness that this is he whom God has made judge of the living and the dead.

众先知也为他作见证，说，凡信他的人，必因他的名，得蒙赦罪。
To him all the prophets give witness, that through his name everyone who has faith in him will have forgiveness of sins.

彼得还说这话的时候，圣灵降在一切听道的人身上。
While Peter was saying these words, the Holy Spirit came on all those who were hearing the word.

那些奉割礼和彼得同来的信徒，见圣灵的恩赐也浇在外邦人身上，就都希奇。
And the Jews of the faith, who had come with Peter, were full of wonder, because the Holy Spirit was given to the Gentiles,

因听见他们说方言，称赞神为大。
And they were talking in tongues, and giving glory to God. Then Peter said,

于是彼得说，这些人既受了圣灵，与我们一样，谁能禁止用水给他们施洗呢？
Will any man say that these may not have baptism who have been given the Holy Spirit as we have?

就吩咐奉耶稣基督的名给他们施洗。他们又请彼得住了几天。
And he gave orders for them to have baptism in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they kept him with them for some days.

使徒和在犹太的众弟兄，听说外邦人也领受了神的道。
Now the Apostles and the brothers who were in Judaea had news that the word of God had been given to the Gentiles.

及至彼得上了耶路撒冷，那些奉割礼的门徒和他争辩说，
And when Peter came to Jerusalem, those who kept the rule of circumcision had an argument with him,

你进入未受割礼之人的家，和他们一同吃饭了。
Saying, You went to men without circumcision, and took food with them.

彼得就开口，把这事挨次给他们讲解说，
But Peter gave them an account of it all in order, saying to them,

我在约帕城里祷告的时候，魂游象外，看见异象，有一物降下，好像一块大布，系着四角，从天缒下，直来到我跟前。
I was in the town of Joppa, at prayer: and falling into a deep sleep, I saw in a vision a vessel like a great cloth let down from heaven, and it came down to me:

我定睛观看，见内中有地上四足的牲畜，和野兽，昆虫，并天上的飞鸟。
And looking on it with attention I saw in it all sorts of beasts and birds.

我且听见有声音向我说，彼得，起来，宰了吃。
And a voice came to my ears saying, Come, Peter; take them for food.

我说，主阿，这是不可的。凡俗而不洁净的物，从来没有入过我的口。
But I said, No, Lord; for nothing common or unclean has ever come into my mouth.

第二次，有声音从天上说，神所洁净的，你不可当作俗物。
But the voice, coming a second time from heaven, said, What God has made clean, do not you make common.

这样一连三次，就都收回天上去了。
And this was done three times, and they were all taken up again into heaven.

正当那时，有三个人站在我们所住的房门前，是从该撒利亚差来见我的。
And at that minute, three men, sent from Caesarea, came to the house where we were.

圣灵吩咐我和他们同去，不要疑惑。（或作不要分别等类）同着我去的，还有这六位弟兄。我们都进了那人的家。
And the Spirit gave me orders to go with them, doubting nothing. And these six brothers came with me; and we went into that man's house:

那人就告诉我们，他如何看见一位天使，站在他屋里，说，你打发人往约帕去，请那称呼彼得的西门来。
And he gave us an account of how he had seen the angel in his house, saying, Send to Joppa, and get Simon, named Peter, to come to you;

他有话告诉你，可以叫你和你的全家得救。
Who will say words to you through which you and all your family may get salvation.

我一开讲，圣灵便降在他们身上，正像当初降在我们身上一样。
And, while I was talking to them, the Holy Spirit came on them, as on us at first.

我就想起主的话说，约翰是用水施洗，但你们要受圣灵的洗。
And the words of the Lord came into my mind, how he said, The baptism of John was with water, but you will have baptism with the Holy Spirit.

神既然给他们恩赐，像在我们信主耶稣基督的时候，给了我们一样，我是谁，能拦阻神呢？
If then God gave them, when they had faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the same as he gave to us, who was I to go against God?

众人听见这话，就不言语了。只归荣耀与神，说，这样看来，神也赐恩给外邦人，叫他们悔改得生命了。
And hearing these things they said nothing more, but gave glory to God, saying, Then to the Gentiles as to us has God given a change of heart, so that they may have life.

那些因司提反的事遭患难四散的门徒，直走到腓尼基，和居比路，并安提阿。他们不向别人讲道，只向犹太人讲。
Then those who had gone away at the time of the trouble about Stephen, went as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus, preaching to the Jews only.

但内中有居比路，和古利奈人，他们到了安提阿，也向希利尼人传讲主耶稣。（有古卷作也向说希利尼话的犹太人传讲主耶稣）
But some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, when they came to Antioch, gave the good news about the Lord Jesus to the Greeks.

主与他们同在，信而归主的人就很多了。
And the power of the Lord was with them, and a great number had faith and were turned to the Lord.

这风声传到耶路撒冷教会人的耳中，他们就打发巴拿巴出去，走到安提阿为止。
And news of them came to the ears of the church at Jerusalem: and they sent Barnabas as far as Antioch:

他到了那里，看见神所赐的恩，就欢喜，劝勉众人，立定心志，恒久靠主。
Who, when he came and saw the grace of God, was glad; and he made clear to them the need of keeping near the Lord with all the strength of their hearts:

这巴拿巴原是个好人，被圣灵充满，大有信心。于是有许多人归服了主。
For he was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith: and a great number were joined to the Lord.

他又往大数去找扫罗，
Then he went on to Tarsus, looking for Saul;

找着了，就带他到安提阿去。他们足有一年的工夫，和教会一同聚集，教训了许多人。门徒称为基督徒，是从安提阿起首。
And when he had come across him, he took him to Antioch. And they were with the church there for a year, teaching the people; and the disciples were first given the name of Christians in Antioch.

当那些日子，有几位先知从耶路撒冷下到安提阿。
Now in those days prophets came from Jerusalem to Antioch.

内中有一位，名叫亚迦布站起来，借着圣灵，指明天下将有大饥荒。这事到革老丢年间果然有了。
And one of them, named Agabus, said publicly through the Spirit that there would be serious need of food all over the earth: which came about in the time of Claudius.

于是门徒定意，照各人的力量捐钱，送去供给住在犹太的弟兄。
And the disciples, everyone as he was able, made a decision to send help to the brothers living in Judaea:

他们就这样行，把捐项托巴拿巴和扫罗，送到众长老那里。
Which they did, sending it to the rulers of the church by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

那时，希律王下手苦害教会中几个人。
Now, about that time, Herod the king made cruel attacks on the Christians.

用刀杀了约翰的哥哥雅各。
And he put James, the brother of John, to death with the sword.

他见犹太人喜欢这事，又去捉拿彼得。那时正是除酵的日子。
And when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews he went on to take Peter in addition. This was at the time of the feast of unleavened bread.

希律拿了彼得收在监里，交付四班兵丁看守，每班四个人，意思要在逾越节后，把他提出来，当着百姓办他。
And having taken him, he put him in prison, with four bands of armed men to keep watch over him; his purpose being to take him out to the people after the Passover.

于是彼得被囚在监里。教会却为他切切地祷告神。
So Peter was kept in prison: but the church made strong prayer to God for him.

希律将要提他出来的前一夜，彼得被两条铁链锁着，睡在两个兵丁当中。看守的人也在门外看守。
And when Herod was about to take him out, the same night Peter was sleeping in chains between two armed men, and the watchmen were keeping watch before the door of the prison.

忽然有主的一个使者，站在旁边，屋里有光照耀。天使拍彼得的肋旁，拍醒了他，说，快快起来。那铁链就从他手上脱落下来。
And a great light was seen shining in the room, and an angel of the Lord came to Peter and, touching him on his side so that he came out of his sleep, said, Get up quickly. And his chains came off his hands.

天使对他说，束上带子。穿上鞋。他就那样作。天使又说，披上外衣跟着我来。
Then the angel said, Put on your shoes and get ready to go. And he did so. And he said, Put your coat round you and come with me.

彼得就出来跟着他，不知道天使所作是真的，只当见了异象。
And he went out after him; and he was not certain if what was done by the angel was a fact, for it seemed to him that he was seeing a vision.

过了第一层，第二层监牢，就来到临街的铁门。那门自己开了。他们出来，走过一条街，天使便离开他去了。
And when they had gone past the first and second watchmen they came to the iron door into the town, which came open by itself: and they went out and down one street; and then the angel went away.

彼得醒悟过来，说，我现在真知道主差遣他的使者，救我脱离希律的手，和犹太百姓一切所盼望的。
And when Peter came to his senses he said, Now, truly, I am certain that the Lord has sent his angel and taken me out of the hands of Herod, against all the hopes of the Jews.

想了一想，就往那称呼马可的约翰他母亲马利亚家去。在那里有好些人聚集祷告。
And when he became clear about this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John named Mark, where a number of them had come together for prayer.

彼得敲外门，有一个使女，名叫罗大出来探听。
And he gave a blow on the door, and a young girl came to it, named Rhoda.

听得是彼得的声音，就欢喜得顾不得开门，跑进去告诉众人说，彼得站在门外。
And hearing the voice of Peter, in her joy she went running, without opening the door, to say that Peter was outside.

他们说，你是疯了。使女极力地说，真是他。他们说，必是他的天使。
And they said to her, You are off your head. But still she said, with decision, that it was so. And they said, It is his angel.

彼得不住地敲门。他们开了门，看见他，就甚惊奇。
But Peter went on giving blows on the door: and when it was open and they saw him, they were full of wonder.

彼得摆手，不要他们作声，就告诉他们主怎样领他出监。又说，你们把这事告诉雅各，和众弟兄。于是出去往别处去了。
But he made a sign to them with his hand to be quiet, and gave them an account of how the Lord had taken him out of prison. And he said, Give the news to James and the brothers. And then he went away.

到了天亮，兵丁扰乱得很，不知道彼得往哪里去了。
Now when it was day, the armed men were greatly troubled about what had become of Peter.

希律找他，找不着，就审问看守的人，吩咐把他们拉去杀了。后来希律离开犹太，下该撒利亚去，住在那里。
And Herod, when he sent for him, and he was not there, after questioning the watchmen, gave orders that they were to be put to death. Then he went down from Judaea to Caesarea for a time.

希律恼怒推罗西顿的人。他们那一带地方，是从王的地土得粮，因此就托了王的内侍臣伯拉斯都的情，一心来求和。
Now he was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon: and they came to him, all together, and having made friends with Blastus, the controller of the king's house, they made a request for peace, because their country was dependent on the king's country for its food.

希律在所定的日子，穿上朝服，坐在位上，对他们讲论一番。
And on the day which had been fixed, Herod, dressed in his robes and seated in his place, made a public statement to them.

百姓喊着说，这是神的声音，不是人的声音。
And the people, with loud cries, said, It is the voice of a god, not of a man.

希律不归荣耀给神，所以主的使者立刻罚他。他被虫所咬，气就绝了。
And straight away the angel of the Lord sent a disease on him, because he did not give the glory to God: and his flesh was wasted away by worms, and so he came to his end.

神的道日见兴旺，越发广传。
But the word of the Lord went on increasing.

巴拿巴和扫罗，办完了他们供给的事，就从耶路撒冷回来，带着称呼马可的约翰同去。
And Barnabas and Saul came back from Jerusalem, when their work was ended, taking with them John named Mark.

在安提阿的教会中，有几位先知和教师，就是巴拿巴，和称呼尼结的西面，古利奈人路求，与分封之王希律同养的马念，并扫罗。
Now there were at Antioch, in the church there, prophets and teachers, Barnabas, and Symeon who was named Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, a relation of Herod the king, and Saul.

他们事奉主，禁食的时候，圣灵说，要为我分派巴拿巴和扫罗，去作我召他们所作的工。
And while they were doing the Lord's work, and going without food, the Holy Spirit said, Let Barnabas and Saul be given to me for the special work for which they have been marked out by me.

于是禁食祷告，按手在他们头上，就打发他们去了。
Then, after prayer and going without food they put their hands on them, and sent them away.

他们既被圣灵差遣，就下到西流基，从那里坐船往居比路去。
So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia; and from there they went by ship to Cyprus.

到了撒拉米，就在犹太人各会堂里传讲神的道。也有约翰作他们的帮手。
And at Salamis they were preaching the word of God in the Synagogues of the Jews: and John was with them, helping them.

经过全岛，直到帕弗，在那里遇见一个有法术假充先知的犹太人，名叫巴耶稣。
And when they had gone through all the island to Paphos, they came across a certain wonder-worker and false prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus;

这人常和方伯士求保罗同在，士求保罗是个通达人。他请了巴拿巴和扫罗来，要听神的道。
Who was with the ruler, Sergius Paulus, an able man. This man sent for Barnabas and Saul, desiring to have knowledge of the word of God.

只是那行法术的以吕马，（这名翻出来就是行法术的意思）敌挡使徒，要叫方伯不信真道。
But Elymas, the wonder-worker (for that is the sense of his name), put himself against them, with the purpose of turning the ruler from the faith.

扫罗又名保罗，被圣灵充满定睛看他，
But Saul, whose other name is Paul, being full of the Holy Spirit, looking hard at him, said,

说，你这充满各样诡诈奸恶，魔鬼的儿子，众善的仇敌，你混乱主的正道还不止住吗？
O you, who are full of false tricks and evil ways, a son of the Evil One, hating all righteousness, will you for ever be turning people from the right ways of the Lord?

现在主的手加在你身上。你要瞎眼，暂且不见日光。他的眼睛立刻昏蒙黑暗，四下里求人拉着手领他。
And now, see, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind and not able to see the sun for a time. And straight away a dark mist came down on him; and he went about looking for a guide.

方伯看见所作的事，很希奇主的道，就信了。
Then the ruler, when he saw what was done, had faith, being full of wonder at the teaching of the Lord.

保罗和他的同人，从帕弗开船，来到旁非利亚的别加。约翰就离开他们回耶路撒冷去。
Then Paul and those who were with him went by ship from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia: and there John went away from them and came back to Jerusalem.

他们离了别加往前行，来到彼西底的安提阿。在安息日进会堂坐下。
But they, going through from Perga, came to Antioch in Pisidia; and they went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath and were seated.

读完了律法和先知的书，管会堂的叫人过去，对他们说，二位兄台，若有什么劝勉众人的话，请说。
And after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent to them, saying, Brothers, if you have a word of comfort for the people, say on.

保罗就站起来，举手说，以色列人，和一切敬畏神的人，请听。
And Paul, getting up and making a sign with his hand, said, Men of Israel, and you who have the fear of God, give ear.

这以色列民的神，拣选了我们的祖宗，当民寄居埃及的时候，抬举他们，用大能的手领他们出来。
The God of this people Israel made selection of our fathers, lifting the people up from their low condition when they were living in the land of Egypt, and with a strong arm took them out of it.

又在旷野容忍他们约有四十年。（容忍或作抚养）
And for about forty years he put up with their ways in the waste land.

既灭了迦南地七族的人，就把那地分给他们为业。
And having put to destruction seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them the land for their heritage for about four hundred and fifty years.

此后，给他们设立士师，约有四百五十年，直到先知撒母耳的时候。
And after these things he gave them judges, till the time of Samuel the prophet.

后来他们求一个王，神就将便雅悯支派中，基士的儿子扫罗，给他们作王四十年。
Then at their request for a king, God gave them Saul, the son of Kish, a man of the family of Benjamin, who was their king for forty years.

既废了扫罗，就选立大卫作他们的王。又为他作见证说，我寻得耶西的儿子大卫，他是合我心意的人，凡事要遵行我的旨意。
And having put him on one side, he made David their king, to whom he gave witness, saying, I have taken David, the son of Jesse, a man dear to my heart, who will do all my pleasure.

从这人的后裔中，神已经照着所应许的，为以色列人立了一位救主，就是耶稣。
From this man's seed has God given to Israel a Saviour, even Jesus, as he gave his word;

在他没有出来以先，约翰向以色列众民宣讲悔改的洗礼。
For whose coming John made ready the way by preaching to all the people of Israel the baptism which goes with a change of heart.

约翰将行尽他的程途说，你们以为我是谁？我不是基督。只是有一位在我以后来的，我解他脚上的鞋带，也是不配的。
And when John was completing his work, he said, What do I seem to you to be? I am not he; but one is coming after me, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo.

弟兄们，亚伯拉罕的子孙，和你们中间敬畏神的人哪，这救世的道，是传给我们的。
My brothers, children of the family of Abraham, and those among you who have the fear of God, to us the word of this salvation is sent.

耶路撒冷居住的人，和他们的官长，因为不认识基督，也不明白每安息日所读众先知的书，就把基督定了死罪，正应了先知的预言。
For the men of Jerusalem and their rulers, having no knowledge of him, or of the sayings of the prophets which come to their ears every Sabbath day, gave effect to them by judging him.

虽然查不出他有当死的罪来，还是求彼拉多杀他。
And though no cause of death was seen in him, they made a request to Pilate that he might be put to death.

既成就了经上指着他所记的一切话，就把他从木头上取下来，放在坟墓里。
And when they had done all the things said in the Writings about him, they took him down from the tree, and put him in the place of the dead.

神却叫他从死里复活。
But God gave him back from the dead:

那从加利利同他上耶路撒冷的人多日看见他，这些人如今在民间是他的见证。
And for a number of days he was seen by those who came with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses before the people.

我们也报好信息给你们，就是那应许祖宗的话，
And we are giving you the good news of the undertaking made to the fathers,

神已经向我们这作儿女的应验，叫耶稣复活了。正如诗篇第二篇上记着说，你是我的儿子，我今日生你。
Which God has now put into effect for our children, by sending Jesus; as it says in the second Psalm, You are my Son; this day I have given you being.

论到神叫他从死里复活，不再归于朽坏，就这样说，我必将所应许大卫那圣洁可靠的恩典，赐给你们。
And about his coming back from the dead, never again to go to destruction, he has said these words, I will give you the holy and certain mercies of David.

又有一篇上说，你必不叫你的圣者见朽坏。
Because he says in another Psalm, You will not let your Holy One see destruction.

大卫在世的时候，遵行了神的旨意，就睡了，（或作大卫按神的旨意服事了他那一世的人就睡了）。归到他祖宗那里，已见朽坏。
Now David, having done God's work for his generation, went to sleep, and was put with his fathers, and his body came to destruction:

惟独神所复活的，他并未见朽坏。
But he, who was lifted up by God, did not see destruction.

所以弟兄们，你们当晓得，赦罪的道是由这人传给你们的。
And so, let it be clear to you, my brothers, that through this man forgiveness of sins is offered to you:

你们靠摩西的律法，在一切不得称义的事上，信靠这人，就都得称义了。
And through him everyone who has faith is made free from all those things, from which the law of Moses was not able to make you free.

所以你们务要小心，免得先知书上所说的临到你们。
So take care that these words of the prophets do not come true for you;

主说，你们这轻慢的人要观看，要惊奇，要灭亡。因为在你们的时候，我行一件事，虽有人告诉你们，你们总是不信。
See, you doubters, have wonder and come to your end; for I will do a thing in your days to which you will not give belief, even if it is made clear to you.

他们出会堂的时候，众人请他们到下安息日，再讲这话给他们听。
And when they went out, they made a request that these words might be said to them again on the Sabbath after.

散会以后，犹太人和敬虔进犹太教的人，多有跟从保罗，巴拿巴的，二人对他们讲道，劝他们务要恒久在神的恩中。
Now when the meeting was ended, a number of the Jews and of the God-fearing Gentiles who had become Jews, went after Paul and Barnabas: who put before them how important it was to keep on in the grace of God.

到下安息日，合城的人，几乎都来聚集，要听神的道。
And on the Sabbath after, almost all the town came together to give hearing to the word of God.

但犹太人看见人这样多，就满心嫉妒，硬驳保罗所说的话，并且毁谤。
But when the Jews saw such a great number of people, they were full of envy and said evil words against Paul's preaching.

保罗和巴拿巴放胆说，神的道先讲给你们，原是应当的，只因你们弃绝这道，断定自己不配得永生，我们就转向外邦人去。
Then Paul and Barnabas without fear said, It was necessary for the word of God to be given to you first; but because you will have nothing to do with it, and have no desire for eternal life, it will now be offered to the Gentiles.

因为主曾这样吩咐我们说，我已经立你作外邦人的光，叫你施行救恩直到地极。
For so the Lord has given us orders, saying, I have given you for a light to the Gentiles so that you may be for salvation to the ends of the earth.

外邦人听见这话，就欢喜了，赞美神的道，凡预定得永生的人都信了。
And the Gentiles, hearing this, were glad and gave glory to the word of God: and those marked out by God for eternal life had faith.

于是主的道，传遍了那一带地方。
And the word of the Lord went through all the country.

但犹太人挑唆虔敬尊贵的妇女，和城内有名望的人，逼迫保罗，巴拿巴，将他们赶出境外。
But the Jews, working up the feelings of the God-fearing women of high position and of the chief men of the town, got an attack started against Paul and Barnabas, driving them out of those parts.

二人对着众人跺下脚上的尘土，就往以哥念去了。
But they, shaking off the dust of that place from their feet, came to Iconium.

门徒满心喜乐，又被圣灵充满。
And the disciples were full of joy and of the Holy Spirit.

二人在以哥念同进犹太人的会堂，在那里讲的叫犹太人，和希利尼人，信的很多。
Now in Iconium they went together to the Synagogue of the Jews and gave such teaching that a great number of Jews and Greeks had faith.

但那不顺从的犹太人耸动外邦人，叫他们心里恼恨弟兄。
But those Jews who had not the faith, made the minds of the Gentiles bitter against the brothers.

二人在那里住了多日，倚靠主放胆讲道。主借他们的手，施行神迹奇事，证明他的恩道。
So they kept there for a long time, taking heart in the Lord, who gave witness to the word of his grace by causing signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

城里的众人就分了党。有附从犹太人的，有附从使徒的。
But there was a division among the people of the town; some were on the side of the Jews and some on the side of the Apostles.

那时，外邦人和犹太人，并他们的官长，一齐拥上来，要凌辱使徒，用石头打他们。
And when a violent attempt was made by the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, to make an attack on them and have them stoned,

使徒知道了，就逃往吕高尼的路司得，特庇，两个城，和周围地方去。
Having got news of it, they went in flight to the towns of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the country round about:

在那里传福音。
And went on preaching the good news there.

路司得城里，坐着一个两脚无力的人，生来是瘸腿的，从来没有走过。
And at Lystra there was a certain man, who from birth had been without the use of his feet, never having had the power of walking.

他听保罗讲道。保罗定睛看他，见他有信心，可得痊愈，
This man was giving ear to the preaching of Paul, who, looking at him, and seeing that he had faith to be made well,

就大声说，你起来，两脚站直。那人就跳起来而且行走。
Said in a loud voice, Get up on your feet. And, jumping up, he went walking about.

众人看见保罗所作的事，就用吕高尼的话，大声说，有神借着人形，降临在我们中间了。
And when the people saw what Paul had done, they said in a loud voice, in the language of Lycaonia, The gods have come down to us in the form of men.

于是称巴拿巴为丢斯，称保罗为希耳米，因为他说话领首。
And they gave the name of Jupiter to Barnabas, and to Paul that of Mercury, because he was the chief talker.

有城外丢斯庙的祭司，牵着牛，拿着花圈，来到门前，要同众人向使徒献祭。
And the priest of the image of Jupiter, which was before the town, took oxen and flowers to the doors of the town, and was about to make an offering with the people.

巴拿巴，保罗，二使徒听见，就撕开衣裳，跳进众人中间，喊着说，
But when this came to the ears of the Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, they went running out among the people, parting their clothing, and crying out,

诸君，为什么作这事呢？我们也是人，性情和你们一样。我们传福音给你们，是叫你们离弃这些虚妄，归向那创造天，地，海，和其中万物的永生神。
Good people, why are you doing these things? We are men with the same feelings as you, and we give you the good news so that you may be turned away from these foolish things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all things in them:

他在从前的世代，任凭万国各行其道。
Who in the past let all nations go in the ways which seemed good to them.

然而为自己未尝不显出证据来，就如常施恩惠，从天降雨，赏赐丰年，叫你们饮食饱足，满心喜乐。
But he was not without witness, because he did good, and gave you rain from heaven and times of fruit, making your hearts full of food and joy.

二人说了这些话，仅仅地拦住众人不献祭与他们。
And even with these words, it was hard for them to keep the people from making an offering to them.

但有些犹太人，从安提阿和以哥念来，挑唆众人，就用石头打保罗，以为他是死了，便拖到城外。
But some Jews came to that place from Antioch and Iconium, and got control over the people; and after stoning Paul, they had him pulled out of the town, taking him for dead.

门徒正围着他，他就起来，走进城去。第二天，同巴拿巴往特庇去，
But when the disciples came round him, he got up and went into the town: and the day after he went away with Barnabas to Derbe.

对那城里的人传了福音，使好些人作门徒。就回路司得，以哥念，安提阿去，
And having made a number of disciples through the preaching of the good news in that town, they went back to Lystra and Iconium and Antioch,

坚固门徒的心，劝他们恒守所信的道。又说，我们进入神的国，必须经历许多艰难。
Making strong the souls of the disciples, saying to them that they were to keep the faith, and that we have to go through troubles of all sorts to come into the kingdom of God.

二人在各教会中选立了长老，又禁食祷告，就把他们交托所信的主。
And when they had made selection of some to be rulers in every church, and had given themselves to prayer and kept themselves from food, they put them into the care of the Lord in whom they had faith.

二人经过彼西底，来到旁非利亚。
And they went through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia.

在别加讲了道，就下亚大利去。
And, after preaching the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia;

从那里坐船，往安提阿去。当初他们被众人所托蒙神之恩，要办现在所作之工，就是在这地方。
And from there they went by ship to Antioch, where they had been handed over to the grace of God for the work which they had not done.

到了那里，聚集了会众，就述说神借他们所行的一切事，并神怎样为外邦人开了信道的门。
And when they came there, and had got the church together, they gave them an account of all the things which God had done through them, and how he had made open a door of faith to the Gentiles.

二人就在那里同门徒住了多日。
And they were with the disciples there for a long time.

有几个人，从犹太下来，教训弟兄们说，你们若不按摩西的规条受割礼，不能得救。
Now certain men came down from Judaea, teaching the brothers and saying that without circumcision, after the rule of Moses, there is no salvation.

保罗巴拿巴与他们大大地分争辩论，众门徒就定规，叫保罗，巴拿巴和本会中几个人，为所辩论的，上耶路撒冷去，见使徒和长老。
And after Paul and Barnabas had had no little argument and discussion with them, the brothers made a decision to send Paul and Barnabas and certain others of them to the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem about this question.

于是教会送他们起行，他们经过腓尼基，撒玛利亚，随处传说外邦人归主的事，叫众弟兄都甚欢喜。
So they, being sent on their way by the church, went through Phoenicia and Samaria, giving news of the salvation of the Gentiles, to the great joy of all the brothers.

到了耶路撒冷，教会和使徒并长老，都接待他们，他们就述说神同他们所行的一切事。
And when they came to Jerusalem, they had a meeting with the church and the Apostles and the rulers, and they gave an account of all the things which God had done through them.

惟有几个信徒是法利赛教门的人，起来说，必须给外邦人行割礼，吩咐他们遵守摩西的律法。
But some of the Pharisees, who were of the faith, got up and said, It is necessary for these to have circumcision and to keep the law of Moses.

使徒和长老，聚会商议这事。
And the Apostles and the rulers of the church came together and gave thought to the question.

辩论已经多了，彼得就起来，说，诸位弟兄，你们知道神早已在你们中间拣选了我，叫外邦人从我口中得听福音之道，而且相信。
And when there had been much discussion, Peter got up and said to them, My brothers, you have knowledge that some time back it was God's pleasure that by my mouth the good news might be given to the Gentiles so that they might have faith.

知道人心的神，也为他们作了见证。赐圣灵给他们，正如给我们一样。
And God, the searcher of hearts, was a witness to them, giving them the Holy Spirit even as he did to us;

又借着信，洁净了他们的心，并不分他们我们。
Making no division between them and us, but making clean their hearts by faith.

现在为什么试探神，要把我们祖宗和我们所不能负的轭，放在门徒的颈项上呢？
Why then are you testing God, by putting on the neck of the disciples a yoke so hard that not even our fathers or we were strong enough for it?

我们得救，乃是因主耶稣的恩，和他们一样，这是我们所信的。
But we have faith that we will get salvation through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way as they.

众人都默默无声，听巴拿巴和保罗，述说神借他们在外邦人中所行的神迹奇事。
And all the people were quiet while Barnabas and Paul gave an account of the signs and wonders which God had done among the Gentiles by them.

他们住了声，雅各就说，诸位弟兄，请听我的话。
And when they had come to an end, James, answering, said, My brothers, give ear to me:

方才西门述说神当初怎样眷顾外邦人，从他们中间选取百姓归于自己的名下
Symeon has given an account of how God was first pleased to take from among the Gentiles a people for himself.

众先知的话，也与这意思相合。
And this is in agreement with the words of the prophets, as it is said,

正如经上所写的，此后我要回来，重新修造大卫倒塌的帐幕，把那破坏的，重新修造建立起来。
After these things I will come back, and will put up the tent of David which has been broken down, building up again its broken parts and making it complete:

叫余剩的人，就是凡称为我名下的外邦人，都寻求主。
So that the rest of men may make search for the Lord, and all the Gentiles on whom my name is named,

这话是从创世以来，显明这事的主说的。
Says the Lord, who has made these things clear from the earliest times.

所以据我的意见，不可难为那归服神的外邦人。
For this reason my decision is, that we do not put trouble in the way of those who from among the Gentiles are turned to God;

只要写信，吩咐他们禁戒偶像的污秽和奸淫，并勒死的牲畜，和血。
But that we give them orders to keep themselves from things offered to false gods, and from the evil desires of the body, and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law, and from blood.

因为从古以来，摩西的书在各城有人传讲，每逢安息日，在会堂里诵读。
For Moses, from times long past, has his preachers in every town, reading his law in the Synagogues every Sabbath.

那时，使徒和长老并全教会，定意从他们中间拣选人，差他们和保罗，巴拿巴，同往安提阿去。所拣选的，就是称呼巴撒巴的犹大，和西拉，这两个人在弟兄中是作首领的。
Then it seemed good to the Apostles and the rulers and all the church, to send men from among them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; Judas, named Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers:

于是写信交付他们，内中说，使徒和作长老的弟兄们，问安提阿，叙利亚，基利家外邦众弟兄的安。
And they sent a letter by them, saying, The Apostles and the older brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, may joy be with you:

我们听说有几个人，从我们这里出去，用言语搅扰你们，惑乱你们的心。（有古卷在此有你们必须受割礼守摩西的律法）。其实我们并没有吩咐他们。
Because we have knowledge that some who went from us have been troubling you with their words, putting your souls in doubt; to whom we gave no such order;

所以我们同心定意，拣选几个人，差他们同我们所亲爱的巴拿巴，和保罗，往你们那里去。
It seemed good to us, having come to an agreement together, to send these men to you, with our well loved Barnabas and Paul,

这二人是为我主耶稣基督的名，不顾性命的。
Men who have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

我们就差了犹大和西拉，他们也要亲口诉说这些事。
And so we have sent Judas and Silas, who will say the same things to you themselves, by word of mouth.

因为圣灵和我们，定意不将别的重担放在你们身上。惟有几件事是不可少的，
For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us, to put on you nothing more than these necessary things;

就是禁戒祭偶像的物，和血，并勒死的牲畜，和奸淫。这几件你们若能自己禁戒不犯，就好了。愿你们平安。
To keep from things offered to false gods, and from blood, and from things put to death in ways which are against the law, and from the evil desires of the body; if you keep yourselves from these, you will do well. May you be happy.

他们既奉了差遣，就下安提阿去，聚集众人，交付书信。
So they, being sent away, came down to Antioch, and having got the people together, they gave them the letter.

众人念了，因为信上安慰的话，就欢喜了。
And after reading it, they were glad of its comfort.

犹大和西拉也是先知，就用许多话劝勉弟兄，坚固他们。
And Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, gave teaching to the brothers and made them strong in the faith.

住了些日子，弟兄们打发他们平平安安地回到差遣他们的人那里去。（有古卷在此有
And when they had been there for some time, they were sent back in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.

惟有西拉定意仍住在那里。）
[]

但保罗和巴拿巴，仍住在安提阿，和许多别人一同教训人，传主的道。
But Paul and Barnabas kept on in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of God, with a number of others.

过了些日子，保罗对巴拿巴说，我们可以回到从前宣传主道的各城，看望弟兄们景况如何。
And after some days, Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go back and see the brothers in every town where we have given the word of God, and see how they are.

巴拿巴有意，要带称呼马可的约翰同去。
And Barnabas had a desire to take with them John, named Mark.

但保罗，因为马可从前在旁非利亚离开他们，不和他们同去作工，就以为不可带他去。
But Paul was of the opinion that it was not right to take with them one who had gone away from them in Pamphylia, and had not gone on with the work.

于是二人起了争论，甚至彼此分开。巴拿巴带着马可，坐船往居比路去。
And there was a sharp argument between them, so that they were parted from one another, and Barnabas took Mark with him and went by ship to Cyprus;

保罗拣选了西拉，也出去，蒙弟兄们把他交于主的恩中。
But Paul took Silas and went away with the blessing of the brothers.

他就走遍叙利亚，基利家，坚固众教会。
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, making the churches stronger in the faith.

保罗来到特庇，又到路司得。在那里有一个门徒，名叫提摩太，是信主之犹太妇人的儿子，他父亲却是希利尼人。
And he came to Derbe and Lystra: and there was a certain disciple there named Timothy, whose mother was one of the Jews of the faith, but his father was a Greek;

路司得和以哥念的弟兄，都称赞他。
Of whom the brothers at Lystra and Iconium had a high opinion.

保罗要带他同去，只因那些地方的犹太人，都知道他父亲是希利尼人，就给他行了割礼。
Paul had a desire for him to go with him, and he gave him circumcision because of the Jews who were in those parts: for they all had knowledge that his father was a Greek.

他们经过各城，把耶路撒冷使徒和长老所定的条规，交给门徒遵守。
And on their way through the towns, they gave them the rules which had been made by the Apostles and the rulers of the church at Jerusalem, so that they might keep them.

于是众教会信心越发坚固，人数天天加增。
So the churches were made strong in the faith and were increased in number every day.

圣灵既然禁止他们在亚西亚讲道，他们就经过弗吕家，加拉太一带地方。
And after they had gone through the land of Phrygia and Galatia, the Holy Spirit did not let them take the word into Asia;

到了每西亚的边界，他们想要往庇推尼去，耶稣的灵却不许。
And having come to Mysia, they made an attempt to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not let them;

他们就越过每西亚，下到特罗亚去。
And going past Mysia, they came down to Troas.

在夜间有异象现与保罗。有一个马其顿人，站着求他说，请你过到马其顿来帮助我们。
And Paul had a vision in the night; a man of Macedonia came, requesting him, and saying, Come over into Macedonia and give us help.

保罗既看见这异象，我们随即想要往马其顿去，以为神召我们传福音给那里的人听。
And when he had seen the vision, straight away we made the decision to go into Macedonia, for it seemed certain to us that God had sent us to give the good news to them.

于是从特罗亚开船，一直行到撒摩特喇，第二天到了尼亚波利。
So, from Troas we went straight by ship to Samothrace and the day after to Neapolis;

从那里来到腓立比，就是马其顿这一方的头一个城。也是罗马的驻防城。我们在这城里住了几天。
And from there to Philippi, which is the most important town of Macedonia and a Roman colony: and we were there for some days.

当安息日，我们出城门，到了河边，知道那里有一个祷告的地方，我们就坐下对那聚会的妇女讲道。
And on the Sabbath we went outside the town, by the river, where we had an idea that there would be a place of prayer; and, being seated, we had talk with the women who had come together.

有一个卖紫色布疋的妇人，名叫吕底亚，是推雅推喇城的人，素来敬拜神。她听见了，主就开导她的心，叫她留心听保罗所讲的话。
And a certain woman named Lydia, a trader in purple cloth of the town of Thyatira, and a God-fearing woman, gave ear to us: whose heart the Lord made open to give attention to the things which Paul was saying.

她和她一家，既领了洗，便求我们说，你们若以为我是真信主的，（或作你们若以为我是忠心事主的）请到我家里来住。于是强留我们。
And when she and her family had had baptism, she made a request to us, saying, If it seems to you that I am true to the Lord, come into my house and be my guests. And she made us come.

后来，我们往那祷告的地方去。有一个使女迎着面来，她被巫鬼所附，用法术，叫她主人们大得财利。
And when we were going to the place of prayer, we came across a girl with a spirit which gave knowledge of the future, whose masters made great profit from her power.

她跟随保罗和我们，喊着说，这些人是至高神的仆人，对你们传说救人的道。
She came after Paul and us, crying out and saying, These men are the servants of the Most High God, who are giving you news of the way of salvation.

她一连多日这样喊叫，保罗就心中厌烦，转身对那鬼说，我奉耶稣基督的名，吩咐你从她身上出来。那鬼当时就出来了。
And this she did on a number of days. But Paul was greatly troubled and, turning, said to the spirit, I give you orders in the name of Jesus Christ, to come out of her. And it came out that very hour.

使女的主人们，见得利的指望没有了，便揪住保罗和西拉，拉他们到市上去见首领。
But when her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they took Paul and Silas, pulling them into the market-place before the rulers;

又带到官长面前说，这些人原是犹太人，竟骚扰我们的城，
And when they had taken them before the authorities, they said, These men, who are Jews, are greatly troubling our town;

传我们罗马人所不可受，不可行的规矩。
Teaching rules of living which it is not right for us to have or to keep, being Romans.

众人就一同起来攻击他们。官长吩咐剥了他们的衣裳，用棍打。
And the people made an attack on them all together: and the authorities took their clothing off them, and gave orders for them to be whipped.

打了许多棍，便将他们下在监里，嘱咐禁卒严紧看守。
And when they had given them a great number of blows, they put them in prison, giving orders to the keeper of the prison to keep them safely:

禁卒领了这样的命，就把他们下在内监里，两脚上了木狗。
And he, having such orders, put them into the inner prison with chains on their feet.

约在半夜，保罗和西拉，祷告唱诗赞美神，众囚犯也侧耳而听。
But about the middle of the night, Paul and Silas were making prayers and songs to God in the hearing of the prisoners;

忽然地大震动，甚至监牢的地基都摇动了。监门立刻全开，众囚犯的锁链也都松开了。
And suddenly there was an earth-shock, so that the base of the prison was moved: and all the doors came open, and everyone's chains came off.

禁卒一醒，看见监门全开，以为囚犯已经逃走，就拔刀要自杀。
And the keeper, coming out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, took his sword and was about to put himself to death, fearing that the prisoners had got away.

保罗大声呼叫说，不要伤害自己，我们都在这里。
But Paul said in a loud voice, Do yourself no damage, for we are all here.

禁卒叫人拿灯来，就跳进去，战战兢兢地俯伏在保罗西拉面前。
And he sent for lights and came rushing in and, shaking with fear, went down on his face before Paul and Silas,

又领他们出来说，二位先生，我当怎样行才可以得救？
And took them out and said, Sirs, what have I to do to get salvation?

他们说，当信主耶稣，你和你一家都必得救。
And they said, Have faith in the Lord Jesus, and you and your family will have salvation.

他们就把主的道，讲给他和他全家的人听。
And they gave the word of the Lord to him and to all who were in his house.

当夜就在那时候，禁卒把他们带去，洗他们的伤。他和属乎他的人，立时都受了洗。
And that same hour of the night, he took them, and when he had given attention to their wounds, he and all his family had baptism straight away.

于是禁卒领他们上自己家里去，给他们摆上饭，他和全家，因为信了神，都很喜乐。
And he took them into his house and gave them food, and he was full of joy, having faith in God with all his family.

到了天亮，官长打发差役来说，释放那两个人吧。
But when it was day, the authorities sent the police, saying, Let these men go.

禁卒就把这话告诉保罗说，官长打发人来叫释放你们。如今可以出监，平平安安地去吧。
And the keeper said to Paul, The authorities have given orders to let you go: come out now, and go in peace.

保罗却说，我们是罗马人，并没有定罪，他们就在众人面前打了我们，又把我们下在监里。现在要私下撵我们出去吗？这是不行的。叫他们自己来领我们出去吧。
But Paul said to them, They have given us who are Romans a public whipping without judging us, and have put us in prison. Will they now send us out secretly? no, truly, let them come themselves and take us out.

差役把这话回禀官长。官长听见他们是罗马人，就害怕了。
And the police gave an account of these words to the authorities, and they were full of fear on hearing that they were Romans;

于是来劝他们，领他们出来，请他们离开那城。
Then they came and made prayers to them, requesting them, when they had taken them out, to go away from the town.

二人出了监，往吕底亚家里去。见了弟兄们，劝慰他们一番，就走了。
And they came out of the prison and went to the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brothers they gave them comfort and went away.

保罗和西拉，经过暗妃波里，亚波罗尼亚，来到帖撒罗尼迦，在那里有犹太人的会堂。
Now when they had gone through Amphipolis and Apollonia they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Synagogue of the Jews:

保罗照他素常的规矩进去，一连三个安息日，本着圣经与他们辩论，
And Paul, as he generally did, went in to them, and on three Sabbath days had discussions with them from the holy Writings,

讲解陈明基督必须受害，从死里复活。又说，我所传与你们的这位耶稣，就是基督。
Saying to them clearly and openly that Christ had to be put to death and come back to life again; and that this Jesus, whom, he said, I am preaching to you, is the Christ.

他们中间有些人听了劝，就附从保罗和西拉。并有许多虔敬的希利尼人，尊贵的妇女也不少。
And some of them had faith, and were joined to Paul and Silas; and a number of the God-fearing Greeks, and some of the chief women.

但那不信的犹太人心里嫉妒，招聚了些市井匪类，搭伙成群，耸动合城的人，闯进耶孙的家，要将保罗西拉带到百姓那里。
But the Jews, being moved with envy, took with them certain low persons from among the common people, and getting together a great number of people, made an outcry in the town, attacking the house of Jason with the purpose of taking them out to the people.

找不着他们，就把耶孙和几个弟兄，拉到地方官那里，喊叫说，那搅乱天下的，也到这里来了。
And when they were not able to get them, they took Jason and some of the brothers by force before the rulers of the town, crying, These men, who have made trouble all over the world have now come here;

耶孙收留他们。这些人都违背该撒的命令，说另有一个王耶稣。
Whom Jason has taken into his house: and they are acting against the orders of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus.

众人和地方官，听见这话，就惊慌了。
And hearing these things the people and the rulers of the town were troubled.

于是取了耶孙和其余之人的保状，就释放了他们。
And having made Jason and the others give an undertaking to keep the peace, they let them go.

弟兄们，随即在夜间打发保罗和西拉往庇哩亚去。二人到了，就进入犹太人的会堂。
And the brothers straight away sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea: and they, when they came there, went to the Synagogue of the Jews.

这地方的人，贤于帖撒罗尼迦的人，甘心领受这道，天天考查圣经，要晓得这道，是与不是。
Now these were more noble than the Jews of Thessalonica, for they gave serious attention to the word, searching in the holy Writings every day, to see if these things were so.

所以他们中间多有相信的。又有希利尼尊贵的妇女，男子也不少。
And a number of them had faith, and no small number of the Greek women of high position and of the men.

但帖撒罗尼迦的犹太人，知道保罗又在庇哩亚传神的道，也就往那里去，耸动搅扰众人。
But when the Jews of Thessalonica had news that Paul was preaching the word at Beroea, they came there, troubling the people and working them up.

当时弟兄们便打发保罗往海边去。西拉和提摩太仍住在庇哩亚。
So the brothers sent Paul straight away to the sea: but Silas and Timothy kept there still.

送保罗的人带他到了雅典。既领了保罗的命，叫西拉和提摩太速速到他这里来，就回去了。
But those who went with Paul took him as far as Athens, and then went away, with orders from him to Silas and Timothy to come to him quickly.

保罗在雅典等候他们的时候，看见满城都是偶像，就心里着急。
Now while Paul was waiting for them at Athens, his spirit was troubled, for he saw all the town full of images of the gods.

于是在会堂里，与犹太人，和虔敬的人，并每日在市上所遇见的人辩论。
So he had discussions in the Synagogue with the Jews and God-fearing Gentiles, and every day in the market-place with those who were there.

还有以彼古罗和斯多亚两门的学士，与他争论。有的说，这胡言乱语的要说什么。有的说，他似乎是传说外邦鬼神的。这话是因保罗传讲耶稣，与复活的道。
And some of those who were supporters of the theories of the Epicureans and the Stoics, had a meeting with him. And some said, What is this talker of foolish words saying? And others, He seems to be a preacher of strange gods: because he was preaching of Jesus and his coming back from the dead.

他们就把他带到亚略巴古说，你所讲的这新道，我们也可以知道吗？
And they took him to Mars' Hill, saying, Will you make clear to us what is this new teaching of yours?

因为你有些奇怪的事，传到我们耳中。我们愿意知道这些事是什么意思。
For you seem to us to say strange things, and we have a desire to get the sense of them.

雅典人，和住在那里的客人，都不顾别的事，只将新闻说说听听
(Now all the Athenians and the men from other lands who come there were giving all their time to talking or hearing of anything new.)

保罗站在亚略巴古当中，说，众位雅典人哪，我看你们凡事很敬畏鬼神。
And Paul got to his feet on Mars' Hill and said, O men of Athens, I see that you are overmuch given to fear of the gods.

我游行的时候，观看你们所敬拜的，遇见一座坛，上面写着未识之神。你们所不认识而敬拜的，我现在告诉你们。
For when I came by, I was looking at the things to which you give worship, and I saw an altar with this writing on it, TO THE GOD OF WHOM THERE IS NO KNOWLEDGE. Now, what you, without knowledge, give worship to, I make clear to you.

创造宇宙和其中万物的神，既是天地的主，就不住人手所造的殿。
The God who made the earth and everything in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, is not housed in buildings made with hands;

也不用人手服事，好像缺少什么，自己倒将生命气息，万物，赐给万人。
And he is not dependent on the work of men's hands, as if he had need of anything, for he himself gives to all life and breath and all things;

他从一本造出万族的人，（本有古卷作血脉），住在全地上，并且预先定准他们的年限，和所住的疆界。
And he has made of one blood all the nations of men living on all the face of the earth, ordering their times and the limits of their lands,

要叫他们寻求神，或者可以揣摩而得，其实他离我们各人不远。
So that they might make search for God, in order, if possible, to get knowledge of him and make discovery of him, though he is not far from every one of us:

我们生活，动作，存留，都在乎他，就如你们作诗的，有人说，我们也是他所生的。
For in him we have life and motion and existence; as certain of your verse writers have said, For we are his offspring.

我们既是神所生的，就不当以为神的神性像人用手艺，心思，所雕刻的金，银，石。
If then we are the offspring of God, it is not right for us to have the idea that God is like gold or silver or stone, formed by the art or design of man.

世人蒙昧无知的时候，神并不监察，如今却吩咐各处的人都要悔改。
Those times when men had no knowledge were overlooked by God; but now he gives orders to all men in every place to undergo a change of heart:

因为他已经定了日子，要借着他所设立的人，按公义审判天下。并且叫他从死里复活，给万人作可信的凭据。
Because a day has been fixed in which all the world will be judged in righteousness by the man who has been marked out by him for this work; of which he has given a sign to all men by giving him back from the dead.

众人听见从死里复活的话，就有讥诮他的，又有人说，我们再听你讲这个吧。
Now on hearing about the coming back from death, some of them made sport of it, but others said, Let us go more fully into this another time.

于是保罗从他们当中出去了。
And so Paul went away from among them.

但有几个人贴近他，信了主，其中有亚略巴古的官丢尼修，并一个妇人，名叫大马哩，还有别人一同信从。
But some men gave him their support: among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

这事以后，保罗离了雅典，来到哥林多。
After these things, he went away from Athens, and came to Corinth.

遇见一个犹太人，名叫亚居拉，他生在本都。因为革老丢命犹太人都离开罗马，新近带着妻百基拉，从义大利来。保罗就投奔了他们。
And there he came across a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by birth, who not long before had come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had given orders that all Jews were to go away from Rome: and he came to them;

他们本是制造帐棚为业。保罗因与他们同业，就和他们同住作工。
And because he was of the same trade, he was living with them, and they did their work together; for by trade they were tent-makers.

每逢安息日，保罗在会堂里辩论，劝化犹太人和希利尼人。
And every Sabbath he had discussions in the Synagogue, turning Jews and Greeks to the faith.

西拉和提摩太从马其顿来的时候，保罗为道迫切，向犹太人证明耶稣是基督。
And when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was completely given up to the word, preaching to the Jews that the Christ was Jesus.

他们既抗拒，毁谤，保罗就抖着衣裳说，你们的罪归到你们自己头上，（罪原文作血）与我无干，（原文作我却干净）从今以后，我要往外邦人那里去，
And when they put themselves against him, and said evil words, he said, shaking his clothing, Your blood be on your heads, I am clean: from now I will go to the Gentiles.

于是离开那里，到了一个人的家中，这人名叫提多犹士都，是敬拜神的，他的家靠近会堂。
And moving from there, he went into the house of a man named Titus Justus, a God-fearing man, whose house was very near the Synagogue.

管会堂的基利司布和全家都信了主。还有许多哥林多人听了，就相信受洗。
And Crispus, the ruler of the Synagogue, with all his family, had faith in the Lord; and a great number of the people of Corinth, hearing the word, had faith and were given baptism.

夜间主在异象中对保罗说，不要怕，只管讲，不要闭口。
And the Lord said to Paul in the night, in a vision, Have no fear and go on preaching:

有我与你同在，必没有人下手害你。因为在这城里我有许多的百姓。
For I am with you, and no one will make an attack on you to do you damage: for I have a number of people in this town.

保罗在那里住了一年零六个月，将神的道教训他们。
And he was there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.

到迦流作亚该亚方伯的时候，犹太人同心起来攻击保罗，拉他到公堂，
But when Gallio was ruler of Achaia, all the Jews together made an attack on Paul, and took him to the judge's seat,

说，这个人劝人不按着律法敬拜神。
Saying, This man is teaching the people to give worship to God in a way which is against the law.

保罗刚要开口，迦流就对犹太人说，你们这些犹太人，如果是为冤枉，或奸恶的事，我理当耐性听你们。
But when Paul was about to say something, Gallio said to the Jews, If this was anything to do with wrongdoing or crime, there would be a reason for me to give you a hearing:

但所争论的，若是关乎言语，名目，和你们的律法，你们自己去办吧。这样的事我不愿意审问。
But if it is a question of words or names or of your law, see to it yourselves; I will not be a judge of such things.

就把他们撵出公堂。
And he sent them away from the judge's seat.

众人便揪住管会堂的所提尼，在堂前打他。这些事迦流都不管。
And they all made an attack on Sosthenes, the ruler of the Synagogue, and gave him blows before the judge's seat; but Gallio gave no attention to these things.

保罗又住了多日，就辞别了弟兄，坐船往叙利亚去，百基拉，亚居拉和他同去。他因为许过愿，就在坚革哩剪了头发。
And Paul, after waiting some days, went away from the brothers and went by ship to Syria, Priscilla and Aquila being with him; and he had had his hair cut off in Cenchrea, for he had taken an oath.

到了以弗所，保罗就把他们留在那里，自己进了会堂，和犹太人辩论。
And they came down to Ephesus and he left them there: and he himself went into the Synagogue and had a discussion with the Jews.

众人请他多住些日子，他却不允。
And being requested by them to be there for a longer time, he said, No;

就辞别他们说，神若许我，我还要回到你们这里。于是开船离了以弗所。
And went from them, saying, I will come back to you if God lets me; and he took ship from Ephesus.

在该撒利亚下了船，就上耶路撒冷去问教会安，随后下安提阿去。
And when he had come to land at Caesarea, he went to see the church, and then went down to Antioch.

住了些日子，又离开那里，挨次经过加拉太和弗吕家地方，坚固众门徒。
And having been there for some time, he went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, making the disciples strong in the faith.

有一个犹太人，名叫亚波罗，来到以弗所。他生在亚力山太，是有学问的，最能讲解圣经。（学问或作口才）。
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, and a man of learning, came to Ephesus; and he had great knowledge of the holy Writings.

这人已经在主的道上受了教训，心里火热，将耶稣的事，详细讲论教训人。只是他单晓得约翰的洗礼。
This man had been trained in the way of the Lord; and burning in spirit, he gave himself up to teaching the facts about Jesus, though he had knowledge only of John's baptism:

他在会堂里放胆讲道，百基拉，亚居拉听见，就接他来，将神的道给他讲解更加详细。
And he was preaching in the Synagogue without fear. But Priscilla and Aquila, hearing his words, took him in, and gave him fuller teaching about the way of God.

他想要往亚该亚去。弟兄们就勉励他，并写信请门徒接待他。（或作弟兄们就写信劝门徒接待他）他到了那里，多帮助那蒙恩信主的人。
And when he had a desire to go over into Achaia, the brothers gave him help, and sent letters to the disciples requesting them to take him in among them: and when he had come, he gave much help to those who had faith through grace:

在众人面前极有能力，驳倒犹太人，引圣经证明耶稣是基督。
For he overcame the Jews in public discussion, making clear from the holy Writings that the Christ was Jesus.

亚波罗在哥林多的时候，保罗经过了上边一带地方，就来到以弗所。在那里遇见几个门徒。
And it came about that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having gone through the higher country, came to Ephesus, where there were certain disciples:

问他们说，你们信的时候，受了圣灵没有。他们回答说，没有，也未曾听见有圣灵赐下来
And he said to them, Did you get the Holy Spirit when you had faith? And they said to him, No, we have had no knowledge of the Holy Spirit.

保罗说，这样，你们受的是什么洗呢？他们说，是约翰的洗。
And he said, What sort of baptism did you have? And they said, The baptism of John.

保罗说，约翰所行的是悔改的洗，告诉百姓，当信那在他以后要来的，就是耶稣。
And Paul said, John gave a baptism which goes with a change of heart, saying to the people that they were to have faith in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus.

他们听见这话，就奉主耶稣的名受洗。
And hearing this, they had baptism in the name of the Lord Jesus.

保罗按手在他们头上，圣灵便降在他们身上。他们就说方言，又说预言。（或作又讲道）。
And when Paul had put his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them; and they had the power of talking in tongues, and acting like prophets.

一共约有十二个人。
And there were about twelve of these men.

保罗进会堂，放胆讲道，一连三个月，辩论神国的事，劝化众人。
And he went into the Synagogue, and for three months he was preaching there without fear, reasoning and teaching about the kingdom of God.

后来有些人，心里刚硬不信，在众人面前毁谤这道，保罗就离开他们，也叫门徒与他们分离，便在推喇奴的学房，天天辩论。
But because some of the people were hard-hearted and would not give hearing, saying evil words about the Way before the people, he went away from them, and kept the disciples separate, reasoning every day in the school of Tyrannus.

这样有两年之久，叫一切住在亚西亚的，无论是犹太人，是希利尼人，都听见主的道。
And this went on for two years, so that all those who were living in Asia had knowledge of the word of the Lord, Greeks as well as Jews.

神借保罗的手，行了些非常的奇事。
And God did special works of power by the hands of Paul:

甚至有人从保罗身上拿手巾，或围裙，放在病人身上，病就退了，恶鬼也出去了。
So that bits of linen and clothing from his body were taken to people who were ill, and their diseases went away from them and the evil spirits went out.

那时，有几个游行各处，念咒赶鬼的犹太人，向那被恶鬼附的人，擅自称主耶稣的名，说，我奉保罗所传的耶稣，敕令你们出来。
But some of the Jews who went from place to place driving out evil spirits, took it on themselves to make use of the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, I give you orders, by Jesus, whom Paul is preaching.

作这事的，有犹太祭司长士基瓦的七个儿子。
And there were seven sons of a man named Sceva, a Jew and a chief priest, who did this.

恶鬼回答他们说，耶稣我认识，保罗我也知道。你们却是谁呢？
And the evil spirit, answering, said to them, I have knowledge of Jesus, and of Paul, but who are you?

恶鬼所附的人，就跳在他们身上，胜了其中二人，制伏他们，叫他们赤着身子受了伤，从那房子里逃出去了。
And the man in whom the evil spirit was, jumping on them, was stronger than the two of them, and overcame them, so that they went running from that house, wounded and without their clothing.

凡住在以弗所的，无论是犹太人，是希利尼人，都知道这事，也都惧怕，主耶稣的名从此就尊大了。
And this came to the ears of all those, Jews and Greeks, who were living at Ephesus; and fear came on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was made great.

那已经信的，多有人来承认诉说自己所行的事。
And a number of those who had faith came and made a public statement of their sins and all their acts.

平素行邪术的，也有许多人把书拿来，堆积在众人面前焚烧。他们算计书价，便知道共合五万块钱。
And a great number of those who were experts in strange arts took their books and put them on the fire in front of everyone: and when the books were valued they came to fifty thousand bits of silver.

主的道大大兴旺而且得胜，就是这样。
So the word of the Lord was increased very greatly and was full of power.

这些事完了，保罗心里定意，经过了马其顿，亚该亚就往耶路撒冷去，又说，我到了那里以后，也必须往罗马去看看。
Now after these things were ended, Paul came to a decision that when he had gone through Macedonia and Achaia he would go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I have a desire to see Rome.

于是从帮助他的人中，打发提摩太，以拉都二人，往马其顿去。自己暂时等在亚西亚。
And having sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, into Macedonia, he himself went on living in Asia for a time.

那时，因为这道起的扰乱不小。
And about that time a great outcry took place about the Way.

有一个银匠，名叫底米丢，是制造亚底米神银龛的，他使这样手艺人生意发达。
For there was a certain man named Demetrius, a silver-worker, who made silver boxes for the images of Diana, and gave no small profit to the workmen;

他聚集他们和同行的工人，说，众位，你们知道我们是倚靠这生意发财。
Whom he got together, with other workmen of the same trade, and said to them, Men, it is clear that from this business we get our wealth.

这保罗不但在以弗所，也几乎在亚西亚全地，引诱迷惑许多人，说，人手所作的不是神，这是你们所看见所听见的。
And you see, for it has come to your ears, that not only at Ephesus, but almost all through Asia, this Paul has been teaching numbers of people and turning them away, saying that those are not gods who are made by men's hands:

这样，不独我们这事业，被人藐视，就是大女神亚底米的庙，也要被人轻忽，连亚西亚全地，和普天下，所敬拜的大女神之威荣，也要消灭了。
And there is danger, not only that our trade may be damaged in the opinion of men, but that the holy place of the great goddess Diana may be no longer honoured, and that she to whom all Asia and the world give worship, will be put down from her high position.

众人听见，就怒气填胸，喊着说，大哉以弗所人的亚底米阿。
And hearing this, they were very angry, crying out and saying, Great is Diana of Ephesus.

满城都轰动起来。众人拿住与保罗同行的马其顿人该犹和亚里达古，齐心拥进戏园里去。
And the town was full of noise and trouble, and they all came running into the theatre, having taken by force Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia who were journeying in company with Paul.

保罗想要进去，到百姓那里，门徒却不许他去。
And when Paul was about to go in to the people, the disciples did not let him.

还有亚西亚几位首领，是保罗的朋友，打发人来劝他，不要冒险到戏园里去。
And some of the rulers of Asia, being his friends, sent to him, requesting him seriously not to put himself in danger by going into the theatre.

聚集的人，纷纷乱乱，有喊叫这个的，有喊叫那个的，大半不知道是为什么聚集。
And some said one thing, and some another: for there was no order in the meeting; and most of them had no idea why they had come together.

有人把亚力山大从众人中带出来，犹太人推他往前，亚力山大就摆手，要向百姓分诉。
Then they took Alexander out from among the people, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander, making a sign with his hand, was about to make a statement to the people in answer:

只因他们认出他是犹太人，就大家同声喊着说，大哉以弗所人的亚底米阿。如此约有两小时
But when they saw that he was a Jew, all of them with one voice went on crying out for about two hours, Great is Diana of Ephesus.

那城里的书记，安抚了众人，就说，以弗所人哪，谁不知道以弗所人的城，是看守大亚底米的庙，和从丢斯那里落下来的像呢？
And when the chief secretary had got the people quiet, he said, Men of Ephesus, is any man without knowledge that the town of Ephesus is the keeper of the holy place of the great Diana, who was sent down from Jupiter?

这事既是驳不倒的，你们就当安静，不可造次。
So then, because these things may not be doubted, it would be better for you to be quiet, and do nothing unwise.

你们把这些人带来，他们并没有偷窃庙中之物，也没有谤？？我们的女神。
For you have taken these men, who are not doing damage to the holy place or talking against our goddess.

若是底米丢和他同行的人，有控告人的事，自有放告的日子。（或作自有公堂）也有方伯，可以彼此对告。
If, then, Demetrius and the workmen who are with him have a protest to make against any man, the law is open to them, and there are judges; let them put up a cause at law against one another.

你们若问别的事，就可以照常例聚集断定。
But if any other business is in question, let it be taken up in the regular meeting.

今日的扰乱，本是无缘无故，我们难免被查问。论到这样聚众，我们也说不出所以然来。
For, truly, we are in danger of being made responsible for this day's trouble, there being no cause for it: and we are not able to give any reason for this coming together.

说了这话，便叫众人散去。
And when he had said this, he sent the meeting away.

乱定之后，保罗请门徒来，劝勉他们，就辞别起行，往马其顿去。
And after the noise had come to an end, Paul, having sent for the disciples and given them comfort, went away from them to Macedonia.

走遍了那一带地方，用许多话劝勉门徒，（或作众人）然后来到希腊。
And when he had gone through those parts and given them much teaching, he came into Greece.

在那里住了三个月，将要坐船往叙利亚去。犹太人设计要害他，他就定意从马其顿回去。
And when he had been there three months, because the Jews had made a secret design against him when he was about to take ship for Syria, he made a decision to go back through Macedonia.

同他到亚西亚去的，有庇哩亚人毕罗斯的儿子所巴特，帖撒罗尼迦人亚里达古，和西公都，还有特庇人该犹，并提摩太，又有亚西亚人推基古，和特罗非摩。
And Sopater of Beroea, the son of Pyrrhus, and Aristarchus and Secundus of Thessalonica, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia, went with him as far as Asia.

这些人先走在特罗亚等候我们。
But these had gone before, and were waiting for us at Troas.

过了除酵的日子，我们从腓立比开船，五天到了特罗亚，和他们相会，在那里住了七天。
And we went away from Philippi by ship after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas in five days; and we were there for seven days.

七日的第一日，我们聚会掰饼的时候，保罗因为要次日起行，就与他们讲论，直讲到半夜。
And on the first day of the week, when we had come together for the holy meal, Paul gave them a talk, for it was his purpose to go away on the day after; and he went on talking till after the middle of the night.

我们聚会的那座楼上，有好些灯烛。
And there were a number of lights in the room where we had come together.

有一个少年人，名叫犹推古，坐在窗台上，困倦沉睡。保罗讲了多时，少年人睡熟了，就从三层楼上掉下去。扶起他来，已经死了。
And a certain young man named Eutychus, who was seated in the window, went into a deep sleep; and while Paul went on talking, being overcome by sleep, he had a fall from the third floor, and was taken up dead.

保罗下去，伏在他身上，抱着他，说，你们不要发慌，他的灵魂还在身上。
And Paul went down and, falling on him, took him in his arms and said, Do not be troubled, for his life is in him.

保罗又上去，掰饼，吃了，谈论许久，直到天亮，这才走了。
And when he had gone up, and had taken the broken bread, he went on talking to them for a long time, even till dawn, and then he went away.

有人把那童子活活地领来，得的安慰不小。
And they took the boy in, living, and were greatly comforted.

我们先上船开往亚朔去，意思要在那里接保罗。因为他是这样安排的，他自己打算要步行。
But we, going before him by ship, went to Assos with the purpose of taking Paul in there: for so he had given orders, because he himself was coming by land.

他既在亚朔与我们相会，我们就接他上船，来到米推利尼。
And when he came up with us at Assos, we took him in the ship and went on to Mitylene.

从那里开船，次日到了基阿的对面。又次日，在撒摩靠岸。又次日，来到米利都。
And going from there by sea, we came on the day after opposite Chios, and touching at Samos on the day after that, we came on the third day to Miletus.

乃因保罗早已定意越过以弗所，免得在亚西亚耽延。他急忙前走，巴不得赶五旬节能到耶路撒冷。
For Paul's purpose was to go past Ephesus, so that he might not be kept in Asia; for he was going quickly, in order, if possible, to be at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.

保罗从米利都打发人往以弗所去，请教会的长老来。
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus for the rulers of the church.

他们来了，保罗就说，你们知道，自从我到亚西亚的日子以来，在你们中间始终为人如何，
And when they had come, he said to them, You yourselves have seen what my life has been like all the time from the day when I first came into Asia,

服事主，凡事谦卑，眼中流泪，又因犹太人的谋害，经历试炼。
Doing the Lord's work without pride, through all the sorrow and troubles which came on me because of the evil designs of the Jews:

你们也知道，凡与你们有益的，我没有一样避讳不说的。或在众人面前，或在各人家里，我都教导你们。
And how I kept back nothing which might be of profit to you, teaching you publicly and privately,

又对犹太人，和希利尼人，证明当向神悔改，信靠我主耶稣基督。
Preaching to Jews and to Greeks the need for a turning of the heart to God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

现在我往耶路撒冷去，心甚迫切，（原文作心被捆绑）不知道在那里要遇见什么事。
And now, as you see, I am going to Jerusalem, a prisoner in spirit, having no knowledge of what will come to me there:

但知道圣灵在各城里向我指证，说，有捆锁与患难等待我。
Only that the Holy Spirit makes clear to me in every town that prison and pains are waiting for me.

我却不以性命为念，也不看为宝贵，只要行完我的路程，成就我从主耶稣所领受的职事，证明神恩惠的福音。
But I put no value on my life, if only at the end of it I may see the work complete which was given to me by the Lord Jesus, to be a witness of the good news of the grace of God.

我素常在你们中间来往，传讲神国的道，如今我晓得你们以后都不得再见我的面了。
And now I am conscious that you, among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom, will not see my face again.

所以我今日向你们证明，你们中间无论何人死亡，罪不在我身上。（原文作我于众人的血是洁净的）。
And so I say to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men.

因为神的旨意，我并没有一样避讳不传给你们的。
For I have not kept back from you anything of the purpose of God.

圣灵立你们作全群的监督，你们就当为自己谨慎，也为全群谨慎，牧养神的教会，就是他用自己血所买来的（或作救赎的）。
Give attention to yourselves, and to all the flock which the Holy Spirit has given into your care, to give food to the church of God, for which he gave his blood.

我知道我去之后，必有凶暴的豺狼，进入你们中间，不爱惜羊群。
I am conscious that after I am gone, evil wolves will come in among you, doing damage to the flock;

就是你们中间，也必有人起来，说悖谬的话，要引诱门徒跟从他们。
And from among yourselves will come men who will give wrong teaching, turning away the disciples after them.

所以你们应当儆醒，记念我三年之久，昼夜不住地流泪，劝戒你们各人。
So keep watch, having in mind that for three years without resting I was teaching every one of you, day and night, with weeping.

如今我把你们交托神，和他恩惠的道。这道能建立你们，叫你们和一切成圣的人同得基业。
And now, I give you into the care of God and the word of his grace, which is able to make you strong and to give you your heritage among all the saints.

我未曾贪图一个人的金，银，衣服。
I have had no desire for any man's silver or gold or clothing.

我这两只手，常供给我和同人的需用，这是你们自己知道的。
You yourselves have seen that with these hands I got what was necessary for me and those who were with me.

我凡事给你们作榜样，叫你们知道，应当这样劳苦，扶助软弱的人，又当记念主耶稣的话，说，施比受更为有福。
In all things I was an example to you of how, in your lives, you are to give help to the feeble, and keep in memory the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, There is a greater blessing in giving than in getting.

保罗说完了这话，就跪下同众人祷告。
And having said these words, he went down on his knees in prayer with them all.

众人痛哭，抱着保罗的颈项，和他亲嘴。
And they were all weeping, falling on Paul's neck and kissing him,

叫他们最伤心的，就是他说，以后不能再见我的面那句话。于是送他上船去了。
Being sad most of all because he had said that they would not see his face again. And so they went with him to the ship.

我们离别了众人，就开船一直行到哥士。第二天到了罗底，从那里到帕大喇。
And after parting from them, we put out to sea and came straight to Cos, and the day after to Rhodes, and from there to Patara:

遇见一只船，要往腓尼基去，就上船起行。
And as there was a ship going to Phoenicia, we went in it.

望见居比路，就从南边行过，往叙利亚去，我们就在推罗上岸。因为船要在那里卸货。
And when we had come in view of Cyprus, going past it on our left, we went on to Syria, and came to land at Tyre: for there the goods which were in the ship had to be taken out.

找着了门徒，就在那里住了七天。他们被圣灵感动，对保罗说，不要上耶路撒冷去。
And meeting the disciples we were there for seven days: and they gave Paul orders through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem.

过了这几天，我们就起身前行。他们众人同妻子儿女，送我们到城外，我们都跪在岸上祷告，彼此辞别。
And when these days came to an end, we went on our journey; and they all, with their wives and children, came with us on our way till we were out of the town: and after going on our knees in prayer by the sea,

我们上了船，他们就回家去了。
We said our last words to one another, and got into the ship, and they went back to their houses.

我们从推罗行尽了水路，来到多利买，就问那里的弟兄安，和他们同住了一天。
And journeying by ship from Tyre we came to Ptolemais; and there we had talk with the brothers and were with them for one day.

第二天，我们离开那里，来到该撒利亚。就进了传福音的腓利家里，和他同住。他是那七个执事里的一个。
And on the day after, we went away and came to Caesarea, where we were guests in the house of Philip, the preacher, who was one of the seven.

他有四个女儿，都是处女，是说预言的。
And he had four daughters, virgins, who were prophets.

我们在那里多住了几天，有一个先知，名叫亚迦布，从犹太下来。
And while we were waiting there for some days, a certain prophet, named Agabus, came down from Judaea.

到了我们这里，就拿保罗的腰带，捆上自己的手脚，说，圣灵说，犹太人在耶路撒冷，要如此捆绑这腰带的主人，把他交在外邦人手里。
And he came to us, and took the band of Paul's clothing, and putting it round his feet and hands, said, The Holy Spirit says these words, So will the Jews do to the man who is the owner of this band, and they will give him up into the hands of the Gentiles.

我们和那本地的人，听见这话，都苦劝保罗不要上耶路撒冷去。
And hearing these things, we and those who were living in that place made request to him not to go to Jerusalem.

保罗说，你们为什么这样痛哭，使我心碎呢？我为主耶稣的名，不但被人捆绑，就是死在耶路撒冷，也是愿意的。
Then Paul said, What are you doing, weeping and wounding my heart? for I am ready, not only to be a prisoner, but to be put to death at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

保罗既不听劝，我们便住了口，只说，愿主的旨意成就便了。
And as he might not be moved we did no more, saying, Let the purpose of God be done.

过了几日，我们收拾行李上耶路撒冷去。
And after these days we got ready and went up to Jerusalem.

有该撒利亚的几个门徒和我们同去，带我们到一个久为（久为或作老）门徒的家里，叫我们与他同住，他名叫拿孙，是居比路人。
And some of the disciples from Caesarea went with us, taking a certain Mnason of Cyprus, one of the early disciples, in whose house we were to be living.

到了耶路撒冷，弟兄们欢欢喜喜地接待我们。
And when we came to Jerusalem, the brothers were pleased to see us.

第二天，保罗同我们去见雅各。长老们也都在那里。
And on the day after, Paul went with us to James, and all the rulers of the church were present.

保罗问了他们安，便将神用他传教，在外邦人中间所行之事，一一地述说了。
And when he had said how glad he was to see them, he gave them a detailed account of the things which God had done through his work among the Gentiles.

他们听见，就归荣耀与神，对保罗说，兄台，你看犹太人中信主的有多少万，并且都为律法热心。
And hearing it, they gave praise to God; and they said to him, You see, brother, what thousands there are among the Jews, who have the faith; and they all have a great respect for the law:

他们听见人说，你教训一切在外邦的犹太人，离弃摩西，对他们说，不要给孩子行割礼，也不要遵行条规。
And they have had news of you, how you have been teaching all the Jews among the Gentiles to give up the law of Moses, and not to give circumcision to their children, and not to keep the old rules.

众人必听见你来了，这可怎么办呢？
What then is the position? They will certainly get news that you have come.

你就照着我们的话行吧，我们这里有四个人，都有愿在身。
Do this, then, which we say to you: We have four men who have taken an oath;

你带他们去，与他们一同行洁净的礼，替他们拿出规费，叫他们得以剃头。这样，众人就可知道，先前所听见你的事都是虚的。并可知道，你自己为人，循规蹈矩，遵行律法。
Go with these, and make yourself clean with them, and make the necessary payments for them, so that they may be free from their oath: and everyone will see that the statements made about you are not true, but that you put yourself under rule, and keep the law.

至于信主的外邦人，我们已经写信拟定，叫他们谨忌那祭偶像之物，和血，并勒死的牲畜，与奸淫。
But as to the Gentiles who have the faith, we sent a letter, giving our decision that they were to keep themselves from offerings made to false gods, and from blood, and from the flesh of animals put to death in ways against the law, and from the evil desires of the body.

于是保罗带着那四个人，第二天与他们一同行了洁净的礼，进了殿，报明洁净的日期满足。只等祭司为他们各人献祭。
Then Paul took the men, and on the day after, making himself clean with them, he went into the Temple, giving out the statement that the days necessary for making them clean were complete, till the offering was made for every one of them.

那七日将完，从亚西亚来的犹太人，看见保罗在殿里，就耸动了众人，下手拿他，
And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews from Asia, seeing him in the Temple, got the people together and put their hands on him,

喊叫说，以色列人来帮助，这就是在各处教训众人糟践我们百姓，和律法，并这地方的。他又带着希利尼人进殿，污秽了这圣地。
Crying out, Men of Israel, come to our help: this is the man who is teaching all men everywhere against the people and the law and this place: and in addition, he has taken Greeks into the Temple, and made this holy place unclean.

这话是因他们曾看见以弗所人特罗非摩，同保罗在城里，以为保罗带他进了殿。
For they had seen him before in the town with Trophimus of Ephesus, and had the idea that Paul had taken him with him into the Temple.

合城都震动，百姓一齐跑来，拿住保罗，拉他出殿，殿门立刻都关了。
And all the town was moved, and the people came running together and put their hands on Paul, pulling him out of the Temple: and then the doors were shut.

他们正想要杀他，有人报信给营里的千夫长说，耶路撒冷合城都乱了。
And while they were attempting to put him to death, news came to the chief captain of the band that all Jerusalem was out of control.

千夫长立时带着兵丁，和几个百夫长，跑下去到他们那里。他们见了千夫长和兵丁，就止住不打保罗。
And straight away he took some armed men and went quickly down to them: and the Jews, seeing them, gave no more blows to Paul.

于是千夫长上前拿住他，吩咐用两条铁链捆锁。又问他是什么人，作的是什么事。
Then the chief captain came near and took him, and gave orders for him to be put in chains, questioning them as to who he was and what he had done.

众人有喊叫这个的，有喊叫那个的。千夫长因为这样乱嚷，得不着实情，就吩咐人将保罗带进营楼去。
And some said one thing and some another, among the people: and as he was not able to get a knowledge of the facts because of the noise, he gave orders for Paul to be taken into the army building.

到了台阶上，众人挤得凶猛，兵丁只得将保罗抬起来。
And when he came on to the steps, he was lifted up by the armed men, because of the force of the people;

众人跟在后面，喊着说，除掉他。
For a great mass of people came after them, crying out, Away with him!

将要带他进营楼，保罗对千夫长说，我对你说句话，可以不可以？他说，你懂得希利尼话吗？
And when Paul was about to be taken into the building, he said to the chief captain, May I say something to you? And he said, Have you a knowledge of Greek?

你莫非是从前作乱，带领四千凶徒，往旷野去的那埃及人吗？
Are you by chance the Egyptian who, before this, got the people worked up against the government and took four thousand men of the Assassins out into the waste land?

保罗说，我本是犹太人，生在基利家的大数，并不是无名小城的人，求你准我对百姓说话。
But Paul said, I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, which is not an unimportant town: I make a request to you to let me say a word to the people.

千夫长准了，保罗就站在台阶上，向百姓摆手，他们都静默无声，保罗便用希伯来话对他们说。
And when he let him do so, Paul, from the steps, made a sign with his hand to the people, and when they were all quiet, he said to them in the Hebrew language,

诸位父兄请听，我现在对你们分诉。
My brothers and fathers, give ear to the story of my life which I now put before you.

众人听他说的是希伯来话，就更加安静了。
And, hearing him talking in the Hebrew language, they became the more quiet, and he said,

保罗说，我原是犹太人，生在基利家的大数，长在这城里，在迦玛列门下，按着我们祖宗严紧的律法受教，热心事奉神，象你们众人今日一样。
I am a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia by birth, but I had my education in this town at the feet of Gamaliel, being trained in the keeping of every detail of the law of our fathers; given up to the cause of God with all my heart, as you are today.

我也曾逼迫奉这道的人，直到死地，无论男女都锁拿下监。
And I made attacks on this Way, even to death, taking men and women and putting them in prison.

这是大祭司和众长老都可以给我作见证的。我又领了他们达与弟兄的书信，往大马色去，要把在那里奉这道的人锁拿，带到耶路撒冷受刑。
Of which the high priest will be a witness, and all the rulers, from whom I had letters to the brothers; and I went into Damascus, to take those who were there as prisoners to Jerusalem for punishment.

我将到大马色，正走的时候，约在晌午，忽然从天上发大光，四面照着我。
And it came about that while I was on my journey, coming near to Damascus, about the middle of the day, suddenly I saw a great light from heaven shining round me.

我就仆倒在地，听见有声音对我说，扫罗，扫罗，你为什么逼迫我。
And when I went down on the earth, a voice came to my ears saying to me, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly?

我回答说，主阿，你是谁？他说，我就是你所逼迫的拿撒勒人耶稣。
And I, answering, said, Who are you; Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are attacking.

与我同行的人，看见了那光，却没有听明那位对我说话的声音。
And those who were with me saw the light, but the voice of him who was talking to me came not to their ears.

我说，主阿，我当作什么。主说，起来，进大马色去，在那里要将所派你作的一切事，告诉你。
And I said, What have I to do, Lord? And the Lord said to me, Get up, and go into Damascus; and it will be made clear to you what you have to do.

我因那光的荣耀，不能看见，同行的人，就拉着我手进了大马色。
And because I was unable to see because of the glory of that light, those who were with me took me by the hand, and so I came to Damascus.

那里有一个人，名叫亚拿尼亚，按着律法是虔诚人，为一切住在那里的犹太人所称赞。
And one Ananias, a God-fearing man, who kept the law, and of whom all the Jews in that place had a high opinion,

他来见我，站在旁边，对我说，兄弟扫罗，你可以看见。我当时往上一看，就看见了他。
Came to my side and said, Brother Saul, let your eyes be open. And in that very hour I was able to see him.

他又说，我们祖宗的神，拣选了你，叫你明白他的旨意，又得见那义者，听他口中所出的声音。
And he said, You have been marked out by the God of our fathers to have knowledge of his purpose, and to see the Upright One and to give ear to the words of his mouth.

因为你要将所看见的，所听见的，对着万人为他作见证。
For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and of what has come to your ears.

现在你为什么耽延呢？起来，求告他的名受洗，洗去你的罪。
And now, why are you waiting? get up, and have baptism, for the washing away of your sins, giving worship to his name.

后来我回到耶路撒冷，在殿里祷告的时候，魂游象外，
And it came about that when I had come back to Jerusalem, while I was at prayer in the Temple, my senses became more than naturally clear,

看见主向我说，你赶紧的离开耶路撒冷，不可迟延，因你为我作的见证，这里的人，必不领受。
And I saw him saying to me, Go out of Jerusalem straight away because they will not give hearing to your witness about me.

我就说，主阿，他们知道我从前把信你的人，收在监里，又在各会堂里鞭打他们。
And I said, Lord, they themselves have knowledge that I went through the Synagogues putting in prison and whipping all those who had faith in you:

并且你的见证人司提反，被害流血的时候，我也站在旁边欢喜。又看守害死他之人的衣裳。
And when Stephen your witness was put to death, I was there, giving approval, and looking after the clothing of those who put him to death.

主向我说，你去吧。我要差你远远地往外邦人那里去。
And he said to me, Go, for I will send you far away to the Gentiles.

众人听他说到这句话，就高声说，这样的人，从世上除掉他吧。他是不当活着的。
And they gave him a hearing as far as this word; then with loud voices they said, Away with this man from the earth; it is not right for him to be living.

众人喧嚷，摔掉衣裳，把尘土向空中扬起来。
And while they were crying out, and pulling off their clothing, and sending dust into the air,

千夫长就吩咐将保罗带进营楼去，叫人用鞭子拷问他，要知道他们向他这样喧嚷，是为什么缘故。
The chief captain gave orders for him to be taken into the army building, saying that he would put him to the test by whipping, so that he might have knowledge of the reason why they were crying out so violently against him.

刚用皮条捆上，保罗对旁边站着的百夫长说，人是罗马人，又没有定罪，你们就鞭打他，有这个例吗？
And when they had put leather bands round him, Paul said to the captain who was present, Is it the law for you to give blows to a man who is a Roman and has not been judged?

百夫长听见这话，就去见千夫长，告诉他说，你要作什么？这人是罗马人。
And hearing this, the man went to the chief captain and gave him an account of it, saying, What are you about to do? for this man is a Roman.

千夫长就来问保罗说，你告诉我，你是罗马人吗？保罗说，是。
And the chief captain came to him and said, Give me an answer, are you a Roman? And he said, Yes.

千夫长说，我用许多银子，才入了罗马的民籍。保罗说，我生来就是。
And the chief captain said, I got Roman rights for myself at a great price. And Paul said, But I had them by birth.

于是那些要拷问保罗的人，就离开他去了。千夫长既知道他是罗马人，又因为捆绑了他，也害怕了。
Then those who were about to put him to the test went away: and the chief captain was in fear, seeing that he was a Roman, and that he had put chains on him.

第二天，千夫长为要知道犹太人控告保罗的实情，便解开他，吩咐祭司长和全公会的人，都聚集，将保罗带下来，叫他站在他们面前。
But on the day after, desiring to have certain knowledge of what the Jews had to say against him, he made him free, and gave orders for the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to come together, and he took Paul and put him before them.

保罗定睛看着公会的人，说，弟兄们，我在神面前行事为人，都是凭着良心，直到今日。
And Paul, looking fixedly at the Sanhedrin, said, My brothers, my life has been upright before God till this day.

大祭司亚拿尼亚，就吩咐旁边站着的人打他的嘴。
And the high priest, Ananias, gave orders to those who were near him to give him a blow on the mouth.

保罗对他说，你这粉饰的墙。神要打你。你坐堂为的是按律法审问我，你竟违背律法，吩咐人打我吗？
Then Paul said to him, God will give blows to you, you whitewashed wall: are you here to be my judge by law, and by your orders am I given blows against the law?

站在旁边的人说，你辱骂神的大祭司吗？
And those who were near said, Do you say such words against God's high priest?

保罗说，弟兄们，我不晓得他是大祭司。经上记着说，不可毁谤你百姓的官长。
And Paul said, Brother, I had no idea that he was the high priest: for it has been said, You may not say evil about the ruler of your people.

保罗看出大众，一半是撒都该人，一半是法利赛人，就在公会中大声说，弟兄们，我是法利赛人，也是法利赛人的子孙。我现在受审问，是为盼望死人复活。
But when Paul saw that half of them were Sadducees and the rest Pharisees, he said in the Sanhedrin, Brothers, I am a Pharisee, and the son of Pharisees: I am here to be judged on the question of the hope of the coming back from the dead.

说了这话，法利赛人和撒都该人，就争论起来，会众分为两党。
And when he had said this, there was an argument between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and a division in the meeting.

因为撒都该人说，没有复活，也没有天使，和鬼魂，法利赛人却说，两样都有。
For the Sadducees say that there is no coming back from the dead, and no angels or spirits: but the Pharisees have belief in all these.

于是大大地喧嚷起来。有几个法利赛党的文士站起来，争辩说，我们看不出这人有什么恶处，倘若有鬼魂，或是天使，对他说过话，怎么样呢？
And there was a great outcry: and some of the scribes on the side of the Pharisees got up and took part in the discussion, saying, We see no evil in this man: what if he has had a revelation from an angel or a spirit?

那时大起争吵，千夫长恐怕保罗被他们扯碎了，就吩咐兵丁下去，把他从众人当中抢出来，带进营楼去。
And when the argument became very violent, the chief captain, fearing that Paul would be pulled in two by them, gave orders to the armed men to take him by force from among them, and take him into the army building.

当夜，主站在保罗旁边说，放心吧，你怎样在耶路撒冷为我作见证，也必怎样在罗马为我作见证。
And the night after, the Lord came to his side and said, Be of good heart, for as you have been witnessing for me in Jerusalem, so will you be my witness in Rome.

到了天亮，犹太人同谋起誓，说，若不先杀保罗，就不吃不喝。
And when it was day, the Jews came together and put themselves under an oath that they would take no food or drink till they had put Paul to death.

这样同心起誓的，有四十多人。
And more than forty of them took this oath.

他们来见祭司长和长老说，我们已经起了一个大誓，若不先杀保罗，就不吃什么。
And they came to the chief priests and the rulers and said, We have taken a great oath to take no food till we have put Paul to death

现在你们和公会要知会千夫长，叫他带下保罗到你们这里来，假作要详细察考他的事。我们已经预备好了，不等他来到跟前就杀他。
So now, will you and the Sanhedrin make a request to the military authorities to have him sent down to you, as if you were desiring to go into the business in greater detail; and we, before ever he gets to you, will be waiting to put him to death.

保罗的外甥，听见他们设下埋伏，就来到营楼里告诉保罗。
But Paul's sister's son had word of their design, and he came into the army building and gave news of it to Paul.

保罗请一个百夫长来，说，你领这少年人去见千夫长，他有事告诉他。
And Paul sent for a captain and said, Take this young man to your chief, for he has news for him.

于是把他领去见千夫长说，被囚的保罗请我到他那里，求我领这少年人来见你。他有事告诉你。
So he took him to the chief captain and said, Paul, the prisoner, made a request to me to take this young man to you, for he has something to say to you.

千夫长就拉着他的手，走到一旁，私下问他说，你有什么事告诉我呢？
And the chief took him by the hand and, going on one side, said to him privately, What is it you have to say to me?

他说，犹太人已经约定，要求你明天带下保罗到公会里去，假作要详细查问他的事。
And he said, The Jews are in agreement together to make a request to you for Paul to be taken, on the day after this, into the Sanhedrin, to be questioned in greater detail.

你切不要随从他们，因为他们有四十多人埋伏，已经起誓，说，若不先杀保罗，就不吃不喝。现在预备好了，只等你应允。
But do not give way to them, for more than forty of them are waiting for him, having taken an oath not to take food or drink till they have put him to death: and now they are ready, waiting for your order.

于是千夫长打发少年人走，嘱咐他说，不要告诉人你将这事报给我了。
So the chief captain let the young man go, saying to him, Do not say to anyone that you have given me word of these things.

千夫长便叫了两个百夫长来，说，预备步兵二百，马兵七十，长枪手二百，今夜亥初往该撒利亚去。
And he sent for two captains and said, Make ready two hundred men, with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, to go to Caesarea, at the third hour of the night:

也要预备牲口叫保罗骑上，护送到巡抚腓力斯那里去。
And get beasts so that they may put Paul on them, and take him safely to Felix, the ruler.

千夫长又写了文书，
And he sent a letter in these words:

大略说，革老丢吕西亚，请巡抚腓力斯大人安。
Claudius Lysias, to the most noble ruler, Felix, peace be with you.

这人被犹太人拿住，将要杀害，我得知他是罗马人，就带兵丁下去救他出来。
This man was taken by the Jews, and was about to be put to death by them, when I came on them with the army and took him out of danger, having knowledge that he was a Roman.

因要知道他们告他的缘故，我就带他下到他们的公会去。
And, desiring to get at the reason for their attack on him, I took him down to their Sanhedrin:

便查知他被告，是因他们律法的辩论，并没有什么该死该绑的罪名。
Then it became clear to me that it was a question of their law, and that nothing was said against him which might be a reason for prison or death.

后来有人把要害他的计谋告诉我，我就立时解他到你那里去，又吩咐告他的人，在你面前告他。（有古卷在此有愿你平安）
And when news was given to me that a secret design was being made against the man, I sent him straight away to you, giving orders to those who are against him to make their statements before you.

于是兵丁照所吩咐他们的，将保罗夜里带到安提帕底。
So the armed men, as they were ordered, took Paul and came by night to Antipatris.

第二天，让马兵护送，他们就回营楼去。
But on the day after, they sent the horsemen on with him, and went back to their place:

马兵来到该撒利亚，把文书呈给巡抚，便叫保罗站在他面前。
And they, when they came to Caesarea, gave the letter to the ruler, and took Paul before him.

巡抚看了文书，问保罗是那省的人，既晓得他是基利家人，
And after reading it, he said, What part of the country do you come from? And, hearing that he was from Cilicia,

就说，等告你的人来到，我要细听你的事，便吩咐人把他看守在希律的衙门里。
I will give hearing to your cause, he said, when those who are against you have come. And he gave orders for him to be kept in Herod's Praetorium.

过了五天，大祭司亚拿尼亚，同几个长老，和一个辩士帖土罗，下来，向巡抚控告保罗。
And after five days, the high priest, Ananias, came with certain of the rulers, and an expert talker, one Tertullus; and they made a statement to Felix against Paul.

保罗被提了来，帖土罗就告他说，
And when he had been sent for, Tertullus, starting his statement, said, Because by you we are living in peace, and through your wisdom wrongs are put right for this nation,

腓力斯大人，我们因你得以大享太平，并且这一国的弊病，因着你的先见，得以更正了。我们随时随地，满心感谢不尽。
In all things and in all places we are conscious of our great debt to you, most noble Felix.

惟恐多说，你嫌烦絮，只求你宽容听我们说几句话。
But, so that I may not make you tired, I make a request to you of your mercy, to give hearing to a short statement.

我们看这个人，如同瘟疫一般，是鼓动普天下众犹太人生乱的，又是拿撒勒教党里的一个头目。
For this man, in our opinion, is a cause of trouble, a maker of attacks on the government among Jews through all the empire, and a chief mover in the society of the Nazarenes:

连圣殿他也想要污秽。我们把他捉住了。（有古卷在此有要按我们的律法审问。
Who, in addition, was attempting to make the Temple unclean: whom we took,

不料千夫长吕西亚前来甚是强横从我们手中把他夺去，吩咐告他的人到你这里来）。
[]

你自己究问他，就可以知道我们告他的一切事了。
And from whom you will be able, by questioning him yourself, to get knowledge of all the things which we say against him.

众犹太人也随着告他说，事情诚然是这样。
And the Jews were in agreement with his statement, saying that these things were so.

巡抚点头叫保罗说话，他就说，我知道你在这国里断事多年，所以我乐意为自己分诉。
Then when the ruler had given him a sign to make his answer, Paul said, Because I have knowledge that you have been a judge over this nation for a number of years, I am glad to make my answer:

你查问就可以知道，从我上耶路撒冷礼拜，到今日，不过有十二天。
Seeing that you are able to make certain of the fact that it is not more than twelve days from the time when I came up to Jerusalem for worship;

他们并没有看见我在殿里，或是在会堂里，或是在城里，和人辩论，耸动众人。
And they have not seen me in argument with any man in the Temple, or working up the feelings of the people, in the Synagogues or in the town:

他们现在所告我的事，并不能对你证实了。
And they are not able to give facts in support of the things which they say against me now.

但有一件事，我向你承认，就是他们所称为异端的道，我正按着那道事奉我祖宗的神，又信合乎律法的，和先知书上一切所记载的。
But this I will say openly to you, that I do give worship to the God of our fathers after that Way, which to them is not the true religion: but I have belief in all the things which are in the law and in the books of the prophets:

并且靠着神，盼望死人，无论善恶，都要复活，就是他们自己也有这个盼望。
Hoping in God for that which they themselves are looking for, that there will be a coming back from the dead for upright men and wrongdoers.

我因此自己勉励，对神，对人，常存无亏的良心。
And in this, I do my best at all times to have no reason for shame before God or men.

过了几年，我带着周济本国的捐项和供献的物上去。
Now after a number of years I came to give help and offerings to my nation:

正献的时候，他们看见我在殿里已经洁净了，并没有聚众，也没有吵嚷。惟有几个从亚西亚来的犹太人。
And having been made clean, I was in the Temple, but not with a great number of people, and not with noise: but there were certain Jews from Asia,

他们若有告我的事，就应当到你面前来告我。
And it would have been better if they had come here to make a statement, if they have anything against me.

即或不然，这些人，若看出我站在公会前，有妄为的地方，他们自己也可以说明。
Or let these men here present say what wrongdoing was seen in me when I was before the Sanhedrin,

纵然有，也不过一句话，就是我站在他们中间大声说，我今日在你们面前受审，是为死人复活的道理
But only this one thing which I said among them in a loud voice, I am this day being judged on the question of the coming back from the dead.

腓力斯本是详细晓得这道，就支吾他们说，且等千夫长吕西亚下来，我要审断你们的事。
But Felix, who had a more detailed knowledge of the Way, put them off, saying, When Lysias, the chief captain, comes down, I will give attention to your business.

于是吩咐百夫长看守保罗并且宽待他，也不拦阻他的亲友来供给他。
And he gave orders to the captain to keep Paul under his control, and to let him have everything he had need of; and not to keep his friends from coming to see him.

过了几天，腓力斯和他夫人犹太的女子土西拉，一同来到，就叫了保罗来，听他讲论信基督耶稣的道。
But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla his wife, who was of the Jews by birth, and sent for Paul, and gave hearing to him about faith in Christ Jesus.

保罗讲论公义，节制，和将来的审判，腓力斯甚觉恐惧，说，你暂且去吧，等我得便再叫你来。
And while he was talking about righteousness and self-control and the judging which was to come, Felix had great fear and said, Go away for the present, and when the right time comes I will send for you.

腓力斯又指望保罗送他银钱，所以屡次叫他来，和他谈论。
For he was hoping that Paul would give him money: so he sent for him more frequently and had talk with him.

过了两年，波求非斯都接了腓力斯的任，腓力斯要讨犹太人的喜欢，就留保罗在监里。
But after two years Porcius Festus took the place of Felix, who, desiring to have the approval of the Jews, kept Paul in chains.

非斯都到了任，过了三天，就从该撒利亚上耶路撒冷去。
So Festus, having come into that part of the country which was under his rule, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

祭司长，和犹太人的首领，向他控告保罗，
And the chief priests and the chief men of the Jews made statements against Paul,

又央告他，求他的情，将保罗提到耶路撒冷来。他们要在路上埋伏杀害他。
Requesting Festus to give effect to their design against him, and send him to Jerusalem, when they would be waiting to put him to death on the way.

非斯都却回答说，保罗押在该撒利亚，我自己快要往那里去。
But Festus, in answer, said that Paul was being kept in prison at Caesarea, and that in a short time he himself was going there.

又说，你们中间有权势的人，与我一同下去，那人若有什么不是，就可以告他。
So, he said, let those who have authority among you go with me, and if there is any wrong in the man, let them make a statement against him.

非斯都在他们那里，住了不过十天八天，就下该撒利亚去。第二天坐堂，吩咐将保罗提上来。
And when he had been with them not more than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; and on the day after, he took his place on the judge's seat, and sent for Paul.

保罗来了，那些从耶路撒冷下来的犹太人，周围站着，将许多重大的事控告他，都是不能证实的。
And when he came, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem came round him, and made all sorts of serious statements against him, which were not supported by the facts.

保罗分诉说，无论犹太人的律法，或是圣殿，或是该撒，我都没有干犯。
Then Paul, in his answer to them, said, I have done no wrong against the law of the Jews, or against the Temple, or against Caesar.

但非斯都要讨犹太人的喜欢，就问保罗说，你愿意上耶路撒冷去，在那里听我审断这事吗？
But Festus, desiring to get the approval of the Jews, said to Paul, Will you go up to Jerusalem, and be judged before me there in connection with these things?

保罗说，我站在该撒的堂前，这就是我应当受审的地方。我向犹太人并没有行过什么不义的事，这也是你明明知道的。
And Paul said, I am before the seat of Caesar's authority where it is right for me to be judged: I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you are well able to see.

我若行了不义的事，犯了什么该死的罪，就是死，我也不辞。他们所告我的事若都不实，就没有人可以把我交给他们。我要上告于该撒。
If, then, I am a wrongdoer and there is a cause of death in me, I am ready for death: if it is not as they say against me, no man may give me up to them. Let my cause come before Caesar.

非斯都和议会商量了，就说，你既上告于该撒，可以往该撒那里去。
Then Festus, having had a discussion with the Jews, made answer, You have said, Let my cause come before Caesar; to Caesar you will go.

过了些日子，亚基帕王，和百尼基氏，来到该撒利亚，问非斯都安。
Now when some days had gone by, King Agrippa and Bernice came to Caesarea and went to see Festus.

在那里住了多日，非斯都将保罗的事告诉王，说，这里有一个人，是腓力斯留在监里的。
And as they were there for some days, Festus gave them Paul's story, saying, There is a certain man here who was put in prison by Felix:

我在耶路撒冷的时候，祭司长和犹太的长老，将他的事禀报了我，求我定他的罪。
Against whom the chief priests and the rulers of the Jews made a statement when I was at Jerusalem, requesting me to give a decision against him.

我对他们说，无论什么人，被告还没有和原告对质，未得机会分诉所告他的事，就先定他的罪，这不是罗马人的条例。
To whom I gave answer that it is not the Roman way to give a man up, till he has been face to face with those who are attacking him, and has had a chance to give an answer to the statements made against him.

及至他们都来到这里，我就不耽延，第二天便坐堂，吩咐把那人提上来。
So, when they had come together here, straight away, on the day after, I took my place on the judge's seat and sent for the man.

告他的人站着告他。所告的，并没有我所逆料的那等恶事。
But when they got up they said nothing about such crimes as I had in mind:

不过是有几样辩论，为他们自己敬鬼神的事，又为一个人名叫耶稣，是已经死了，保罗却说他是活着的。
But had certain questions against him in connection with their religion, and about one Jesus, now dead, who, Paul said, was living.

这些事当怎样究问，我心里作难。所以问他说，你愿意上耶路撒冷去，在那里为这些事听审吗？
And as I had not enough knowledge for the discussion of these things, I made the suggestion to him to go to Jerusalem and be judged there.

但保罗求我留下，他要听皇上审断，我就吩咐把他留下，等我解他到该撒那里去。
But when Paul made a request that he might be judged by Caesar, I gave orders for him to be kept till I might send him to Caesar.

亚基帕对非斯都说，我自己也愿听这人辩论。非斯都说，明天你可以听。
And Agrippa said to Festus, I have a desire to give the man a hearing myself. Tomorrow, he said, you may give him a hearing.

第二天，亚基帕和百尼基大张威势而来，同着众千夫长，和城里的尊贵人，进了公厅。非斯都吩咐一声，就有人将保罗带进来。
So on the day after, when Agrippa and Bernice in great glory had come into the public place of hearing, with the chief of the army and the chief men of the town, at the order of Festus, Paul was sent for.

非斯都说，亚基帕王，和在这里的诸位阿，你们看这人，就是一切犹太人在耶路撒冷，和这里，曾向我恳求，呼叫说，不可容他再活着。
And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all those who are present here with us, you see this man, about whom all the Jews have made protests to me, at Jerusalem and in this place, saying that it is not right for him to be living any longer.

但我查明他没有犯什么该死的罪。并且他自己上告于皇帝，所以我定意把他解去
But, in my opinion, there is no cause of death in him, and as he himself has made a request to be judged by Caesar, I have said that I would send him.

论到这人，我没有确实的事，可以奏明主上。因此我带他到你们面前，也特意带他到你亚基帕王面前，为要在查问之后，有所陈奏。
But I have no certain account of him to send to Caesar. So I have sent for him to come before you, and specially before you, King Agrippa, so that after the business has been gone into, I may have something to put in writing.

据我看来，解送囚犯，不指明他的罪案，是不合理的。
For it seems to me against reason to send a prisoner without making clear what there is against him.

亚基帕对保罗说，准你为自己辩明。于是保罗伸手分诉说，
And Agrippa said to Paul, You may put your cause before us. Then Paul, stretching out his hand, made his answer, saying:

亚基帕王阿，犹太人所告我的一切事，今日得在你面前分诉，实为万幸。
In my opinion I am happy, King Agrippa, to be able to give my answer before you today to all these things which the Jews say against me:

更可幸的，是你熟悉犹太人的规矩，和他们的辩论。所以求你耐心听我。
The more so, because you are expert in all questions to do with the Jews and their ways: so I make my request to you to give me a hearing to the end.

我从起初在本国的民中，并在耶路撒冷，自幼为人如何，犹太人都知道。
All the Jews have knowledge of my way of life from my early years, as it was from the start among my nation, and at Jerusalem;

他们若肯作见证，就晓得我从起初，是按着我们教中最严紧的教门，作了法利赛人。
And they are able to say, if they would give witness, that I was living as a Pharisee, in that division of our religion which is most regular in the keeping of the law.

现在我站在这里受审，是因为指望神向我们祖宗所应许的。
And now I am here to be judged because of the hope given by God's word to our fathers;

这应许，我们十二个支派昼夜切切地事奉神，都指望得着。王阿，我被犹太人控告，就是因这指望。
For the effecting of which our twelve tribes have been working and waiting night and day with all their hearts. And in connection with this hope I am attacked by the Jews, O king!

神叫死人复活，你们为什么看作不可信的呢？
Why, in your opinion, is it outside belief for God to make the dead come to life again?

从前我自己以为应当多方攻击拿撒勒人耶稣的名。
For I, truly, was of the opinion that it was right for me to do a number of things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

我在耶路撒冷也曾这样行了。既从祭司长得了权柄，我就把许多圣徒囚在监里。他们被杀，我也出名定案。
And this I did in Jerusalem: and numbers of the saints I put in prison, having had authority given to me from the chief priests, and when they were put to death, I gave my decision against them.

在各会堂，我屡次用刑，强逼他们说亵渎的话。又分外恼恨他们，甚至追逼他们直到外邦的城邑。
And I gave them punishment frequently, in all the Synagogues, forcing them to say things against God; and burning with passion against them, I went after them even into far-away towns.

那时，我领了祭司长的权柄和命令，往大马色去。
Then, when I was journeying to Damascus with the authority and orders of the chief priests,

王阿，我在路上，晌午的时候，看见从天发光，比日头还亮，四面照着我，并与我同行的人。
In the middle of the day, on the road I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining round me and those who were journeying with me.

我们都仆倒在地，我就听见有声音，用希伯来话，向我说，扫罗，扫罗，为什么逼迫我。你用脚踢刺是难的。
And when we had all gone down on the earth, a voice came to me, saying in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why are you attacking me so cruelly? It is hard for you to go against the impulse which is driving you.

我说，主阿，你是谁。主说，我就是你所逼迫的耶稣。
And I said, Who are you, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom you are attacking.

你起来站着，我特意向你显现，要派你作执事作见证，将你所看见的事，和我将要指示你的事，证明出来。
But get up on your feet: for I have come to you for this purpose, to make you a servant and a witness of the things in which you have seen me, and of those in which you will see me;

我也要救你脱离百姓和外邦人的手。
And I will keep you safe from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,

我差你到他们那里去，要叫他们的眼睛得开，从黑暗中归向光明，从撒但权下归向神。又因信我，得蒙赦罪，和一切成圣的人同得基业。
To make their eyes open, turning them from the dark to the light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may have forgiveness of sins and a heritage among those who are made holy by faith in me.

亚基帕王阿，我故此没有违背那从天上来的异象。
So, then, King Agrippa, I did not go against the vision from heaven;

先在大马色，后在耶路撒冷，和犹太全地，以及外邦，劝勉他们应当悔改归向神，行事与悔改的心相称。
But I went about, first to those in Damascus and Jerusalem, and through all the country of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, preaching a change of heart, so that they, being turned to God, might give, in their works, the fruits of a changed heart.

因此，犹太人在殿里拿住我，想要杀我。
For this reason, the Jews took me in the Temple, and made an attempt to put me to death.

然而我蒙神的帮助，直到今日还站得住，对着尊贵卑贱老幼作见证。所讲的，并不外乎众先知和摩西所说，将来必成的事。
And so, by God's help, I am here today, witnessing to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would come about;

就是基督必须受害，并且因从死里复活，要首先把光明的道，传给百姓和外邦人。
That the Christ would go through pain, and being the first to come back from the dead, would give light to the people and to the Gentiles.

保罗这样分诉，非斯都大声说，保罗，你癫狂了吧。你的学问太大，反叫你癫狂了。
And when he made his answer in these words, Festus said in a loud voice, Paul, you are off your head; your great learning has made you unbalanced.

保罗说，非斯都大人，我不是癫狂，我说的乃是真实明白话。
Then Paul said, I am not off my head, most noble Festus, but my words are true and wise.

王也晓得这些事，所以我向王放胆直言，我深信这些事没有一件向王隐藏的。因都不是在背地里作的。
For the king has knowledge of these things, to whom I am talking freely; being certain that all this is common knowledge to him; for it has not been done in secret.

亚基帕王阿，你信先知吗？我知道你是信的。
King Agrippa, have you faith in the prophets? I am certain that you have.

亚基帕对保罗说，你想少微一劝，便叫我作基督徒阿。（或作你这样劝我几乎叫我作基督徒了）。
And Agrippa said to Paul, A little more and you will be making me a Christian.

保罗说，无论是少劝，是多劝，我向神所求的，不但你一个人，就是今天一切听我的，都要像我一样，只是不要像我有这些锁链。
And Paul said, It is my prayer to God that, in little or great measure, not only you, but all those hearing me today might be even as I am, but for these chains.

于是王，和巡抚，并百尼基，与同坐的人，都起来，
And the king and the ruler and Bernice and those who were seated with them got up;

退到里面，彼此谈论说，这人并没有犯什么该死该绑的罪。
And when they had gone away they said to one another, This man has done nothing which might give cause for death or prison.

亚基帕又对非斯都说，这人若没有上告于该撒，就可以释放了。
And Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have been made free, if he had not put his cause before Caesar.

非斯都既然定规了，叫我们坐船往义大利去，便将保罗，和别的囚犯，交给御营里的一个百夫长，名叫犹流。
And when the decision had been made that we were to go by sea to Italy, they gave Paul and certain other prisoners into the care of a captain named Julius, of the Augustan band.

有一只亚大米田的船，要沿着亚西亚一带地方的海边走，我们就上了那船开行，有马其顿的帖撒罗尼迦人，亚里达古，和我们同去。
And we went to sea in a ship of Adramyttium which was sailing to the sea towns of Asia, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

第二天，到了西顿。犹流宽待保罗，准他往朋友那里去，受他们的照应。
And on the day after, we came to Sidon; and Julius was kind to Paul, and let him go to see his friends and take a rest.

从那里又开船，因为风不顺，就贴着居比路背风岸行去。
And sailing again from there, we went on under cover of Cyprus, because the wind was against us.

过了基利家旁非利亚前面的海，就到了吕家的每拉。
And having gone across the sea off Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to Myra, in Lycia.

在那里百夫长遇见一只亚力山太的船，要往义大利去，便叫我们上了那船。
And there the captain came across a ship of Alexandria, sailing for Italy, and put us in it.

一连多日，船行得慢，仅仅来到革尼土的对面。因为被风拦阻，就贴着革哩底背风岸，从撒摩尼对面行过。
And when we had gone on slowly for a long time, and had had hard work getting across to Cnidus, for the wind was against us, we went under cover of Crete, in the direction of Salmone;

我们沿岸行走，仅仅来到一个地方，名叫佳澳。离那里不远，有拉西亚城。
And sailing down the side of it, as well as we were able, we came to a certain place named Fair Havens, near which was the town of Lasea.

走的日子多了，已经过了禁食的节期，行船又危险，保罗就劝众人说，
And as a long time had gone by, and the journey was now full of danger, because it was late in the year, Paul put the position before them,

众位，我看这次行船，不但货物和船要受伤损，大遭破坏，连我们的性命也难保。
Saying, Friends, I see that this journey will be one of great damage and loss, not only to the goods and the ship, but to ourselves.

但百夫长信从掌船的和船主，不信从保罗所说的。
But the captain gave more attention to the master and the owner of the ship than to what Paul said.

且因在这海口过冬不便，船上的人，就多半说，不如开船离开这地方，或者能到非尼基过冬。非尼基是革哩底的一个海口，一面朝东北，一面朝东南。
And as the harbour was not a good one in which to be for the winter, the greater number of them were for going out to sea, in order, if possible, to put in for the winter at Phoenix, a harbour of Crete, looking to the north-east and south-east.

这时微微起了南风，他们以为得意，就起了锚，贴近革哩底行去。
And when the south wind came softly, being of the opinion that their purpose might be effected, they let the ship go and went sailing down the side of Crete, very near to the land.

不多几时，狂风从岛上扑下来，那风名叫友拉革罗。
But after a little time, a very violent wind, named Euraquilo, came down from it with great force.

船被风抓住，敌不住风，我们就任风刮去。
And when the ship got into the grip of it, and was not able to make headway into the wind, we gave way, and went before it.

贴着一个小岛的背风岸奔行，那岛名叫高大，在那里仅仅收住了小船。
And, sailing near the side of a small island named Cauda, we were able, though it was hard work, to make the ship's boat safe:

既然把小船拉上来，就用缆索捆绑船底。又恐怕在赛耳底沙滩上搁了浅，就落下篷来，任船飘去。
And having got it up, they put cords under and round the ship; but fearing that they might be pushed on to the Syrtis, they let down the sails and so went running before the wind.

我们被风浪逼得甚急，第二天众人就把货物抛在海里。
And, still fighting the storm with all our strength, the day after they made a start at getting the goods out of the ship;

到第三天，他们又亲手把船上的器具抛弃了。
And on the third day, they let all the sailing apparatus go over the side.

太阳和星辰多日不显露，又有狂风大浪催逼，我们得救的指望就都绝了。
And as we had not seen the sun or stars for a long time, and a great storm was on us, all hope of salvation was gone.

众人多日没有吃什么，保罗就出来站在他们中间说，众位，你们本该听我的话，不离开革哩底，免得遭这样的伤损破坏。
And when they had been without food for a long time, Paul got up among them and said, Friends, it would have been better if you had given attention to me and not gone sailing out from Crete, to undergo this damage and loss.

现在我还劝你们放心。你们的性命，一个也不失丧，惟独失丧这船。
But now, I say to you, be of good heart, for there will be no loss of life, but only of the ship.

因我所属所事奉的神，他的使者昨夜站在我旁边说，
For this night there came to my side an angel of the God who is my Master and whose servant I am,

保罗，不要害怕，你必定站在该撒面前。并且与你同船的人，神都赐给你了。
Saying, Have no fear, Paul, for you will come before Caesar, and God has given to you all those who are sailing with you.

所以众位可以放心，我信神，他怎样对我说，事情也要怎样成就。
And so, O men, be of good heart, for I have faith in God that it will be as he said to me.

只是我们必要撞在一个岛上。
But we will be sent on to a certain island.

到了第十四天夜间，船在亚底亚海，飘来飘去，约到半夜，水手以为渐近旱地，
But when the fourteenth day came, while we were going here and there in the Adriatic sea, about the middle of the night the sailors had an idea that they were getting near land;

就探深浅，探得有十二丈，稍往前行，又探深浅，探得有九丈。
And they let down the lead, and saw that the sea was a hundred and twenty feet deep; and after a little time they did it again and it was ninety feet.

恐怕撞在石头上，就从船尾抛下四个锚，盼望天亮。
Then, fearing that by chance we might come on to the rocks, they let down four hooks from the back of the ship, and made prayers for the coming of day.

水手想要逃出船去，把小船放在海里，假作要从船头抛锚的样子。
Then the sailors made attempts secretly to get away from the ship, letting down a boat as if they were about to put down hooks from the front of the ship;

保罗对百夫长和兵丁说，这些人若不等在船上，你们必不能得救。
But Paul said to the captain and his men, If you do not keep these men in the ship, you will not be safe.

于是兵丁砍断小船的绳子，由它飘去。
Then the armed men, cutting the cords of the boat, let her go.

天渐亮的时候保罗劝众人都吃饭，说，你们悬望忍饿不吃什么，已经十四天了。
And when dawn was near, Paul gave them all orders to take food, saying, This is the fourteenth day you have been waiting and taking no food.

所以我劝你们吃饭，这是关乎你们救命的事。因为你们各人连一根头发，也不至于损坏。
So I make request to you to take food; for this is for your salvation: not a hair from the head of any of you will come to destruction.

保罗说了这话，就拿着饼，在众人面前祝谢了神，掰开吃。
And when he had said this and had taken bread, he gave praise to God before them all, and took a meal of the broken bread.

于是他们都放下心，也就吃了。
Then they all took heart and did the same.

我们在船上的，共有二百七十六个人
And we were, in the ship, two hundred and seventy-six persons.

他们吃饱了，就把船上的麦子，抛在海里，为要叫船轻一点。
And when they had had enough food, they made the weight of the ship less, turning the grain out into the sea.

到了天亮，他们不认识那地方，但见一个海湾，有岸可登，就商议能把船拢进去不能。
And when it was day, they had no knowledge of the land, but they saw an inlet of the sea with a floor of sand, and they had the idea of driving the ship up on to it if possible.

于是砍断缆索，弃锚在海里，同时也松开舵绳，拉起头篷，顺着风向岸行去。
So cutting away the hooks, and letting them go into the sea, and freeing the cords of the guiding-blades, and lifting up the sail to the wind, they went in the direction of the inlet.

但遇着两水夹流的地方，就把船搁了浅。船头胶住不动，船尾被浪的猛力冲坏。
And coming to a point between two seas, they got the ship to land; and the front part was fixed in the sand and not able to be moved, but the back part was broken by the force of the waves.

兵丁的意思，要把囚犯杀了，恐怕有？？水脱逃的。
Then the armed men were for putting the prisoners to death, so that no one would get away by swimming.

但百夫长要救保罗，不准他们任意而行，就吩咐会？？水的，跳下水去先上岸。
But the captain, desiring to keep Paul safe, kept them from their purpose, and gave orders that those who had knowledge of swimming were to go off the ship and get first to land:

其余的人，可以用板子，或船上的零碎东西上岸。这样众人都得了救上了岸。
And the rest, some on boards and some on things from the ship. And so it came about that they all got safe to land.

我们既已得救，才知道那岛名叫米利大。
And when we were safe, we made the discovery that the island was named Melita.

土人看待我们，有非常的情分，因为当时下雨，天气又冷，就生火，接待我们众人。
And the simple people living there were uncommonly kind to us, for they made a fire for us, and took us in, because it was raining and cold.

那时保罗拾起一捆柴，放在火上，有一条毒蛇，因为热了出来，咬住他的手。
But when Paul had got some sticks together and put them on the fire, a snake came out, because of the heat, and gave him a bite on the hand.

土人看见那毒蛇，悬在他手上，就彼此说，这人必是个凶手，虽然从海里救上来，天理还不容他活着。
And when the people saw it hanging on his hand, they said to one another, Without doubt this man has put someone to death, and though he has got safely away from the sea, God will not let him go on living.

保罗竟把那毒蛇，甩在火里，并没有受伤。
But shaking off the beast into the fire, he got no damage.

土人想他必要肿起来，或是忽然仆倒死了。看了多时，见他无害，就转念说，他是个神。
But they had the idea that they would see him becoming ill, or suddenly falling down dead; but after waiting a long time, and seeing that no damage came to him, changing their opinion, they said he was a god.

离那地方不远，有田产是岛长部百流的。他接纳我们，尽情款待三日。
Now near that place there was some land, the property of the chief man of the island, who was named Publius; who very kindly took us into his house as his guests for three days.

当时，部百流的父亲，患热病和痢疾躺着。保罗进去，为他祷告，按手在他身上，治好了他。
And the father of Publius was ill, with a disease of the stomach; to whom Paul went, and put his hands on him, with prayer, and made him well.

从此，岛上其余的病人，也来得了医治。
And when this took place, all the others in the island who had diseases came and were made well.

他们又多方的尊敬我们。到了开船的时候，也把我们所需用的送到船上。
Then they gave us great honour, and, when we went away, they put into the ship whatever things we were in need of.

过了三个月，我们上了亚力山太的船，往前行。这船以丢斯双子为记，是在那海岛过了冬的。
And after three months we went to sea in a ship of Alexandria sailing under the sign of the Dioscuri, which had been at the island for the winter.

到了叙拉古，我们停泊三日。
And going into the harbour at Syracuse, we were waiting there for three days.

又从那里绕行，来到利基翁。过了一天，起了南风，第二天就来到部丢利。
And from there, going about in a curve, we came to Rhegium: and after one day a south wind came up and on the day after we came to Puteoli:

在那里遇见弟兄们，请我们与他们同住了七天。这样我们来到罗马。
Where we came across some of the brothers, who kept us with them for seven days; and so we came to Rome.

那里的弟兄们，一听见我们的信息，就出来到亚比乌市，和三馆地方迎接我们。保罗见了他们，就感谢神，放心壮胆。
And the brothers, when they had news of us, came out from town as far as Appii Forum and the Three Taverns to have a meeting with us: and Paul, seeing them, gave praise to God and took heart.

进了罗马城，（有古卷在此有百夫长把众囚犯交给御营的统领惟有）保罗蒙准，和一个看守他的兵，另住在一处。
And when we came into Rome, they let Paul have a house for himself and the armed man who kept watch over him.

过了三天，保罗请犹太人的首领来。他们来了，就对他们说，弟兄们，我虽没有作什么事干犯本国的百姓，和我们祖宗的规条，却被锁绑，从耶路撒冷解在罗马人的手里。
Then after three days he sent for the chief men of the Jews: and when they had come together, he said to them, My brothers, though I had done nothing against the people or the ways of our fathers, I was given, a prisoner from Jerusalem, into the hands of the Romans.

他们审问了我，就愿意释放我。因为在我身上，并没有该死的罪。
Who, when they had put questions to me, were ready to let me go free, because there was no cause of death in me.

无奈犹太人不服，我不得已，只好上告于该撒。并非有什么事，要控告我本国的百姓。
But when the Jews made protest against it, I had to put my cause into Caesar's hands; not because I have anything to say against my nation.

因此，我请你们来见面说话。我原为以色列人所指望的，被这链子捆锁。
But for this reason I sent for you, to see and have talk with you: for because of the hope of Israel I am in these chains.

他们说，我们并没有接着从犹太来论你的信，也没有弟兄到这里来，报给我们说，你有什么不好处。
And they said to him, We have not had letters from Judaea about you, and no one of the brothers has come to us here to give an account or say any evil about you.

但我们愿意听你的意见如何。因为这教门，我们晓得是到处被毁谤的。
But we have a desire to give hearing to your opinion: for as to this form of religion, we have knowledge that in all places it is attacked.

他们和保罗约定了日子，就有许多人到他的寓处来，保罗从早到晚，对他们讲论这事，证明神国的道，引摩西的律法和先知的书，以耶稣的事，劝勉他们。
And when a day had been fixed, they came to his house in great numbers; and he gave them teaching, giving witness to the kingdom of God, and having discussions with them about Jesus, from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning till evening.

他所说的话，有信的，有不信的。
And some were in agreement with what he said, but some had doubts.

他们彼此不合，就散了。未散以先，保罗说了一句话，说，圣灵借先知以赛亚，向你们祖宗所说的话，是不错的。
And they went away, for there was a division among them after Paul had said this one thing: Well did the Holy Spirit say by the prophet Isaiah to your fathers,

他说，你去告诉这百姓说，你们听是要听见，却不明白。看是要看见，却不晓得。
Go to this people and say, Though you give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing, you will see, but the sense will not be clear to you:

因为这百姓，油蒙了心，耳朵发沉，眼睛闭着。恐怕眼睛看见，耳朵听见，心里明白，回转过来，我就医治他们。
For the heart of this people has become fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might make them well.

所以你们当知道，神这救恩，如今传给外邦人，他们也必听受。（有古卷在此有，
Be certain, then, that the salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will give hearing.

保罗说了这话犹太人议论纷纷的就走了）。
[]

保罗在自己所租的房子里，住了足足两年。凡来见他的人，他全都接待，
And for the space of two years, Paul was living in the house of which he had the use, and had talk with all those who went in to see him,

放胆传讲神国的道，将主耶稣基督的事教导人，并没有人禁止。
Preaching the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ without fear, and no orders were given that he was not to do so.

