启示录 Revelation


耶稣基督的启示，就是神赐给他，叫他将必要快成的事指示他的众仆人。他就差遣使者，晓谕他的仆人约翰。
The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave him so that his servants might have knowledge of the things which will quickly take place: and he sent and made it clear by his angel to his servant John;

约翰便将神的道，和耶稣基督的见证，凡自己所看见的，都证明出来。
Who gave witness of the word of God, and of the witness of Jesus Christ, even of all the things which he saw.

念这书上预言的，和那些听见又遵守其中所记载的，都是有福的。因为日期近了。
A blessing be on the reader, and on those who give ear to the prophet's words, and keep the things which he has put in the book: for the time is near.

约翰写信给亚西亚的七个教会。但愿从那昔在今在以后永在的神和他宝座前的七灵。
John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace to you and peace, from him who is and was and is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his high seat;

并那诚实作见证的，从死里首先复活，为世上君王元首的耶稣基督。有恩惠平安归与你们。他爱我们，用自己的血使我们脱离罪恶。（脱离有古卷作洗去）
And from Jesus Christ, the true witness, the first to come back from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who had love for us and has made us clean from our sins by his blood;

又使我们成为国民，作他父神的祭司。但愿荣耀权能归给他，直到永永远远。阿们。
And has made us to be a kingdom and priests to his God and Father; to him let glory and power be given for ever and ever. So be it.

看哪，他驾云降临。众目要看见他，连刺他的人也要看见他。地上的万族都要因他哀哭。这话是真实的。阿们。
See, he comes with the clouds, and every eye will see him, and those by whom he was wounded; and all the tribes of the earth will be sorrowing because of him. Yes, so be it.

主神说，我是阿拉法，我是俄梅戛（阿拉法俄梅戛乃希腊字母首末二字），是昔在今在以后永在的全能者。
I am the First and the Last, says the Lord God who is and was and is to come, the Ruler of all.

我约翰就是你们的弟兄，和你们在耶稣的患难，国度，忍耐里一同有分。为神的道，并为给耶稣作的见证，曾在那名叫拔摩的海岛上。
I, John, your brother, who have a part with you in the trouble and the kingdom and the quiet strength of Jesus, was in the island which is named Patmos, for the word of God and the witness of Jesus.

当主日我被圣灵感动，听见在我后面有大声音如吹号说，
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and a great voice at my back, as of a horn, came to my ears,

你所看见的，当写在书上，达与以弗所，士每拿，别迦摩，推雅推喇，撒狄，非拉铁非，老底嘉，那七个教会。
Saying, What you see, put in a book, and send it to the seven churches; to Ephesus and to Smyrna and to Pergamos and to Thyatira and to Sardis and to Philadelphia and to Laodicea.

我转过身来，要看是谁发声与我说话。既转过来，就看见七个金灯台。
And turning to see the voice which said these words to me, I saw seven gold vessels with lights burning in them;

灯台中间，有一位好像人子，身穿长衣，直垂到脚，胸间束着金带。
And in the middle of them one like a son of man, clothed with a robe down to his feet, and with a band of gold round his breasts.

他的头与发皆白，如白羊毛，如雪。眼目如同火焰。
And his head and his hair were white like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;

脚好像在炉中锻炼光明的铜。声音如同众水的声音。
And his feet like polished brass, as if it had been burned in a fire; and his voice was as the sound of great waters.

他右手拿着七星。从他口中出来一把两刃的利剑。面貌如同烈日放光。
And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth came a sharp two-edged sword: and his face was like the sun shining in its strength.

我一看见，就仆倒在他脚前，像死了一样。他用右手按着我说，不要惧怕。我是首先的，我是末后的，
And when I saw him, I went down on my face at his feet as one dead. And he put his right hand on me, saying, Have no fear; I am the first and the last and the Living one;

又是那存活的。我曾死过，现在又活了，直活到永永远远。并且拿着死亡和阴间的钥匙。
And I was dead, and see, I am living for ever, and I have the keys of death and of Hell.

所以你要把所看见的，和现在的事，并将来必成的事，都写出来。
Put in writing, then, the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which will be after these;

论到你所看见在我右手中的七星，和七个金灯台的奥秘。那七星就是七个教会的使者。七灯台就是七个教会。
The secret of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and of the seven gold vessels with burning lights. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven lights are the seven churches.

你要写信给以弗所教会的使者，说，那右手拿着七星，在七个金灯台中间行走的，说，
To the angel of the church in Ephesus say: These things says he who has the seven stars in his right hand, who is walking in the middle of the seven gold lights:

我知道你的行为，劳碌，忍耐，也知道你不能容忍恶人，你也曾试验那自称为使徒却不是使徒的，看出他们是假的来。
I have knowledge of your doings, and of your hard work and long waiting, and that you will not put up with evil men, and have put to the test those who say they are Apostles and are not, and have seen that they are false;

你也能忍耐，曾为我的名劳苦，并不乏倦。
And you have the power of waiting, and have undergone trouble because of my name, without weariness.

然而有一件事我要责备你，就是你把起初的爱心离弃了。
But I have this against you, that you are turned away from your first love.

所以应当回想你是从哪里坠落的，并要悔改，行起初所行的事。你若不悔改，我就临到你那里，把你的灯台从原处挪去。
So keep in mind where you were at first, and be changed in heart and do the first works; or I will come to you, and will take away your light from its place, if your hearts are not changed.

然而你还有一件可取的事，就是你恨恶尼哥拉一党人的行为，这也是我所恨恶的。
But at least you have the credit of hating the works of the Nicolaitans, as I do.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的，就应当听。得胜的，我必将神乐园中生命树的果子赐给他吃。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give of the fruit of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God.

你要写信给士每拿教会的使者说，那首先的，末后的，死过又活的说，
And to the angel of the church in Smyrna say: These things says the first and the last, who was dead and is living:

我知道你的患难，你的贫穷，（你却是富足的）也知道那自称是犹太人所说的毁谤话，其实他们不是犹太人，乃是撒但一会的人。
I have knowledge of your troubles and how poor you are (but you have true wealth), and the evil words of those who say they are Jews, and are not, but are a Synagogue of Satan.

你将要受的苦你不用怕。魔鬼要把你们中间几个人下在监里，叫你们被试炼。你们必受患难十日。你务要至死忠心，我就赐给你那生命的冠冕。
Have no fear of the things which you will have to undergo: see, the Evil One will send some of you into prison, so that you may be put to the test; and you will have great trouble for ten days. Be true till death, and I will give you the crown of life.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的，就应当听。得胜的，必不受第二次死的害。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. He who overcomes will not come under the power of the second death.

你要写信给别迦摩教会的使者，说，那有两刃利剑的说，
And to the angel of the church in Pergamos say: These things says he who has the sharp two-edged sword:

我知道你的居所，就是有撒但座位之处。当我忠心的见证人安提帕在你们中间，撒但所住的地方被杀之时，你还坚守我的名，没有弃绝我的道。
I have knowledge that your living-place is where Satan has his seat: and you are true to my name, and were not turned away from your faith in me, even in the days of Antipas, my true witness, who was put to death among you, where Satan has his place.

然而有几件事我要责备你，因为在你那里，有人服从了巴兰的教训。这巴兰曾教导巴勒将绊脚石放在以色列人面前，叫他们吃祭偶像之物，行奸淫的事。
But I have some things against you, because you have with you those who keep the teaching of Balaam, by whose suggestion Balak made the children of Israel go out of the right way, taking food which was offered to false gods, and going after the desires of the flesh.

你那里也有人照样服从了尼哥拉一党人的教训。
And you have those who keep the teaching of the Nicolaitans.

所以你当悔改。若不悔改，我就快临到你那里，用我口中的剑，攻击他们。
See, then, that you have a change of heart; or I will come to you quickly, and will make war against them with the sword of my mouth.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的就应当听。得胜的，我必将那隐藏的吗哪赐给他。并赐他一块白石，石上写着新名。除了那领受的以外。没有人能认识。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches. To him who overcomes I will give of the secret manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name, of which no one has knowledge but he to whom it is given.

你要写信给推雅推喇教会的使者，说，那眼目如火焰，脚像光明铜的神之子，说，
And to the angel of the church in Thyatira say: These things says the Son of God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire, and his feet like polished brass:

我知道你的行为，爱心，信心，勤劳，忍耐。又知道你末后所行的善事，比起初所行的更多。
I have knowledge of your works, and your love and faith and help and strength in trouble, and that your last works are more than the first.

然而有一件事我要责备你，就是你容让那自称是先知的妇人耶洗别教导我的仆人，引诱他们行奸淫，吃祭偶像之物。
But I have this against you, that you let the woman Jezebel say she is a prophet and give false teaching, making my servants go after the desires of the flesh and take food offered to false gods.

我曾给她悔改的机会，她却不肯悔改她的淫行。
And I gave her time for a change of heart, but she has no mind to give up her unclean ways.

看哪，我要叫她病卧在床，那些与她行淫的人，若不悔改所行的，我也要叫他们同受大患难。
See, I will put her into a bed, and those who make themselves unclean with her, into great trouble, if they go on with her works.

我又要杀死她的党类（党类原文作儿女），叫众教会知道，我是那察看人肺腑心肠的。并要照你们的行为报应你们各人。
And I will put her children to death; and all the churches will see that I am he who makes search into the secret thoughts and hearts of men: and I will give to every one of you the reward of your works.

至于你们推雅推喇其余的人，就是一切不从那教训，不晓得他们素常所说撒但深奥之理的人。我告诉你们，我不将别的担子放在你们身上。
But to you I say, to the rest in Thyatira, even to those who have not this teaching, and have no knowledge of the secrets of Satan, as they say; I put on you no other weight.

但你们已经有的，总要持守，直等到我来。
But what you have, keep safe till I come.

那得胜又遵守我命令到底的，我要赐给他权柄制伏列国。
He who overcomes, and keeps my works to the end, to him I will give rule over the nations,

他必用铁杖辖管他们（辖管原文作牧），将他们如同窑户的瓦器打得粉碎。像我从我父领受的权柄一样。
And he will be ruling them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of the potter they will be broken, even as I have power from my Father:

我又要把晨星赐给他。
And I will give him the morning star.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.

你要写信给撒狄教会的使者，说，那有神的七灵和七星的，说，我知道你的行为，按名你是活的，其实是死的。
And to the angel of the church in Sardis say: These things says he who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars: I have knowledge of your works, that you seem to be living but are dead.

你要儆醒，坚固那剩下将要衰微的（衰微原文作死）。因我见你的行为，在我神面前，没有一样是完全的。
Be on the watch, and make strong the rest of the things which are near to death; because as judged by me your works have not come up to God's measure.

所以要回想你是怎样领受，怎样听见的。又要遵守，并要悔改。若不儆醒，我必临到你那里如同贼一样。我几时临到，你也决不能知道。
Keep in mind, then, the teaching which was given to you, and be ruled by it and have a change of heart. If then you do not keep watch, I will come like a thief, and you will have no knowledge of the hour when I will come on you.

然而在撒狄你还有几名是未曾污秽自己衣服的。他们要穿白衣与我同行。因为他们是配得过的。
But you have some names in Sardis who have kept clean their robes; and as a reward they will go in white with me.

凡得胜的，必这样穿白衣。我也必不从生命册上涂抹他的名。且要在我父面前，和我父众使者面前认他的名。
He who overcomes will be dressed in white, and I will not take his name from the book of life, and I will give witness to his name before my Father, and before his angels.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的，就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.

你要写信给非拉铁非教会的使者，说，那圣洁，真实，拿着大卫的钥匙，开了就没有人能关，关了就没有人能开的，说，
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia say: These things says he who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, opening the door so that it may be shut by no one, and shutting it so that it may be open to no one.

我知道你的行为，你略有一点力量，也曾遵守我的道，没有弃绝我的名。看哪，我在你面前给你一个敞开的门，是无人能关的。
I have knowledge of your works (see, I have put before you an open door which may be shut by no one), and that you have a little strength, and have kept my word, and have been true to my name.

那撒但一会的，自称是犹太人，其实不是犹太人，乃是说谎话的，我要使他们来在你脚前下拜，也使他们知道我是已经爱你了。
See, I will make those of the Synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews, and are not, but say what is false; I will make them come and give worship before your feet, and see my love for you.

你既遵守我忍耐的道，我必在普天下人受试炼的时候，保守你免去你的试炼。
Because you have kept my word in quiet strength, I will keep you from the hour of testing which is coming on all the world, to put to the test those who are on earth.

我必快来，你要持守你所有的，免得人夺去你的冠冕。
I come quickly: keep that which you have, so that no one may take your crown.

得胜的，我要叫他在我神殿中作柱子，他也必不再从那里出去。我又要将我神的名，和我神城的名，（这城就是从天上从我神那里降下来的新耶路撒冷）并我的新名，都写在他上面。
Him who overcomes I will make a pillar in the house of my God, and he will go out no more: and I will put on him the name of my God, and the name of the town of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and my new name.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的，就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.

你要写信给老底嘉教会的使者，说，那为阿们的，为诚信真实见证的，在神创造万物之上为元首的，说，
And to the angel of the church in Laodicea say: These things says the true and certain witness, the head of God's new order:

我知道你的行为，你也不冷也不热。我巴不得你或冷或热。
I have knowledge of your works, that you are not cold or warm: it would be better if you were cold or warm.

你既如温水，也不冷也不热，所以我必从我口中把你吐出去。
So because you are not one thing or the other, I will have no more to do with you.

你说，我是富足，已经发了财，一样都不缺。却不知道你是那困苦，可怜，贫穷，瞎眼，赤身的。
For you say, I have wealth, and have got together goods and land, and have need of nothing; and you are not conscious of your sad and unhappy condition, that you are poor and blind and without clothing.

我劝你向我买火炼的金子，叫你富足。又买白衣穿上，叫你赤身的羞耻不露出来。又买眼药擦你的眼睛，使你能看见。
If you are wise you will get from me gold tested by fire, so that you may have true wealth; and white robes to put on, so that your shame may not be seen; and oil for your eyes, so that you may see.

凡我所疼爱的，我就责备管教他。所以你要发热心，也要悔改。
To all those who are dear to me, I give sharp words and punishment: then with all your heart have sorrow for your evil ways.

看哪，我站在门外叩门。若有听见我声音就开门的，我要进到他那里去，我与他，他与我一同坐席。
See, I am waiting at the door and giving the sign; if my voice comes to any man's ears and he makes the door open, I will come in to him, and will take food with him and he with me.

得胜的，我要赐他在我宝座上与我同坐，就如我得了胜，在我父的宝座上与他同坐一般。
To him who overcomes I will give a place with me on my high seat, even as I overcame, and am seated with my Father on his high seat.

圣灵向众教会所说的话，凡有耳的，就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear to what the Spirit says to the churches.

此后，我观看，见天上有门开了，我初次听见好像吹号的声音，对我说，你上到这里来，我要将以后必成的事指示你。
After these things I saw a door open in heaven, and the first voice came to my ears, like the sound of a horn, saying, Come up here, and I will make clear to you the things which are to come.

我立刻被圣灵感动，见有一个宝座安置在天上，又有一位坐在宝座上。
Straight away I was in the Spirit: and I saw a high seat in heaven, and one was seated on it;

看那坐着的，好像碧玉和红宝石。又有虹围着宝座，好像绿宝石。
And to my eyes he was like a jasper and a sardius stone: and there was an arch of light round the high seat, like an emerald.

宝座的周围，又有二十四个座位，其上坐着二十四位长老，身穿白衣，头上戴着金冠冕。
And round about the high seat were four and twenty seats: and on them I saw four and twenty rulers seated, clothed in white robes; and on their heads crowns of gold.

有闪电，声音，雷轰，从宝座中发出。又有七盏火灯在宝座前点着，这七灯就是神的七灵。
And out of the high seat came flames and voices and thunders. And seven lights of fire were burning before the high seat, which are the seven Spirits of God;

宝座前好像一个玻璃海如同水晶。宝座中，和宝座周围有四个活物，前后遍体都满了眼睛。
And before the high seat there was, as it seemed, a clear sea of glass; and in the middle of the high seat, and round about it, four beasts full of eyes round about.

第一个活物像狮子，第二个像牛犊，第三个脸面像人，第四个像飞鹰。
And the first beast was like a lion, and the second like an ox, and the third had a face like a man, and the fourth was like an eagle in flight.

四活物各有六个翅膀，遍体内外都满了眼睛。他们昼夜不住地说，圣哉，圣哉，圣哉，主神。是昔在今在以后永在的全能者。
And the four beasts, having every one of them six wings, are full of eyes round about and inside: and without resting day and night, they say, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God, Ruler of all, who was and is and is to come.

每逢四活物将荣耀，尊贵，感谢，归给那坐在宝座上，活到永永远远者的时候，
And when the beasts give glory and honour to him who is seated on the high seat, to him who is living for ever and ever,

那二十四位长老，就俯伏在坐宝座的面前，敬拜那活到永永远远的，又把他们的冠冕放在宝座前，说，
The four and twenty rulers go down on their faces before him who is seated on the high seat, and give worship to him who is living for ever and ever, and take off their crowns before the high seat, saying,

我们的主，我们的神，你是配得荣耀尊贵权柄的。因为你创造了万物，并且万物是因你的旨意被创造而有的。
It is right, our Lord and our God, for you to have glory and honour and power: because by you were all things made, and by your desire they came into being.

我看见坐宝座的右手中有书卷，里外都写着字，用七印封严了。
And I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on the high seat, a book with writing inside it and on the back, shut with seven stamps of wax.

我又看见一位大力的天使，大声宣传说，有谁配展开那书卷，揭开那七印呢？
And I saw a strong angel saying in a loud voice, Who is able to make the book open, and to undo its stamps?

在天上，地上，地底下，没有能展开能观看那书卷的。
And no one in heaven, or on the earth, or under the earth, was able to get the book open, or to see what was in it.

因为没有配展开，配观看那书卷的，我就大哭。
And I was very sad, because there was no one able to get the book open or to see what was in it.

长老中有一位对我说，不要哭。看哪，犹大支派中的狮子，大卫的根，他已得胜，能以展开那书卷，揭开那七印。
And one of the rulers said to me, Do not be sad: see, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome, and has power to undo the book and its seven stamps.

我又看见宝座与四活物并长老之中，有羔羊站立，像是被杀过的，有七角七眼，就是神的七灵，奉差遣往普天下去的。
And I saw in the middle of the high seat and of the four beasts, and in the middle of the rulers, a Lamb in his place, which seemed as if it had been put to death, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth.

这羔羊前来，从坐宝座的右手里拿了书卷。
And he came and took it out of the right hand of him who was seated on the high seat.

他既拿了书卷，四活物和二十四位长老，就俯伏在羔羊面前，各拿着琴，和盛满了香的金炉。这香就是众圣徒的祈祷。
And when he had taken the book, the four beasts and the four and twenty rulers went down on their faces before the Lamb, having every one an instrument of music, and gold vessels full of perfumes, which are the prayers of the saints.

他们唱新歌，说，你配拿书卷，配揭开七印。因为你曾被杀，用自己的血从各族各方，各民各国中买了人来，叫他们归于神，
And their voices are sounding in a new song, saying, It is right for you to take the book and to make it open: for you were put to death and have made an offering to God of your blood for men of every tribe, and language, and people, and nation,

又叫他们成为国民，作祭司，归于神。在地上执掌王权。
And have made them a kingdom and priests to our God, and they are ruling on the earth.

我又看见，且听见，宝座与活物并长老的周围，有许多天使的声音。他们的数目有千千万万。
And I saw, and there came to my ears the sound of a great number of angels round about the high seat and the beasts and the rulers; and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands;

大声说，曾被杀的羔羊，是配得权柄，丰富，智慧，能力，尊贵，荣耀，颂赞的。
Saying with a great voice, It is right to give to the Lamb who was put to death, power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honour and glory and blessing.

我又听见，在天上，地上，地底下，沧海里，和天地间一切所有被造之物，都说，但愿颂赞，尊贵，荣耀，权势，都归给坐宝座的和羔羊，直到永永远远。
And to my ears came the voice of everything in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and of all things which are in them, saying, To him who is seated on the high seat, and to the Lamb, may blessing and honour and glory and power be given for ever and ever.

四活物就说，阿们。众长老也俯伏敬拜。
And the four beasts said, So be it. And the rulers went down on their faces and gave worship.

我看见羔羊揭开七印中第一印的时候，就听见四活物中的一个活物，声音如雷，说，你来。
And I saw when the Lamb undid one of the stamps, and the voice of one of the four beasts came to my ears, saying as with a voice of thunder, Come and see.

我就观看，见有一匹白马，骑在马上的拿着弓。并有冠冕赐给他。他便出来，胜了又要胜。
And I saw a white horse, and he who was seated on it had a bow; and there was given to him a crown: and he went out with power to overcome.

揭开第二印的时候，我听见第二个活物说，你来。
And when the second stamp was undone, the voice of the second beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see.

就另有一匹马出来，是红的。有权柄给了那骑马的，可以从地上夺去太平，使人彼此相杀。又有一把大刀赐给他。
And another horse came out, a red horse; and it was given to him who was seated on it to take peace from the earth, so that people might put one another to death: and there was given to him a great sword.

揭开第三印的时候，我听见第三个活物说，你来。我就观看，见有一匹黑马。骑在马上的手里拿着天平。
And when the third stamp was undone, the voice of the third beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see. And I saw a black horse; and he who was seated on it had scales in his hand.

我听见在四活物中，似乎有声音说，一钱银子买一升麦子，一钱银子买三升大麦。油和酒不可糟蹋。
And a voice came to my ears, from the middle of the four beasts, saying, A measure of grain for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny: and see that you do no damage to the oil and the wine.

揭开第四印的时候，我听见第四个活物说，你来。
And when the fourth stamp was undone, the voice of the fourth beast came to my ears, saying, Come and see.

我就观看，见有一匹灰色马。骑在马上的，名字叫作死。阴府也随着他。有权柄赐给他们，可以用刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫（瘟疫或作死亡），野兽，杀害地上四分之一的人。
And I saw a grey horse, and the name of him who was seated on it was Death; and Hell came after him. And there was given to them authority over the fourth part of the earth, to put to destruction by the sword, and by taking away their food, and by death, and by the beasts of the earth.

揭开第五印的时候，我看见在祭坛底下，有为神的道，并为作见证，被杀之人的灵魂。
And when the fifth stamp was undone, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been put to death for the word of God, and for the witness which they kept.

大声喊着说，圣洁真实的主阿，你不审判住在地上的人给我们伸流血的冤，要等到几时呢？
And they gave a great cry, saying, How long will it be, O Ruler, holy and true, before you take your place as judge and give punishment for our blood to those on the earth?

于是有白衣赐给他们各人。又有话对他们说，还要安息片时，等着一同作仆人的，和他们的弟兄，也像他们被杀，满足了数目。
And there was given to every one a white robe, and they were ordered to take their rest for a little time, till the number was complete of the other servants, their brothers, who would be put to death, even as they had been.

揭开第六印的时候，我又看见地大震动。日头变黑像毛布，满月变红像血。
And I saw when the sixth stamp was undone, and there was a great earth-shock; and the sun became black as haircloth, and all the moon became as blood;

天上的星辰坠落于地，如同无花果树被大风摇动，落下未熟的果子一样。
And the stars of heaven were falling to the earth, like green fruit from a tree before the force of a great wind.

天就挪移，好像书卷被卷起来。山岭海岛都被挪移离开本位。
And the heaven was taken away like the roll of a book when it is rolled up; and all the mountains and islands were moved out of their places.

地上的君王，臣宰，将军，富户，壮士，和一切为奴的，自主的，都藏在山洞，和岩石穴里。
And the kings of the earth, and the rulers, and the chief captains, and the men of wealth, and the strong, and every servant and free man, took cover in the holes and the rocks of the mountains;

向山和岩石说，倒在我们身上吧，把我们藏起来，躲避坐宝座者的面目，和羔羊的忿怒。
And they say to the mountains and to the rocks, Come down on us, covering us from the face of him who is seated on the high seat, and from the wrath of the Lamb:

因为他们忿怒的大日到了，谁能站得住呢？
For the great day of their wrath is come, and who may keep his place?

此后我看见四位天使站在地的四角，执掌地上四方的风，叫风不吹在地上，海上，和树上。
After this I saw four angels in their places at the four points of the earth, keeping back the four winds in their hands, so that there might be no moving of the wind on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree.

我又看见另有一位天使，从日出之地上来，拿着永生神的印。他就向那得着权柄能伤害地和海的四位天使，大声喊着说，
And I saw another angel coming up from the east, having the mark of the living God: and he said with a great voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to do damage to the earth and the sea,

地与海并树木，你们不可伤害，等我们印了我们神众仆人的额。
Do no damage to the earth, or the sea, or the trees, till we have put a mark on the servants of our God.

我听见以色列人，各支派中受印的数目，有十四万四千。
And there came to my ears the number of those who had the mark on their brows, a hundred and forty-four thousand, who were marked out of every tribe of the people of Israel.

犹大支派中受印的有一万二千。流便支派中有一万二千。迦得支派中有一万二千。
Of the tribe of Judah were marked twelve thousand: of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand:

亚设支派中有一万二千。拿弗他利支派中有一万二千。玛拿西支派中有一万二千。
Of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand: of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand: of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand:

西缅支派中有一万二千。利未支派中有一万二千。以萨迦支派中有一万二千。
Of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand: of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand: of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand:

西布伦支派中有一万二千。约瑟支派中有一万二千。便雅悯支派中受印的有一万二千。
Of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand: of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand: of the tribe of Benjamin were marked twelve thousand.

此后，我观看，见有许多的人，没有人能数过来，是从各国各族各民各方来的，站在宝座和羔羊面前，身穿白衣，手拿棕树枝。
After these things I saw a great army of people more than might be numbered, out of every nation and of all tribes and peoples and languages, taking their places before the high seat and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, and with branches in their hands,

大声喊着说，愿救恩归与坐在宝座上我们的神，也归与羔羊。
Saying with a loud voice, Salvation to our God who is seated on the high seat, and to the Lamb.

众天使都站在宝座和众长老并四活物的周围，在宝座前，面伏于地，敬拜神，
And all the angels were round about the high seat, and about the rulers and the four beasts; and they went down on their faces before the high seat, and gave worship to God, saying,

说，阿们。颂赞，荣耀，智慧，感谢，尊贵，权柄，大力，都归与我们的神，直到永永远远。阿们。
So be it. Let blessing and glory and wisdom and praise and honour and power and strength be given to our God for ever and ever. So be it.

长老中有一位问我说，这些穿白衣的是谁？是从哪里来的？
And one of the rulers made answer, saying to me, These who have on white robes, who are they, and where did they come from?

我对他说，我主，你知道。他向我说，这些人是从大患难中出来的，曾用羔羊的血，把衣裳洗白净了。
And I said to him, My lord, you have knowledge. And he said to me, These are they who came through the great testing, and their robes have been washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb.

所以他们在神宝座前，昼夜在他殿中事奉他。坐宝座的要用帐幕覆庇他们。
This is why they are before the high seat of God; and they are his servants day and night in his house: and he who is seated on the high seat will be a tent over them.

他们不再饥，不再渴。日头和炎热，也必不伤害他们。
They will never be in need of food or drink: and they will never again be troubled by the burning heat of the sun:

因为宝座中的羔羊必牧养他们，领他们到生命水的泉源。神也必擦去他们一切的眼泪。
For the Lamb who is on the high seat will be their keeper and their guide to fountains of living water: and God will make glad their eyes for ever.

羔羊揭开第七印的时候，天上寂静约有二刻。
And when the seventh stamp was undone there was quiet in heaven for about half an hour.

我看见那站在神面前的七位天使，有七枝号赐给他们。
And I saw the seven angels who had their place before God; and seven horns were given to them.

另有一位天使拿着金香炉，来站在祭坛旁边。有许多香赐给他，要和众圣徒的祈祷一同献在宝座前的金坛上。
And another angel came and took his place at the altar, having a gold vessel for burning perfume; and there was given to him much perfume, so that he might put it with the prayers of all the saints on the gold altar which was before the high seat.

那香的烟，和众圣徒的祈祷，从天使的手中一同升到神面前。
And the smoke of the perfume, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the angel's hand.

天使拿着香炉，盛满了坛上的火，倒在地上。随有雷轰，大声，闪电，地震。
And the angel took the vessel; and he made it full of the fire of the altar, and sent it down on the earth: and there came thunders and voices and flames and a shaking of the earth.

拿着七枝号的七位天使，就预备要吹。
And the seven angels who had the seven horns made ready for sounding them.

第一位天使吹号，就有雹子与火搀着血丢在地上。地的三分之一和树的三分之一被烧了，一切的青草也被烧了。
And at the sounding of the first, a rain of ice and fire, mixed with blood, was sent on the earth: and a third part of the earth, and of the trees, and all green grass was burned up.

第二位天使吹号，就有仿佛火烧着的大山扔在海中。海的三分之一变成血。
And at the sounding of the second angel, it was as if a great mountain burning with fire was sent into the sea: and a third part of the sea became blood,

海中的活物死了三分之一。船只也坏了三分之一。
And destruction came on a third part of the living things which were in the sea, and on a third part of the ships.

第三位天使吹号，就有烧着的大星，好像火把从天上落下来，落在江河的三分之一，和众水的泉源上。
And at the sounding of the third angel, there went down from heaven a great star, burning like a flame, and it came on a third part of the rivers, and on the fountains of water.

这星名叫茵陈。众水的三分之一变为茵陈。因水变苦，就死了许多人。
And the name of the star is Wormwood: and a third part of the waters became bitter; and a number of men came to their end because of the waters, for they were made bitter.

第四位天使吹号，日头的三分之一，月亮的三分之一，星辰的三分之一，都被击打。以致日月星的三分之一黑暗了，白昼的三分之一没有光，黑夜也是这样。
And at the sounding of the fourth angel, a third part of the sun, and of the moon, and of the stars was made dark, so that there was no light for a third part of the day and of the night.

我又看见一个鹰飞在空中，并听见它大声说，三位天使要吹那其余的号，你们住在地上的民，祸哉，祸哉，祸哉。
And there came to my ears the cry of an eagle in flight in the middle of heaven, saying with a great voice, Trouble, trouble, trouble, to all on the earth, because of the other voices of the horns of the three angels, whose sounding is still to come.

第五位天使吹号，我就看见一个星从天落到地上。有无底坑的钥匙赐给他。
And at the sounding of the fifth angel I saw a star falling from heaven to the earth: and there was given to him the key of the great deep.

他开了无底坑，便有烟从坑里往上冒，好像大火炉的烟。日头和天空，都因这烟昏暗了。
And he made the great deep open and a smoke went up from it, like the smoke of a great oven; and the sun and the air were made dark because of the smoke.

有蝗虫从烟中出来飞到地上。有能力赐给它们，好像地上蝎子的能力一样。
And from the smoke locusts came out on the earth; and power was given them, like the power of scorpions.

并且吩咐它们说，不可伤害地上的草，和各样青物，并一切树木，惟独要伤害额上没有神印记的人。
And they were ordered to do no damage to the grass of the earth, or any green thing, or any tree, but only to such men as have not the mark of God on their brows.

但不许蝗虫害死他们，只叫他们受痛苦五个月。这痛苦就像蝎子螫人的痛苦一样。
And orders were given them not to put them to death, but to give them great pain for five months: and their pain was as the pain from the wound of a scorpion.

在那些日子，人要求死，决不得死。愿意死，死却远避他们。
And in those days men will be hoping for death, and it will not come to them; and they will have a great desire for death, and death will go in flight from them.

蝗虫的形状，好像预备出战的马一样，头上戴的好像金冠冕，脸面好像男人的脸面。
And the forms of the locusts were like horses made ready for war; and on their heads they had crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.

头发像女人的头发，牙齿像狮子的牙齿。
And they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

胸前有甲，好像铁甲。它们翅膀的声音，好像许多车马奔跑上阵的声音。
And they had breastplates like iron, and the sound of their wings was as the sound of carriages, like an army of horses rushing to the fight.

有尾巴像蝎子。尾巴上的毒钩能伤人五个月。
And they have pointed tails like scorpions; and in their tails is their power to give men wounds for five months.

有无底坑的使者作它们的王。按着希伯来话，名叫亚巴顿，希利尼话，名叫亚玻伦。
They have over them as king the angel of the great deep: his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in the Greek language Apollyon.

第一样灾祸过去了，还有两样灾祸要来。
The first Trouble is past: see, there are still two Troubles to come.

第六位天使吹号，我就听见有声音，从神面前金坛的四角出来，
And at the sounding of the sixth angel a voice came to my ears from the horns of the gold altar which is before God,

吩咐那吹号的第六位天使，说，把那捆绑在伯拉大河的四个使者释放了。
Saying to the sixth angel who had the horn, Make free the four angels who are chained at the great river Euphrates.

那四个使者就被释放。他们原是预备好了，到某年某月某日某时，要杀人的三分之一。
And the four angels were made free, who were ready for the hour and day and month and year, that they might put to death a third part of men.

马军有二万万。他们的数目我听见了。
And the number of the armies of the horsemen was twice ten thousand times ten thousand: the number of them came to my ears.

我在异象中看见那些马和骑马的，骑马的胸前有甲如火，与紫玛瑙，并硫磺。马的头好像狮子头，有火，有烟，有硫磺，从马的口中出来。
And so I saw the horses in the vision, and those who were seated on them, having breastplates of fire and glass and of burning stone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and a smell of burning.

口中所出来的火，与烟，并硫磺，这三样灾杀了人的三分之一。
By these evils a third part of men was put to death, by the fire, and the smoke, and the burning smell which came out of their mouths.

这马的能力，是在口里，和尾巴上。因这尾巴像蛇，并且有头用以害人。
For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails: because their tails are like snakes, and have heads, and with them they give wounds.

其余未曾被这些灾所杀的人，仍旧不悔改自己手所作的，还是去拜鬼魔，和那些不能看，不能听，不能走，金，银，铜，木，石，的偶像。
And the rest of the people, who were not put to death by these evils, were not turned from the works of their hands, but went on giving worship to evil spirits, and images of gold and silver and brass and stone and wood which have no power of seeing or hearing or walking:

又不悔改他们那些凶杀，邪术，奸淫，偷窃的事。
And they had no regret for putting men to death, or for their use of secret arts, or for the evil desires of the flesh, or for taking the property of others.

我又看见另有一位大力的天使，从天降下，披着云彩，头上有虹。脸面像日头，两脚像火柱。
And I saw another strong angel coming down out of heaven, clothed with a cloud; and an arch of coloured light was round his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire;

他手里拿着小书卷是展开的。他右脚踏海，左脚踏地。
And he had in his hand a little open book: and he put his right foot on the sea, and his left on the earth;

大声呼喊，好像狮子吼叫，呼喊完了，就有七雷发声。
And he gave a loud cry, like the angry voice of a lion: and at his cry the voices of the seven thunders were sounding.

七雷发声之后，我正要写出来，就听见从天上有声音说，七雷所说的你要封上，不可写出来。
And when the seven thunders had given out their voices, I was about to put their words down: and a voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Keep secret the things which the seven thunders said, and do not put them in writing.

我所看见的那踏海踏地的天使，向天举起右手来，
And the angel which I saw taking his position on the sea and on the earth, put up his right hand to heaven,

指着那创造天和天上之物，地和地上之物，海和海中之物，直活到永永远远的，起誓说，不再有时日了。（或作不再耽延了）
And took his oath by him who is living for ever and ever, who made the heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, that there would be no more waiting:

但在第七位天使吹号发声的时候，神的奥秘，就成全了，正如神所传给他仆人众先知的佳音。
But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when the sound of his horn is about to come, then will the secret of God be complete, of which he gave the good news to his servants the prophets.

我先前从天上所听见的那声音，又吩咐我说，你去把那踏海踏地之天使手中展开的小书卷取过来。
And the voice came to me again from heaven, saying, Go, take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who has his place on the sea and on the earth.

我就走到天使那里，对他说，请你把小书卷给我。他对我说，你拿着吃尽了，便叫你肚子发苦，然而在你口中要甜如蜜。
And I went to the angel, and said to him, Give me the little book. And he said to me: Put it in your mouth; and it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.

我从天使手中把小书卷接过来，吃尽了。在我口中果然甜如蜜。吃了以后，肚子觉得发苦了。
And I took the little book out of the angel's hand and did as he said; and it was sweet as honey in my mouth: and when I had taken it, my stomach was made bitter.

天使（原文作他们）对我说，你必指着多民多国多方多王再说预言。
And they said to me, You are to give word again of what is coming in the future to the peoples and nations and languages and kings.

有一根苇子赐给我，当作量度的杖。且有话说，起来，将神的殿，和祭坛，并在殿中礼拜的人，都量一量。
And there was given to me a measuring rod: and one said, Go up and take the measure of the house of God, and the altar, and the worshippers in it.

只是殿外的院子，要留下不用量。因为这是给了外邦人的。他们要践踏圣城四十二个月。
But do not take the measure of the space outside the house; because it has been given to the nations: and the holy town will be under their feet for forty-two months.

我要使我那两个见证人，穿着毛衣，传道一千二百六十天。
And I will give orders to my two witnesses, and they will be prophets for a thousand, two hundred and sixty days, clothed with haircloth.

他们就是那两棵橄榄树，两个灯台，立在世界之主面前的。
These are the two olive-trees and the two lights, which are before the Lord of the earth.

若有人想要害他们，就有火从他们口中出来，烧灭仇敌。凡想要害他们的，都必这样被杀。
And if any man would do them damage, fire comes out of their mouth and puts an end to those who are working against them: and if any man has a desire to do them damage, in this way will he be put to death.

这二人有权柄，在他们传道的日子叫天闭塞不下雨，又有权柄叫水变为血。并且能随时随意用各样的灾殃攻击世界。
These have the power to keep the heaven shut, so that there may be no rain in the days when they are prophets: and they have power over the waters to make them into blood, and to send every sort of disease on the earth as their pleasure is.

他们作完见证的时候，那从无底坑里上来的兽，必与他们交战，并且得胜，把他们杀了。
And when they have come to the end of their witness, the beast which comes up out of the great deep will make war on them and overcome them and put them to death.

他们的尸首就倒在大城里的街上。这城按着灵意叫所多玛，又叫埃及，就是他们的主钉十字架之处。
And their dead bodies will be in the open street of the great town, which in the spirit is named Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord was put to death on the cross.

从各民各族各方各国中，有人观看他们的尸首三天半，又不许把尸首放在坟墓里。
And the peoples and tribes and languages and nations will be looking on their dead bodies three days and a half, and will not let their dead bodies be put in the earth.

住在地上的人，就为他们欢喜快乐，互相馈送礼物。因这两位先知曾叫住在地上的人受痛苦。
And those who are on the earth will have pleasure and delight over them; and they will send offerings one to another because these two prophets gave great trouble to all on the earth.

过了这三天半，有生气从神那里进入他们里面，他们就站起来。看见他们的人甚是害怕。
And after three days and a half the breath of life from God went into them, and they got up on their feet; and great fear came on those who saw them.

两位先知听见有大声音从天上来，对他们说，上到这里来。他们就驾着云上了天。他们的仇敌也看见了。
And a great voice from heaven came to their ears, saying to them, Come up here. And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and were seen by those desiring their death.

正在那时候，地大震动，城就倒塌了十分之一。因地震而死的有七千人。其余的都恐惧，归荣耀给天上的神。
And in that hour there was a great earth-shock and a tenth part of the town came to destruction; and in the earth-shock seven thousand persons came to their end: and the rest were in fear, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

第二样灾祸过去。第三样灾祸快到了。
The second Trouble is past: see, the third Trouble comes quickly.

第七位天使吹号，天上就有大声音说，世上的国，成了我主和主基督的国。他要作王，直到永永远远。
And at the sounding of the seventh angel there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he will have rule for ever and ever.

在神面前，坐在自己位上的二十四位长老，就面伏于地敬拜神，
And the four and twenty rulers, who are seated before God on their high seats, went down on their faces and gave worship to God, saying,

说，昔在今在的主神，全能者阿，我们感谢你，因你执掌大权作王了。
We give you praise, O Lord God, Ruler of all, who is and who was; because you have taken up your great power and are ruling your kingdom.

外邦发怒，你的忿怒也临到了。审判死人的时候也到了。你的仆人众先知，和众圣徒，凡敬畏你名的人连大带小得赏赐的时候也到了。你败坏那些败坏世界之人的时候也就到了。
And the nations were angry, and your wrath has come, and the time for the dead to be judged, and the time of reward for your servants, the prophets, and for the saints, and for those in whom is the fear of your name, small and great, and the time of destruction for those who made the earth unclean.

当时神天上的殿开了，在他殿中现出他的约柜。随后有闪电，声音，雷轰，地震，大雹。
And the house of God which is in heaven was open; and the ark of his agreement was seen in his house, and there were flames and voices and thunders and an earth-shock and a rain of ice.

天上现出大异象来。有一个妇人，身披日头，脚踏月亮，头戴十二星的冠冕。
And a great sign was seen in heaven: a A woman clothed with the sun, and with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.

她怀了孕，在生产的艰难中疼痛呼叫。
And she was with child; and she gave a cry, in the pains of childbirth.

天上又现出异象来。有一条大红龙，七头十角，七头上戴着七个冠冕。
And there was seen another sign in heaven; a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns.

它的尾巴拖拉着天上星辰的三分之一，摔在地上。龙就站在那将要生产的妇人面前，等她生产之后，要吞吃她的孩子。
And his tail was pulling a third part of the stars of heaven down to the earth, and the dragon took his place before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when the birth had taken place he might put an end to her child.

妇人生了一个男孩子，是将来要用铁杖辖管万国的（辖管原文作牧）。她的孩子被提到神宝座那里去了。
And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who was to have rule over all the nations with a rod of iron: and her child was taken up to God and to his high seat.

妇人就逃到旷野，在那里有神给她预备的地方，使她被养活一千二百六十天。
And the woman went in flight to the waste land, where she has a place made ready by God, so that there they may give her food a thousand, two hundred and sixty days.

在天上就有了争战。米迦勒同他的使者与龙争战。龙也同它的使者去争战。
And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels going out to the fight with the dragon; and the dragon and his angels made war,

并没有得胜，天上再没有它们的地方。
And they were overcome, and there was no more place for them in heaven.

大龙就是那古蛇，名叫魔鬼，又叫撒但，是迷惑普天下的。它被摔在地上，它的使者也一同被摔下去。
And the great dragon was forced down, the old snake, who is named the Evil One and Satan, by whom all the earth is turned from the right way; he was forced down to the earth, and his angels were forced down with him.

我听见在天上有大声音说，我神的救恩，能力，国度，并他基督的权柄，现在都来到了。因为那在我们神面前昼夜控告我们弟兄的，已经被摔下去了。
And a great voice in heaven came to my ears, saying, Now is come the salvation, and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ: because he who says evil against our brothers before our God day and night is forced down.

弟兄胜过它，是因羔羊的血，和自己所见证的道。他们虽至于死，也不爱惜性命。
And they overcame him through the blood of the Lamb and the word of their witness; and loving not their lives they freely gave themselves up to death.

所以诸天和住在其中的，你们都快乐吧。只是地与海有祸了，因为魔鬼知道自己的时候不多，就气忿忿地下到你们那里去了。
Be glad then, O heavens, and you who are in them. But there is trouble for the earth and the sea: because the Evil One has come down to you, being very angry, having the knowledge that he has but a short time.

龙见自己被摔在地上，就逼迫那生男孩子的妇人。
And when the dragon saw that he was forced down to the earth, he made cruel attacks on the woman who gave birth to the male child.

于是有大鹰的两个翅膀赐给妇人，叫她能飞到旷野，到自己的地方，躲避那蛇。她在那里被养活一载二载半载。
And there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle, so that she might go in flight into the waste land, to her place, where she is given food for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the snake.

蛇就在妇人身后，从口中吐出水来像河一样，要将妇人冲去。
And the snake sent out of his mouth after the woman a river of water, so that she might be taken away by the stream.

地却帮助妇人，开口吞了从龙口吐出来的水。（原文作河）
And the earth gave help to the woman, and with open mouth took up the river which the dragon sent out of his mouth.

龙向妇人发怒，去与她其余的儿女争战，这儿女就是那守神诫命，为耶稣作见证的。那时龙就站在海边的沙上。
And the dragon was angry with the woman and went away to make war on the rest of her seed, who keep the orders of God, and the witness of Jesus:

我又看见一个兽从海中上来，有十角七头，在十角上戴着十个冠冕，七头上有亵渎的名号。
And he took his place on the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and on his horns ten crowns, and on his heads unholy names.

我所看见的兽，形状像豹，脚像熊的脚，口像狮子的口。那龙将自己的能力，座位，和大权柄，都给了它。
And the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power and his seat and great authority.

我看见兽的七头中，有一个似乎受了死伤。那死伤却医好了。全地的人，都希奇跟从那兽。
And I saw one of his heads as if it had been given a death-wound; and his death-wound was made well: and all the earth was wondering at the beast.

又拜那龙，因为它将自己的权柄给了兽。也拜兽说，谁能比这兽，谁能与它交战呢？
And they gave worship to the dragon, because he gave authority to the beast; and worshipping the beast, they said, Who is like the beast? and who is able to go to war with him?

又赐给它说夸大亵渎话的口。又有权柄赐给它，可以任意而行四十二个月。
And there was given to him a mouth to say words of pride against God; and there was given to him authority to go on for forty-two months.

兽就开口向神说亵渎的话，亵渎神的名，并他的帐幕，以及那些住在天上的。
And his mouth was open to say evil against God, and against his name and his Tent, even against those who are in heaven.

又任凭它与圣徒争战，并且得胜。也把权柄赐给它，制伏各族各民各方各国。
And it was given to him to make war on the saints and to overcome them: and there was given to him authority over every tribe and people and language and nation.

凡住在地上，名字从创世以来，没有记在被杀之羔羊生命册上的人，都要拜它。
And all who are on the earth will give him worship, everyone whose name has not been from the first in the book of life of the Lamb who was put to death.

凡有耳的，就应当听。
If any man has ears, let him give ear.

掳掠人的必被掳掠。用刀杀人的，必被刀杀。圣徒的忍耐和信心，就是在此。
If any man sends others into prison, into prison he will go: if any man puts to death with the sword, with the sword will he be put to death. Here is the quiet strength and the faith of the saints.

我又看见另有一个兽从地中上来。有两角如同羊羔，说话好像龙。
And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and his voice was like that of a dragon.

它在头一个兽面前，施行头一个兽所有的权柄。并且叫地和住在地上的人，拜那死伤医好的头一个兽。
And he makes use of all the authority of the first beast before his eyes. And he makes the earth and those who are in it give worship to the first beast, whose death-wound was made well.

又行大奇事，甚至在人面前，叫火从天降在地上。
And he does great signs, even making fire come down from heaven on the earth before the eyes of men.

它因赐给它权柄在兽面前能行奇事，就迷惑住在地上的人，说，要给那受刀伤还活着的兽作个像。
And those who are on the earth are turned from the true way by him through the signs which he was given power to do before the beast; giving orders to those who are on the earth to make an image to the beast, who was wounded by the sword, and came to life.

又有权柄赐给它叫兽像有生气。并且能说话，又叫所有不拜兽像的人都被杀害。
And he had power to give breath to the image of the beast, so that words might come from the image of the beast, and that he might have all those who did not give worship to the image of the beast put to death.

它又叫众人，无论大小贫富，自主的，为奴的，都在右手上，或是在额上，受一个印记。
And he gives to all, small and great, the poor and those who have wealth, the free and those who are not free, a mark on their right hand or on their brows;

除了那受印记，有了兽名，或有兽名数目的，都不得作买卖。
So that no man might be able to do trade but he who has the mark, even the name of the beast or the number of his name.

在这里有智慧。凡有聪明的，可以算计兽的数目，因为这是人的数目。它的数目是六百六十六。
Here is wisdom. He who has knowledge let him get the number of the beast; because it is the number of a man: and his number is Six hundred and sixty-six.

我又观看，见羔羊站在锡安山，同他又有十四万四千人，都有他的名，和他父的名，写在额上。
And I saw the Lamb on the mountain of Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, marked on their brows with his name and the name of his Father.

我听见从天上有声音，像众水的声音，和大雷的声音。并且我所听见的好像弹琴的所弹的琴声。
And a voice from heaven came to my ears, like the sound of great waters, and the sound of loud thunder: and the voice which came to me was like the sound of players, playing on instruments of music.

他们在宝座前，并在四活物和众长老前唱歌，仿佛是新歌。除了从地上买来的那十四万四千人以外，没有人能学这歌。
And they made as it seemed a new song before the high seat, and before the four beasts and the rulers: and no man might have knowledge of the song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, even those from the earth whom God has made his for a price.

这些人未曾沾染妇女，他们原是童身。羔羊无论往哪里去，他们都跟随他。他们是从人间买来的，作初熟的果子归与神和羔羊。
These are they who have not made themselves unclean with women; for they are virgins. These are they who go after the Lamb wherever he goes. These were taken from among men to be the first fruits to God and to the Lamb.

在他们口中察不出谎言来。他们是没有瑕疵的。
And in their mouth there was no false word, for they are untouched by evil.

我又看见另有一位天使飞在空中，有永远的福音要传给住在地上的人，就是各国各族各方各民。
And I saw another angel in flight between heaven and earth, having eternal good news to give to those who are on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and language and people,

他大声说，应当敬畏神，将荣耀归给他。因他施行审判的时候已经到了。应当敬拜那创造天地海和众水泉源的。
Saying with a loud voice, Have fear of God and give him glory; because the hour of his judging is come; and give worship to him who made heaven and earth and the sea and the fountains of water.

又有第二位天使，接着说，叫万民喝邪淫大怒之酒的巴比伦大城倾倒了，倾倒了。
And a second angel came after, saying, Destruction has come to Babylon the great, which gave to all the nations the wine of the wrath of her evil ways.

又有第三位天使，接着他们，大声说，若有人拜兽和兽像，在额上，或在手上，受了印记，
And a third angel came after them, saying with a loud voice, If any man gives worship to the beast and his image, and has his mark on his brow or on his hand,

这人也必喝神大怒的酒，此酒斟在神忿怒的杯中纯一不杂。他要在圣天使和羔羊面前，在火与硫磺之中受痛苦。
To him will be given of the wine of God's wrath which is ready unmixed in the cup of his wrath and he will have cruel pain, burning with fire before the holy angels and before the Lamb:

他受痛苦的烟往上冒，直到永永远远。那些拜兽和兽像受他名之印记的，昼夜不得安宁。
And the smoke of their pain goes up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day and night, who give worship to the beast and his image, and have on them the mark of his name.

圣徒的忍耐就在此。他们是守神诫命，和耶稣真道的。
Here is the quiet strength of the saints, who keep the orders of God, and the faith of Jesus.

我听见从天上有声音说，你要写下，从今以后，在主里面而死的人有福了。圣灵说，是的，他们息了自己的劳苦，作工的果效也随着他们。
And a voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Put in writing, There is a blessing on the dead who from now on come to their end in the Lord: yes, says the Spirit, that they may have rest from their troubles; for their works go with them.

我又观看，见有一片白云，云上坐着一位好像人子，头上戴着金冠冕，手里拿着快镰刀。
And I saw a white cloud, and on the cloud I saw one seated, like a son of man, having on his head a crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp curved blade.

又有一位天使从殿中出来，向那坐在云上的大声喊着说，伸出你的镰刀来收割。因为收割的时候已经到了，地上的庄稼已经熟透了。
And another angel came out from the house of God, crying with a loud voice to him who was seated on the cloud, Put in your blade, and let the grain be cut: because the hour for cutting it is come; for the grain of the earth is over-ready.

那坐在云上的，就把镰刀扔在地上。地上的庄稼就被收割了。
And he who was seated on the cloud sent in his blade on the earth; and the grain of the earth was cut.

又有一位天使从天上的殿中出来，他也拿着快镰刀。
And another angel came out from the house of God which is in heaven, having a sharp curved blade.

又有一位天使从祭坛中出来，是有权柄管火的，向拿着快镰刀的大声喊着说，伸出快镰刀来收取地上葡萄树的果子。因为葡萄熟透了。
And another angel came out from the altar, who has power over fire; and he gave a loud cry to him who had the sharp curved blade, saying, Put in your sharp blade, and let the grapes of the vine of the earth be cut; for her grapes are fully ready.

那天使就把镰刀扔在地上，收取了地上的葡萄，丢在神忿怒的大酒榨中。
And the angel sent his blade into the earth, and the vine of the earth was cut, and he put it into the great wine-crusher of the wrath of God.

那酒榨踹在城外，就有血从酒榨里流出来，高到马的嚼环，远有六百里。
And the grapes were crushed under foot outside the town, and blood came out from them, even to the head-bands of the horses, two hundred miles.

我又看见在天上有异象，大而且奇，就是七位天使掌管末了的七灾。因为神的大怒在这七灾中发尽了。
And I saw another sign in heaven, great and strange; seven angels having the seven last punishments, for in them the wrath of God is complete.

我看见仿佛有玻璃海，其中有火搀杂。又看见那些胜了兽和兽的像，并它名字数目的人，都站在玻璃海上，拿着神的琴。
And I saw a sea which seemed like glass mixed with fire; and those who had overcome the beast and his image and the number of his name, were in their places by the sea of glass, with God's instruments of music in their hands.

唱神仆人摩西的歌，和羔羊的歌，说，主神，全能者阿，你的作为大哉，奇哉。万世之王阿，（世或作国）你的道途义哉，诚哉。
And they give the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and full of wonder are your works, O Lord God, Ruler of all; true and full of righteousness are your ways, eternal King.

主阿，谁敢不敬畏你，不将荣耀归与你的名呢？因为独有你是圣的。万民都要来在你面前敬拜。因你公义的作为已经显出来了。
What man is there who will not have fear before you, O Lord, and give glory to your name? because you only are holy; for all the nations will come and give worship before you; for your righteousness has been made clear.

此后，我看见在天上那存法柜的殿开了。
And after these things I saw, and the house of the Tent of witness in heaven was open:

那掌管七灾的七位天使，从殿中出来，穿着洁白光明的细麻衣，（细麻衣有古卷作宝石）胸间束着金带。
And the seven angels who had the seven punishments came out from the house of God, clothed with linen, clean and bright and with bands of gold about their breasts.

四活物中有一个把盛满了活到永永远远之神大怒的七个金碗给了那七位天使。
And one of the four beasts gave to the seven angels seven gold vessels full of the wrath of God, who is living for ever and ever.

因神的荣耀，和能力，殿中充满了烟。于是没有人能以进殿，直等到那七位天使所降的七灾完毕了。
And the house of God was full of smoke from the glory of God, and from his power, and no one was able to go into the house of God, till the seven punishments of the seven angels were ended.

我听见有大声音从殿中出来，向那七位天使说，你们去，把盛神大怒的七碗倒在地上。
And a great voice out of the house of God came to my ears, saying to the seven angels, Go, and let that which is in the seven vessels of the wrath of God come down on the earth.

第一位天使便去，把碗倒在地上，就有恶而且毒的疮，生在那些有兽印记，拜兽像的人身上。
And the first went, and let what was in his vessel come down on the earth; and it became an evil poisoning wound on the men who had the mark of the beast, and who gave worship to his image.

第二位天使把碗倒在海里，海就变成血，好像死人的血，海中的活物都死了。
And the second let what was in his vessel come out into the sea; and it became blood as of a dead man; and every living thing in the sea came to an end.

第三位天使把碗倒在江河与众水的泉源里，水就变成血了。
And the third let what was in his vessel come out into the rivers and the fountains of water; and they became blood.

我听见掌管众水的天使说，昔在今在的圣者阿，你这样判断是公义的。
And the voice of the angel of the waters came to my ears, saying, True and upright is your judging, O Holy One, who is and was from all time:

他们曾流圣徒与先知的血，现在你给他们血喝。这是他们所该受的。
For they made the blood of saints and prophets come out like a stream, and blood have you given them for drink; which is their right reward.

我又听见祭坛中有声音说，是的，主神，全能者阿，你的判断义哉，诚哉。
And a voice came from the altar, saying, Even so, O Lord God, Ruler of all, true and full of righteousness is your judging.

第四位天使把碗倒在日头上，叫日头能用火烤人。
And the fourth let what was in his vessel come out on the sun; and power was given to it that men might be burned with fire.

人被大热所烤，就亵渎那有权掌管这些灾的神之名，并不悔改将荣耀归给神。
And men were burned with great heat: and they said evil things against the name of the God who has authority over these punishments; and they were not turned from their evil ways to give him glory.

第五位天使把碗倒在兽的座位上，兽的国就黑暗了。人因疼痛就咬自己的舌头。
And the fifth let what was in his vessel come out on the high seat of the beast; and his kingdom was made dark; and they were biting their tongues for pain.

又因所受的疼痛，和生的疮，就亵渎天上的神。并不悔改所行的。
And they said evil things against the God of heaven because of their pain and their wounds; and they were not turned from their evil works.

第六位天使把碗倒在伯拉大河上，河水就干了，要给那从日出之地所来的众王预备道路。
And the sixth let what was in his vessel come out on the great river Euphrates; and it became dry, so that the way might be made ready for the kings from the east.

我又看见三个污秽的灵，好像青蛙，从龙口兽口并假先知的口中出来。
And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, like frogs.

他们本是鬼魔的灵，施行奇事，出去到普天下众王那里，叫他们在神全能者的大日聚集争战。
For they are evil spirits, working signs; who go out even to the kings of all the earth, to get them together to the war of the great day of God, the Ruler of all.

（看哪，我来像贼一样。那儆醒，看守衣服，免得赤身而行，叫人见他羞耻的，有福了
(See, I come as a thief. Happy is he who is watching and keeps his robes, so that he may not go unclothed, and his shame be seen.)

那三个鬼魔便叫众王聚集在一处，希伯来话叫作哈米吉多顿。
And they got them together into the place which is named in Hebrew Armageddon.

第七位天使把碗倒在空中，就有大声音从殿中的宝座上出来，说，成了。
And the seventh let what was in his vessel come out on the air; and there came out a great voice from the house of God, from the high seat, saying, It is done.

又有闪电，声音，雷轰，大地震，自从地上有人以来，没有这样大这样利害的地震。
And there were flames and voices and thunders; and there was a great earth-shock so that never, from the time when men were on the earth, had there been so great an earth-shock, so full of power.

那大城裂为三段，列国的城也都倒塌了。神也想起巴比伦大城来，要把那盛自己烈怒的酒杯递给他。
And the great town was cut into three parts, and the towns of the nations came to destruction: and Babylon the great came into mind before God, to be given the cup of the wine of his wrath.

各海岛都逃避了，众山也不见了。
And every island went in flight, and the mountains were seen no longer.

又有大雹子从天落在人身上，每一个约重一他连得。（一他连得约有九十斤）为这雹子的灾极大，人就亵渎神。
And great drops of ice, every one about the weight of a talent, came down out of heaven on men: and men said evil things against God because of the punishment of the ice-drops; for it is very great.

拿着七碗的七位天使中，有一位前来对我说，你到这里来，我将坐在众水上的大淫妇所要受的刑罚指给你看。
And one of the seven angels who had the seven vessels came and said to me, Come here, so that you may see the judging of the evil woman who is seated on the great waters;

地上的君王与她行淫。住在地上的人喝醉了她淫乱的酒。
With whom the kings of the earth made themselves unclean, and those who are on the earth were full of the wine of her evil desires.

我被圣灵感动，天使带我到旷野去。我就看见一个女人骑在朱红色的兽上。那兽有七头十角，遍体有亵渎的名号。
And he took me away in the Spirit into a waste land: and I saw a woman seated on a bright red beast, full of evil names, having seven heads and ten horns,

那女人穿着紫色和朱红色的衣服，用金子宝石珍珠为妆饰。手拿金杯，杯中盛满了可憎之物，就是她淫乱的污秽。
And the woman was clothed in purple and bright red, with ornaments of gold and stones of great price and jewels; and in her hand was a gold cup full of evil things and her unclean desires;

在她额上有名写着说，奥秘哉，大巴比伦，作世上的淫妇和一切可憎之物的母。
And on her brow was a name, SECRET, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE EVIL WOMEN AND OF THE UNCLEAN THINGS OF THE EARTH.

我又看见那女人喝醉了圣徒的血，和为耶稣作见证之人的血。我看见她，就大大地希奇。
And I saw the woman overcome as with the wine of the blood of the saints, and the blood of those put to death because of Jesus. And when I saw her, I was overcome with a great wonder.

天使对我说，你为什么希奇呢？我要将这女人和驮着她的那七头十角兽的奥秘告诉你。
And the angel said to me, Why were you surprised? I will make clear to you the secret of the woman, and of the beast on which she is seated, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.

你所看见的兽，先前有，如今没有。将要从无底坑里上来，又要归于沉沦。凡住在地上名字从创世以来没有记在生命册上的，见先前有，如今没有，以后再有的兽，就必希奇。
The beast which you saw was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the great deep, and to go into destruction. And those who are on the earth, whose names have not been put in the book of life from the first, will be full of wonder when they see the beast, that he was, and is not, and still will be.

智慧的心在此可以思想。那七头就是女人所坐的七座山。
Here is the mind which has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman is seated:

又是七位王。五位已经倾倒了，一位还在，一位还没有来到。他来的时候，必须暂时存留。
And they are seven kings; the five have come to an end, the one is, the other has not come; and when he comes, he will have to go on for a little time.

那先前有，如今没有的兽，就是第八位。他也和那七位同列，并且归于沉沦。
And the beast which was, and is not, is himself the eighth, and is of the seven; and he goes into destruction.

你所看见的那十角，就是十王。他们还没有得国。但他们一时之间，要和兽同得权柄与王一样。
And the ten horns which you saw are ten kings, which still have been given no kingdom; but they are given authority as kings, with the beast, for one hour.

他们同心合意，将自己的能力权柄给那兽。
These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.

他们与羔羊争战，羔羊必胜过他们，因为羔羊是万主之主，万王之王。同着羔羊的，就是蒙召被选有忠心的，也必得胜。
These will make war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, because he is the Lord of lords and King of kings; and those who are with him are named, marked out, and true.

天使又对我说，你所看见那淫妇坐的众水，就是多民多人多国多方。
And he said to me, The waters which you saw, where the evil woman is seated, are peoples, and armies, and nations and languages.

你所看见的那十角，与兽，必恨这淫妇，使她冷落赤身。又要吃她的肉，用火将她烧尽。
And the ten horns which you saw, and the beast, these will be turned against the evil woman, and will make her waste and uncovered, and will take her flesh for food, and will have her burned with fire.

因为神使诸王同心合意，遵行他的旨意，把自己的国给那兽，直等到神的话都应验了。
Because God has put it in their hearts to do his purpose, and to be of one mind, giving their kingdom to the beast, till the words of God have effect and are complete.

你所看见的那女人，就是管辖地上众王的大城。
And the woman whom you saw is the great town, which is ruling over the kings of the earth.

此后，我看见另有一位有大权柄的天使从天降下。地就因他的荣耀发光。
After these things I saw another angel coming down out of heaven, having great authority; and the earth was bright with his glory.

他大声喊着说，巴比伦大城倾倒了，倾倒了，成了鬼魔的住处，和各样污秽之灵的巢穴（或作牢狱下同），并各样污秽可憎之雀鸟的巢穴。
And he gave a loud cry, saying, Babylon the great has come down from her high place, she has come to destruction and has become a place of evil spirits, and of every unclean spirit, and a hole for every unclean and hated bird.

因为列国都被她邪淫大怒的酒倾倒了。地上的君王与她行淫，地上的客商，因她奢华太过就发了财。
For through the wine of the wrath of her evil desires all the nations have come to destruction; and the kings of the earth made themselves unclean with her, and the traders of the earth had their wealth increased by the power of her evil ways.

我又听见从天上有声音说，我的民哪，你们要从那城出来，免得与她一同有罪，受她所受的灾殃。
And another voice from heaven came to my ears, saying, Come out of her, my people, so that you may have no part in her sins and in her punishments.

因她的罪恶滔天，她的不义神已经想起来了。
For her sins have gone up even to heaven, and God has taken note of her evil-doing.

她怎样待人，也要怎样待她，按她所行的加倍地报应她。用她调酒的杯，加倍地调给她喝。
Give to her as she gave, even an increased reward for her works; in the cup which was mixed by her, let there be mixed as much again for herself.

她怎样荣耀自己，怎样奢华，也当叫她照样痛苦悲哀。因她心里说，我坐了皇后的位，并不是寡妇，决不至于悲哀。
As she gave glory to herself, and became more evil in her ways, in the same measure give her pain and weeping: for she says in her heart, I am seated here a queen, and am no widow, and will in no way see sorrow.

所以在一天之内，她的灾殃要一齐来到，就是死亡，悲哀，饥荒，她又要被火烧尽了。因为审判她的主神大有能力。
For this reason in one day will her troubles come, death and sorrow and need of food; and she will be completely burned with fire; for strong is the Lord God who is her judge.

地上的君王，素来与她行淫一同奢华的，看见烧她的烟，就必为她哭泣哀号。
And the kings of the earth, who made themselves unclean with her, and in her company gave themselves up to evil, will be weeping and crying over her, when they see the smoke of her burning,

因怕她的痛苦，就远远地站着说，哀哉，哀哉，巴比伦大城，坚固的城阿，一时之间你的刑罚就来到了。
Watching from far away, for fear of her punishment, saying, Sorrow, sorrow for Babylon, the great town, the strong town! for in one hour you have been judged.

地上的客商也都为她哭泣悲哀，因为没有人再买他们的货物了。
And the traders of the earth are weeping and crying over her, because no man has any more desire for their goods,

这货物就是金，银，宝石，珍珠，细麻布，紫色料，绸子，朱红色料，各样香木，各样象牙的器皿，各样极宝贵的木头和铜，铁，汉白玉的器皿，
Gold, and silver, and stones of great price, and jewels, and delicate linen, and robes of purple and silk and red; and perfumed wood, and every vessel of ivory, and every vessel made of fair wood, and of brass, and iron, and stone;

并肉桂，豆蔻，香料，香膏，乳香，酒，油，细面，麦子，牛，羊，车，马，和奴仆，人口。
And sweet-smelling plants, and perfumes, and wine, and oil, and well crushed grain, and cattle and sheep; and horses and carriages and servants; and souls of men.

巴比伦哪，你所贪爱的果子离开了你。你一切的珍馐美味，和华美的物件，也从你中间毁灭，决不能再见了。
And the fruit of your soul's desire has gone from you, and all things delicate and shining have come to an end and will never again be seen.

贩卖这些货物，借着她发了财的客商，因怕她的痛苦，就远远地站着哭泣悲哀，说，
The traders in these things, by which their wealth was increased, will be watching far off for fear of her punishment, weeping and crying;

哀哉，哀哉，这大城阿，素常穿着细麻，紫色，朱红色的衣服，又用金子，宝石，和珍珠为妆饰。
Saying, Sorrow, sorrow for the great town, she who was clothed in delicate linen, and purple, and red; with ornaments of gold and stones of great price and jewels!

一时之间，这么大的富厚就归于无有了。凡船主，和坐船往各处去的，并众水手，连所有靠海为业的，都远远地站着，
For in one hour such great wealth has come to nothing. And every shipmaster, and all who are sailing on the sea, and sailors and all who get their living by the sea, were watching from far away,

看见烧她的烟，就喊着说，有何城能比这大城呢？
And crying out when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What town is like the great town?

他们又把尘土撒在头上，哭泣悲哀，喊着说，哀哉，哀哉，这大城阿。凡有船在海中的，都因她的珍宝成了富足。她在一时之间就成了荒场。
And they put dust on their heads, and were sad, weeping and crying, and saying, Sorrow, sorrow for the great town, in which was increased the wealth of all who had their ships on the sea because of her great stores! for in one hour she is made waste.

天哪，众圣徒众使徒众先知阿，你们都要因她欢喜。因为神已经在她身上伸了你们的冤。
Be glad over her, heaven, and you saints, and Apostles, and prophets; because she has been judged by God on your account.

有一位大力的天使举起一块石头，好像大磨石，扔在海里，说，巴比伦大城，也必这样猛力的被扔下去，决不能再见了。
And a strong angel took up a stone like the great stone with which grain is crushed, and sent it into the sea, saying, So, with a great fall, will Babylon, the great town, come to destruction, and will not be seen any more at all.

弹琴，作乐，吹笛，吹号的声音，在你中间决不能再听见。各行手艺人在你中间决不能再遇见。推磨的声音在你中间决不能再听见。
And the voice of players and makers of music will never again be sounding in you: and no worker, expert in art, will ever again be living in you; and there will be no sound of the crushing of grain any more at all in you;

灯光在你中间决不能再照耀。新郎和新妇的声音，在你中间决不能再听见。你的客商原来是地上的尊贵人。万国也被你的邪术迷惑了。
And never again will the shining of lights be seen in you; and the voice of the newly-married man and the bride will never again be sounding in you: for your traders were the lords of the earth, and by your evil powers were all the nations turned out of the right way.

先知和圣徒，并地上一切被杀之人的血，都在这城里看见了。
And in her was seen the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been put to death on the earth.

此后，我听见好像群众在天上大声说，哈利路亚（就是要赞美耶和华的意思），救恩，荣耀，权能，都属乎我们的神。
After these things there came to my ears a sound like the voice of a great band of people in heaven, saying, Praise to the Lord; salvation and glory and power be to our God:

他的判断是真实公义的。因他判断了那用淫行败坏世界的大淫妇，并且向淫妇讨流仆人血的罪，给他们伸冤。
For true and upright are his decisions; for by him has the evil woman been judged, who made the earth unclean with the sins of her body; and he has given her punishment for the blood of his servants.

又说，哈利路亚。烧淫妇的烟往上冒，直到永永远远。
And again they said, Praise to the Lord. And her smoke went up for ever and ever.

那二十四位长老与四活物，就俯伏敬拜坐宝座的神，说，阿们，哈利路亚。
And the four and twenty rulers and the four beasts went down on their faces and gave worship to God who was seated on the high seat, saying, Even so, praise to the Lord.

有声音从宝座出来说，神的众仆人哪，凡敬畏他的，无论大小，都要赞美我们的神。
And a voice came from the high seat, saying, Give praise to our God, all you his servants, small and great, in whom is the fear of him.

我听见好像群众的声音，众水的声音，大雷的声音，说，哈利路亚。因为主我们的神，全能者，作王了。
And there came to my ears the voice of a great army, like the sound of waters, and the sound of loud thunders, saying, Praise to the Lord: for the Lord our God, Ruler of all, is King.

我们要欢喜快乐，将荣耀归给他。因为羔羊婚娶的时候到了，新妇也自己预备好了。
Let us be glad with delight, and let us give glory to him: because the time is come for the Lamb to be married, and his wife has made herself ready.

就蒙恩得穿光明洁白的细麻衣，这细麻衣就是圣徒所行的义。
And to her it was given to be clothed in delicate linen, clean and shining: for the clean linen is the righteousness of the saints.

天使吩咐我说，你要写上，凡被请赴羔羊之婚筵的有福了。又对我说，这是神真实的话。
And he said to me, Put in the book, Happy are the guests at the bride-feast of the Lamb. And he said to me, These are the true words of God.

我就俯伏在他脚前要拜他。他说，千万不可。我和你并你那些为耶稣作见证的弟兄同是作仆人的。你要敬拜神。因为预言中的灵意，乃是为耶稣作见证。
And I went on my face before his feet to give him worship. And he said to me, See you do it not: I am a brother-servant with you and with your brothers who keep the witness of Jesus: give worship to God: for the witness of Jesus is the spirit of the prophet's word.

我观看，见天开了。有一匹白马。骑在马上的，称为诚信真实。他审判争战都按着公义。
And the heaven was open; and I saw a white horse, and he who was seated on it was named Certain and True; and he is judging and making war in righteousness.

他的眼睛如火焰，他头上戴着许多冠冕。又有写着的名字，除了他自己没有人知道。
And his eyes are a flame of fire, and crowns are on his head; and he has a name in writing, of which no man has knowledge but himself.

他穿着溅了血的衣服。他的名称为神之道。
And he is clothed in a robe washed with blood: and his name is The Word of God.

在天上的众军，骑着白马，穿着细麻衣，又白又洁，跟随他。
And the armies which are in heaven went after him on white horses, clothed in delicate linen, white and clean.

有利剑从他口中出来，可以击杀列国。他必用铁杖辖管他们。（辖管原文作牧）并要踹全能神烈怒的酒榨。
And out of his mouth comes a sharp sword, with which he overcomes the nations: and he has rule over them with a rod of iron: and he is crushing with his feet the grapes of the strong wrath of God the Ruler of all.

在他衣服和大腿上，有名写着说，万王之王，万主之主。
And on his robe and on his leg is a name, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

我又看见一位天使站在日头中，向天空所飞的鸟，大声喊着说，你们聚集来赴神的大筵席。
And I saw an angel taking his place in the sun; and he was crying with a loud voice, saying to all the birds in flight in the heavens, Come together to the great feast of God;

可以吃君王与将军的肉，壮士与马和骑马者的肉，并一切自主的为奴的，以及大小人民的肉。
So that you may take for your food the flesh of kings, and of captains, and of strong men, and of horses and of those who are seated on them, and the flesh of all men, free and unfree, small and great.

我看见那兽，和地上的君王，并他们的众军，都聚集，要与骑白马的并他的军兵争战。
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, come together to make war against him who was seated on the horse and against his army.

那兽被擒拿，那在兽面前曾行奇事，迷惑受兽印记，和拜兽像之人的假先知，也与兽同被擒拿。他们两个就活活地被扔在烧着硫磺的火湖里。
And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who did the signs before him, by which they were turned from the true way who had the mark of the beast, and who gave worship to his image: these two were put living into the sea of ever-burning fire.

其余的被骑白马者口中出来的剑杀了。飞鸟都吃饱了他们的肉。
And the rest were put to death with the sword of him who was on the horse, even the sword which came out of his mouth: and all the birds were made full with their flesh.

我又看见一位天使从天降下，手里拿着无底坑的钥匙，和一条大链子。
And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the great deep and a great chain in his hand.

他捉住那龙，就是古蛇，又叫魔鬼，也叫撒但，把它捆绑一千年，
And he took the dragon, the old snake, which is the Evil One and Satan, and put chains on him for a thousand years,

扔在无底坑里，将无底坑关闭，用印封上，使它不得再迷惑列国，等到那一千年完了。以后必须暂时释放它。
And put him into the great deep, and it was shut and locked over him, so that he might put the nations in error no longer, till the thousand years were ended: after this he will be let loose for a little time.

我又看见几个宝座，也有坐在上面的，并有审判的权柄赐给他们。我又看见那些因为给耶稣作见证，并为神之道被斩者的灵魂，和那没有拜过兽与兽像，也没有在额上和手上受过它印记之人的灵魂，他们都复活了，与基督一同作王一千年。
And I saw high seats, and they were seated on them, and the right of judging was given to them: and I saw the souls of those who were put to death for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and those who did not give worship to the beast, or to his image, and had not his mark on their brows or on their hands; and they were living and ruling with Christ a thousand years.

这是头一次的复活。其余的死人还没有复活，直等那一千年完了。
The rest of the dead did not come to life again till the thousand years were ended. This is the first coming back from the dead.

在头一次复活有分的，有福了，圣洁了。第二次的死在他们身上没有权柄。他们必作神和基督的祭司，并要与基督一同作王一千年。
Happy and holy is he who has a part in this first coming: over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will be ruling with him a thousand years.

那一千年完了，撒但必从监牢里被释放，
And when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be let loose out of his prison,

出来要迷惑地上四方的列国，（方原文作角）就是歌革和玛各，叫他们聚集争战。他们的人数多如海沙。
And will go out to put in error the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to get them together to the war, the number of whom is like the sands of the sea.

他们上来遍满了全地，围住圣徒的营，与蒙爱的城。就有火从天降下，烧灭了他们。
And they went up over the face of the earth, and made a circle about the tents of the saints, and the well loved town: and fire came down out of heaven for their destruction.

那迷惑他们的魔鬼，被扔在硫磺的火湖里，就是兽和假先知所在的地方。他们必昼夜受痛苦，直到永永远远。
And the Evil One who put them in error was sent down into the sea of ever-burning fire, where the beast and the false prophet are, and their punishment will go on day and night for ever and ever.

我又看见一个白色的大宝座，与坐在上面的。从他面前天地都逃避，再无可见之处了。
And I saw a great white seat, and him who was seated on it, before whose face the earth and the heaven went in flight; and there was no place for them.

我又看见死了的人，无论大小，都站在宝座前。案卷展开了。并且另有一卷展开，就是生命册。死了的人都凭着这些案卷所记载的，照他们所行的受审判。
And I saw the dead, great and small, taking their places before the high seat; and the books were open, and another book was open, which is the book of life; and the dead were judged by the things which were in the books, even by their works.

于是海交出其中的死人。死亡和阴间也交出其中的死人。他们都照各人所行的受审判。
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and Hell gave up the dead which were in them; and they were judged every man by his works.

死亡和阴间也被扔在火湖里。这火湖就是第二次的死。
And death and Hell were put into the sea of fire. This is the second death, even the sea of fire.

若有人名字没记在生命册上，他就被扔在火湖里。
And if anyone's name was not in the book of life, he went down into the sea of fire.

我又看见一个新天新地。因为先前的天地已经过去了。海也不再有了。
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were gone; and there was no more sea.

我又看见圣城新耶路撒冷由神那里从天而降，预备好了，就如新妇妆饰整齐，等候丈夫。
And I saw the holy town, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, like a bride made beautiful for her husband.

我听见有大声音从宝座出来说，看哪，神的帐幕在人间。他要与人同住，他们要作他的子民，神要亲自与他们同在，作他们的神。
And there came to my ears a great voice out of the high seat, saying, See, the Tent of God is with men, and he will make his living-place with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them, and be their God.

神要擦去他们一切的眼泪。不再有死亡，也不再有悲哀，哭号，疼痛，因为以前的事都过去了。
And he will put an end to all their weeping; and there will be no more death, or sorrow, or crying, or pain; for the first things have come to an end.

坐宝座的说，看哪，我将一切都更新了。又说，你要写上。因这些话是可信的，是真实的。
And he who is seated on the high seat said, See, I make all things new. And he said, Put it in the book; for these words are certain and true.

他又对我说，都成了。我是阿拉法，我是俄梅戛，我是初，我是终。我要将生命泉的水白白赐给那口渴的人喝。
And he said to me, It is done. I am the First and the Last, the start and the end. I will freely give of the fountain of the water of life to him who is in need.

得胜的，必承受这些为业。我要作他的神，他要作我的儿子。
He who overcomes will have these things for his heritage; and I will be his God, and he will be my son.

惟有胆怯的，不信的，可憎的，杀人的，淫乱的，行邪术的，拜偶像的，和一切说谎话的，他们的分就在烧着硫磺的火湖里。这是第二次的死。
But those who are full of fear and without faith, the unclean and takers of life, those who do the sins of the flesh, and those who make use of evil powers or who give worship to images, and all those who are false, will have their part in the sea of ever-burning fire which is the second death.

拿着七个金碗，盛满末后七灾的七位天使中，有一位来对我说，你到这里来，我要将新妇，就是羔羊的妻，指给你看。
And one of the seven angels who had the seven vessels in which were the seven last punishments, came and said to me, Come here, and see the bride, the Lamb's wife.

我被圣灵感动，天使就带我到一座高大的山，将那由神那里从天而降的圣城耶路撒冷指示我。
And he took me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and let me see the holy town Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,

城中有神的荣耀。城的光辉如同极贵的宝石，好像碧玉，明如水晶。
Having the glory of God: and her light was like a stone of great price, a jasper stone, clear as glass:

有高大的墙。有十二个门，门上有十二位天使。门上又写着以色列十二个支派的名字。
She had a wall great and high, with twelve doors, and at the doors twelve angels; and names on them, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

东边有三门。北边有三门。南边有三门。西边有三门。
And on the east were three doors; and on the north three doors; and on the south three doors; and on the west three doors.

城墙有十二根基，根基上有羔羊十二使徒的名字。
And the wall of the town had twelve bases, and on them the twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.

对我说话的拿着金苇子当尺，要量那城，和城门城墙。
And he who was talking with me had a gold measuring-rod to take the measure of the town, and of its doors, and its wall.

城是四方的，长宽一样。天使用苇子量那城，共有四千里。长宽高都是一样。
And the town is square, as wide as it is long; and he took the measure of the town with the rod, one thousand and five hundred miles: it is equally long and wide and high.

又量了城墙，按着人的尺寸，就是天使的尺寸，共有一百四十四肘。
And he took the measure of its wall, one hundred and forty-four cubits, after the measure of a man, that is, of an angel.

墙是碧玉造的。城是精金的，如同明净的玻璃。
And the building of its wall was of jasper, and the town was clear gold, clear as glass.

城墙的根基是用各样宝石修饰的。第一根基是碧玉。第二是蓝宝石。第三是绿玛瑙。第四是绿宝石。
The bases of the wall of the town had ornaments of all sorts of beautiful stones. The first base was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;

第五是红玛瑙。第六是红宝石。第七是黄璧玺。第八是水苍玉。第九是红璧玺。第十是翡翠。第十一是紫玛瑙。第十二是紫晶。
The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprase; the eleventh, jacinth; the twelfth, amethyst.

十二个门是十二颗珍珠。每门是一颗珍珠。城内的街道是精金，好像明透的玻璃。
And the twelve doors were twelve pearls; every door was made of one pearl; and the street of the town was clear gold, as clear as glass.

我未见城内有殿，因主神全能者，和羔羊，为城的殿。
And I saw no Temple there; because the Lord God, the Ruler of all, and the Lamb are its Temple.

那城内又不用日月光照。因有神的荣耀光照。又有羔羊为城的灯。
And the town has no need of the sun, or of the moon, to give it light: for the glory of God did make it light, and the light of it is the Lamb.

列国要在城的光里行走。地上的君王必将自己的荣耀归与那城。
And the nations will go in its light: and the kings of the earth will take their glory into it.

城门白昼总不关闭。在那里原没有黑夜。
And the doors of it will never be shut by day (for there is no night there):

人必将列国的荣耀尊贵归与那城。
And the glory and honour of the nations will come into it:

凡不洁净的，并那行可憎与虚谎之事的，总不得进那城。只有名字写在羔羊生命册上的才得进去。
And nothing unclean may come into it, or anyone whose works are cursed or false; but only those whose names are in the Lamb's book of life.

天使又指示我在城内街道当中一道生命水的河，明亮如水晶，从神和羔羊的宝座流出来。
And I saw a river of water of life, clear as glass, coming out of the high seat of God and of the Lamb,

在河这边与那边有生命树，结十二样果子，（样或作回）每月都结果子。树上的叶子乃为医治万民。
In the middle of its street. And on this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, having twelve sorts of fruits, giving its fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree give life to the nations.

以后再没有咒诅。在城里有神和羔羊的宝座。他的仆人都要事奉他。
And there will be no more curse: and the high seat of God and of the Lamb will be there; and his servants will be worshipping him;

也要见他的面。他的名字必写在他们的额上。
And they will see his face; and his name will be on their brows.

不再有黑夜。他们也不用灯光日光。因为主神要光照他们。他们要作王，直到永永远远。
And there will be no more night; and they have no need of a light or of the shining of the sun; for the Lord God will give them light: and they will be ruling for ever and ever.

天使又对我说，这些话是真实可信的。主就是众先知被感之灵的神，差遣他的使者，将那必要快成的事指示他仆人。
And he said to me, These words are certain and true: and the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his angel to make clear to his servants the things which are now to come about.

看哪，我必快来。凡遵守这书上预言的有福了。
See, I come quickly. A blessing on him who keeps the words of this book of the prophet.

这些事是我约翰所听见所看见的。我既听见看见了。就在指示我的天使脚前俯伏要拜他。
And I, John, am he who saw these things and to whose ears they came. And when I had seen and given ear, I went down on my face to give worship at the feet of the angel who made these things clear to me.

他对我说，千万不可。我与你，和你的弟兄众先知，并那些守这书上言语的人，同是作仆人的。你要敬拜神。
And he said to me, See you do it not; I am a brother-servant with you and with your brothers the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book: give worship to God.

他又对我说，不可封了这书上的预言。因为日期近了。
And he said to me, Let not the words of this prophet's book be kept secret, because the time is near.

不义的，叫他仍旧不义。污秽的，叫他仍旧污秽。为义的，叫他仍旧为义。圣洁的，叫他仍旧圣洁。
Let the evil man go on in his evil: and let the unclean be still unclean: and let the upright go on in his righteousness: and let the holy be holy still.

看哪，我必快来。赏罚在我，要照各人所行的报应他。
See, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give to every man the outcome of his works.

我是阿拉法，我是俄梅戛，我是首先的，我是末后的，我是初，我是终。
I am the First and the Last, the start and the end.

那些洗净自己衣服的有福了，可得权柄能到生命树那里，也能从门进城。
A blessing on those whose robes are washed, so that they may have a right to the tree of life, and may go in by the doors into the town.

城外有那些犬类，行邪术的，淫乱的，杀人的，拜偶像的，并一切喜好说谎言编造虚谎的。
Outside are the dogs, and those who make use of evil powers, those who make themselves unclean, and the takers of life, and those who give worship to images, and everyone whose delight is in what is false.

我耶稣差遣我的使者为众教会将这些事向你们证明。我是大卫的根，又是他的后裔。我是明亮的晨星。
I, Jesus, have sent my angel to give witness to you of these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star.

圣灵和新妇都说来。听见的人也该说来。口渴的人也当来。愿意的都可以白白取生命的水喝。
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him who gives ear, say, Come. And let him who is in need come; and let everyone desiring it take of the water of life freely.

我向一切听见这书上预言的作见证，若有人在这预言上加添什么，神必将写在这书上的灾祸加在他身上。
For I say to every man to whose ears have come the words of this prophet's book, If any man makes an addition to them, God will put on him the punishments which are in this book:

这书上的预言，若有人删去什么，神必从这书上所写的生命树，和圣城，删去他的分。
And if any man takes away from the words of this book, God will take away from him his part in the tree of life and the holy town, even the things which are in this book.

证明这事的说，是了。我必快来。阿们。主耶稣阿，我愿你来。
He who gives witness to these things says, Truly, I come quickly. Even so come, Lord Jesus.

愿主耶稣的恩惠，常与众圣徒同在。阿们。
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with the saints. So be it.

