哥林多前书 Corinthians


奉神旨意，蒙召作耶稣基督使徒的保罗，同兄弟所提尼，
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, and Sosthenes the brother,

写信给在哥林多神的教会，就是在基督耶稣里成圣，蒙召作圣徒的，以及所有在各处求告我主耶稣基督之名的人。基督是他们的主，也是我们的主。
To the church of God which is in Corinth, to those who have been made holy in Christ Jesus, saints by the selection of God, with all those who in every place give honour to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:

愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父，并主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

我常为你们感谢我的神，因神在基督耶稣里所赐给你们的恩惠。
I give praise to my God for you at all times, because of the grace of God which has been given to you in Christ Jesus;

又因你们在他里面凡事富足，口才知识都全备。
So that in him you have wealth in all things, in word and in knowledge of every sort;

正如我为基督作的见证，在你们心里得以坚固。
Even as the witness of the Christ has been made certain among you:

以致你们在恩赐上没有一样不及人的。等候我们的主耶稣基督显现。
So that having every grace you are living in the hope of the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;

他也必坚固你们到底，叫你们在我们主耶稣基督的日子，无可责备。
Who will give you strength to the end, to be free from all sin in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

神是信实的，你们原是被他所召，好与他儿子，我们的主耶稣基督，一同得分。
God is true, through whom you have been given a part with his Son, Jesus Christ our Lord.

弟兄们，我借我们主耶稣基督的名，劝你们都说一样的话。你们中间也不可分党。只要一心一意彼此相合。
Now I make request to you, my brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will all say the same thing, and that there may be no divisions among you, so that you may be in complete agreement, in the same mind and in the same opinion.

因为革来氏家里的人，曾对我提起弟兄们来，说你们中间有分争。
Because it has come to my knowledge, through those of the house of Chloe, that there are divisions among you, my brothers.

我的意思就是你们各人说，我是属保罗的。我是属亚波罗的。我是属矶法的。我是属基督的。
That is, that some of you say, I am of Paul; some say, I am of Apollos; some say, I am of Cephas; and some say, I am Christ's.

基督是分开的吗？保罗为你们钉了十字架吗？你们是奉保罗的名受了洗吗？
Is there a division in Christ? was Paul nailed to the cross for you? or were you given baptism in the name of Paul?

我感谢神，除了基利司布并该犹以外，我没有给你们一个人施洗。
I give praise to God that not one of you had baptism from me, but Crispus and Gaius;

免得有人说，你们是奉我的名受洗。
So that no one may be able to say that you had baptism in my name.

我也给司提反家施过洗。此外给别人施洗没有，我却记不清。
And I gave baptism to the house of Stephanas; but I am not certain that any others had baptism from me.

基督差遣我，原不是为施洗，乃是为传福音。并不用智慧的言语，免得基督的十字架落了空。
For Christ sent me, not to give baptism, but to be a preacher of the good news: not with wise words, for fear that the cross of Christ might be made of no value.

因为十字架的道理，在那灭亡的人为愚拙。在我们得救的人却为神的大能。
For the word of the cross seems foolish to those who are on the way to destruction; but to us who are on the way to salvation it is the power of God.

就如经上所记，我要灭绝智慧人的智慧，废弃聪明人的聪明。
As it says in the holy Writings, I will put an end to the wisdom of the wise, and will put on one side the designs of those who have knowledge.

智慧人在哪里？文士在哪里？这世上的辩士在哪里？神岂不是叫这世上的智慧变成愚拙吗？
Where is the wise? where is he who has knowledge of the law? where is the man of this world who has a love of discussion? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

世人凭自己的智慧，既不认识神，神就乐意用人所当作愚拙的道理，拯救那些信的人。这就是神的智慧了。
For because, by the purpose of God, the world, with all its wisdom, had not the knowledge of God, it was God's pleasure, by so foolish a thing as preaching, to give salvation to those who had faith in him.

犹太人是要神迹，希利尼人是求智慧。
Seeing that the Jews make request for signs, and the Greeks are looking for knowledge:

我们却是传钉十字架的基督，在犹太人为绊脚石，在外邦人为愚拙。
But we give the good news of Christ on the cross, a hard thing to the Jews, and a foolish thing to the Gentiles;

但在那蒙召的无论是犹太人，希利尼人，基督总为神的能力，神的智慧。
But to those of God's selection, Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power and the wisdom of God.

因神的愚拙总比人智慧。神的软弱总比人强壮。
Because what seems foolish in God is wiser than men; and what seems feeble in God is stronger than men.

弟兄们哪，可见你们蒙召的，按着肉体有智慧的不多，有能力的不多，有尊贵的也不多。
For you see God's design for you, my brothers, that he has not taken a great number of the wise after the flesh, not the strong, not the noble:

神却拣选了世上愚拙的，叫有智慧的羞愧。又拣选了世上软弱的，叫那强壮的羞愧。
But God made selection of the foolish things of this world so that he might put the wise to shame; and the feeble things that he might put to shame the strong;

神也拣选了世上卑贱的，被人厌恶的，以及那无有的，为要废掉那有的。
And the low things of the world, and the things without honour, did God make selection of, yes, even the things which are not, so that he might make as nothing the things which are:

使一切有血气的，在神面前一个也不能自夸。
So that no flesh might have glory before God.

但你们得在基督耶稣里，是本乎神，神又使他成为我们的智慧，公义，圣洁，救赎。
But God has given you a place in Christ Jesus, through whom God has given us wisdom and righteousness and salvation, and made us holy:

如经上所记，夸口的当指着主夸口。
So that, as it is said in the holy Writings, Whoever has a desire for glory, let his glory be in the Lord.

弟兄们，从前我到你们那里去，并没有用高言大智对你们宣传神的奥秘。
And when I came to you, my brothers, I did not come with wise words of knowledge, putting before you the secret of God.

因为我曾定了主意，在你们中间不知道别的，只知道耶稣基督，并他钉十字架。
For I had made the decision to have knowledge of nothing among you but only of Jesus Christ on the cross.

我在你们那里，又软弱，又惧怕，又甚战兢。
And I was with you without strength, in fear and in doubt.

我说的话，讲的道，不是用智慧委婉的言语，乃是用圣灵和大能的明证。
And in my preaching there were no honeyed words of wisdom, but I was dependent on the power of the Spirit to make it clear to you:

叫你们的信不在乎人的智慧，只在乎神的大能。
So that your faith might be based not on man's wisdom but on the power of God.

然而在完全的人中，我们也讲智慧。但不是这世上的智慧，也不是这世上有权有位将要败亡之人的智慧。
But still we have wisdom for those who are complete in knowledge, though not the wisdom of this world, and not of the rulers of this world, who are coming to nothing:

我们讲的，乃是从前所隐藏，神奥秘的智慧，就是神在万世以前预定使我们得荣耀的。
But we give the news of the secret wisdom of God, which he had kept in store before the world came into existence, for our glory;

这智慧世上有权有位的人没有一个知道的。他们若知道，就不把荣耀的主钉在十字架上了。
Of which not one of the rulers of this world had knowledge: for if they had, they would not have put the Lord of glory on the cross:

如经上所记，神为爱他的人所预备的，是眼睛未曾看见，耳朵未曾听见，人心也未曾想到的。
But as it says in the holy Writings, Things which the eye saw not, and which had not come to the ears or into the heart of man, such things as God has made ready for those who have love for him.

只有神借着圣灵向我们显明了。因为圣灵参透万事，就是神深奥的事也参透了。
But God has given us the revelation of these things through his Spirit, for the Spirit makes search into all things, even the deep things of God.

除了在人里头的灵，谁知道人的事。像这样，除了神的灵，也没有人知道神的事。
For who has knowledge of the things of a man but the spirit of the man which is in him? in the same way, no one has knowledge of the things of God but the Spirit of God.

我们所领受的，并不是世上的灵，乃是从神来的灵，叫我们能知道神开恩赐给我们的事。
But we have not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which comes from God, so that we may have knowledge of the things which are freely given to us by God.

并且我们讲说这些事，不是用人智慧所指教的言语，乃是用圣灵所指教的言语，将属灵的话，解释属灵的事。（或作将属灵的事讲与属灵的人）
And these are the things which we say, not in the language of man's wisdom, but in words given to us by the Spirit, judging the things of the spirit by the help of the Spirit.

然而属血气的人不领会神圣灵的事，反倒以为愚拙。并且不能知道，因为这些事惟有属灵的人才能看透。
For the natural man is not able to take in the things of the Spirit of God: for they seem foolish to him, and he is not able to have knowledge of them, because such knowledge comes only through the Spirit.

属灵的人能看透万事，却没有一人能看透了他。
But he who has the Spirit, though judging all things, is himself judged by no one.

谁曾知道主的心去教导他呢？但我们是有基督的心了。
For who has knowledge of the mind of the Lord, so as to be his teacher? But we have the mind of Christ.

弟兄们，我从前对你们说话，不能把你们当作属灵的，只得把你们当作属肉体，在基督里为婴孩的。
And the teaching I gave you, my brothers, was such as I was able to give, not to those who have the Spirit, but to those who are still in the flesh, even to children in Christ.

我是用奶喂你们，没有用饭喂你们。那时你们不能吃，就是如今还是不能。
I gave you milk and not meat, because you were, then, unable to take it, and even now you are not able;

你们仍是属肉体的。因为在你们中间有嫉妒分争，这岂不是属乎肉体，照着世人的样子行吗？
Because you are still in the flesh: for when there is envy and division among you, are you not still walking after the way of the flesh, even as natural men?

有说，我是属保罗的。有说，我是属亚波罗的。这岂不是你们和世人一样吗？
For when one says, I am of Paul; and another says, I am of Apollos; are you not talking like natural men?

亚波罗算什么。保罗算什么。无非是执事，照主所赐给他们各人的，引导你们相信。
What then is Apollos? and what is Paul? They are but servants who gave you the good news as God gave it to them.

我栽种了，亚波罗浇灌了。惟有神叫他生长。
I did the planting, Apollos did the watering, but God gave the increase.

可见栽种的算不得什么，浇灌的也算不得什么。只在那叫他生长的神。
So then the planter is nothing, and the waterer is nothing; but God who gives the increase.

栽种的和浇灌的都是一样。但将来各人要照自己的工夫，得自己的赏赐。
Now the planter and the waterer are working for the same end: but they will have their separate rewards in the measure of their work.

因为我们是与神同工的。你们是神所耕种的田地，所建造的房屋。
For we are workers with God: you are God's planting, God's building.

我照神所给我的恩，好像一个聪明的工头，立好了根基，有别人在上面建造。只是各人要谨慎怎样在上面建造。
In the measure of the grace given to me, I, as a wise master-builder, have put the base in position, and another goes on building on it. But let every man take care what he puts on it.

因为那已经立好的根基，就是耶稣基督，此外没有人能立别的根基。
For there is no other base for the building but that which has been put down, which is Jesus Christ.

若有人用金，银，宝石，草木，禾楷，在这根基上建造。
But on the base a man may put gold, silver, stones of great price, wood, dry grass, cut stems;

各人的工程必然显露。因为那日子要将它表明出来，有火发现。这火要试验各人的工程怎样。
Every man's work will be made clear in that day, because it will be tested by fire; and the fire itself will make clear the quality of every man's work.

人在那根基上所建造的工程，若存得住，他就要得赏赐。
If any man's work comes through the test, he will have a reward.

人的工程若被烧了，他就要受亏损。自己却要得救。虽然得救乃像从火里经过的一样。
If the fire puts an end to any man's work, it will be his loss: but he will get salvation himself, though as by fire.

岂不知你们是神的殿，神的灵住在你们里头吗？
Do you not see that you are God's holy house, and that the Spirit of God has his place in you?

若有人毁坏神的殿，神必要毁坏那人。因为神的殿是圣的，这殿就是你们。
If anyone makes the house of God unclean, God will put an end to him; for the house of God is holy, and you are his house.

人不可自欺。你们中间若有人，在这世界自以为有智慧，倒不如变作愚拙，好成为有智慧的。
Let no man have a false idea. If any man seems to himself to be wise among you, let him become foolish, so that he may be wise.

因这世界的智慧，在神看是愚拙。如经上记着说，主叫有智慧的中了自己的诡计。
For the wisdom of this world is foolish before God. As it is said in the holy Writings, He who takes the wise in their secret designs:

又说，主知道智慧人的意念是虚妄的。
And again, The Lord has knowledge of the reasonings of the wise, that they are nothing.

所以无论谁，都不可拿人夸口。因为万有全是你们的。
So let no one take pride in men. For all things are yours;

或保罗，或亚波罗，或矶法，或世界，或生，或死，或现今的事，或将来的事，全是你们的。
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;

并且你们是属基督的。基督又是属神的。
And you are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

人应当以我们为基督的执事，为神奥秘事的管家。
Let us be judged as servants of Christ, and as those who are responsible for the secret things of God.

所求于管家的，是要他有忠心。
And it is right for such servants to be safe persons.

我被你们论断，或被别人论断，我都以为极小的事。连我自己也不论断自己。
But it is a small thing to me that I am judged by you or by man's judging; I am not even a judge of myself.

我虽不觉得自己有错，却也不能因此得以称义。但判断我的乃是主。
For I am not conscious of any wrong in myself; but this does not make me clear, for it is the Lord who is my judge.

所以时候未到，什么都不要论断，只等主来，他要照出暗中的隐情，显明人心的意念。那时各人要从神那里得着称赞。
For this reason let there be no judging before the time, till the Lord comes, who will make clear the secret things of the dark, and the designs of the heart; and then will every man have his praise from God.

弟兄们，我为你们的缘故，拿这些事转比自己和亚波罗。叫你们效法我们不可过于圣经所记。免得你们自高自大，贵重这个，轻看那个。
My brothers, it is because of you that I have taken Apollos and myself as examples of these things, so that in us you might see that it is not wise to go farther than what is in the holy Writings, so that no one of you may be lifted up against his brother.

使你与人不同的是谁呢？你有什么不是领受的呢？若是领受的，为何自夸，仿佛不是领受的呢？
For who made you better than your brother? or what have you that has not been given to you? but if it has been given to you, what cause have you for pride, as if it had not been given to you?

你们已经饱足了，已经丰富了，不用我们，自己就作王了。我愿意你们果真作王，叫我们也得与你们一同作王。
For even now you are full, even now you have wealth, you have been made kings without us: truly, I would be glad if you were kings, so that we might be kings with you.

我想神把我们使徒明明列在末后，好像定死罪的囚犯。因为我们成了一台戏，给世人和天使观看。
For it seems to me that God has put us the Apostles last of all, as men whose fate is death: for we are put on view to the world, and to angels, and to men.

我们为基督的缘故算是愚拙的，你们在基督里倒是聪明的，我们软弱，你们倒强壮。你们有荣耀，我们倒被藐视。
We are made to seem foolish for Christ, but you are wise in Christ; we are feeble, but you are strong; you have glory, but we have shame.

直到如今，我们还是又饥又渴，又赤身露体，又挨打，又没有一定的住处。
Even to this hour we are without food, drink, and clothing, we are given blows and have no certain resting-place;

并且劳苦，亲手作工，被人咒骂，我们就祝福。被人逼迫，我们就忍受。
And with our hands we do the hardest work: when they give us curses we give blessings, when we undergo punishment we take it quietly;

被人毁谤，我们就善劝。直到如今，人还把我们看作世界上的污秽，万物中的渣滓。
When evil things are said about us we give gentle answers: we are made as the unclean things of the world, as that for which no one has any use, even till now.

我写这话，不是叫你们羞愧，乃是警戒你们，好像我所亲爱的儿女一样。
I am not saying these things to put you to shame, but so that, as my dear children, you may see what is right.

你们学基督的，师傅虽有一万，为父的却是不多，因我在基督耶稣里用福音生了你们。
For even if you had ten thousand teachers in Christ, you have not more than one father: for in Christ Jesus I have given birth to you through the good news.

所以我求你们效法我。
So my desire is that you take me as your example.

因此我已打发提摩太到你们那里去。他在主里面，是我所亲爱有忠心的儿子。他必提醒你们，记念我在基督里怎样行事，在各处各教会中怎样教导人。
For this cause I have sent Timothy to you, who is my dear and true child in the Lord; he will make clear to you my ways in Christ, even as I am teaching everywhere in every church.

有些人自高自大，以为我不到你们那里去。
Now some are full of pride, as if I was not coming to you.

然而主若许我，我必快到你们那里去。并且我所要知道的，不是那些自高自大之人的言语，乃是他们的权能。
But I will come to you in a short time, if it is pleasing to the Lord, and I will take note, not of the word of those who are full of pride, but of the power.

因为神的国不在乎言语，乃在乎权能。
For the kingdom of God is not in word but in power.

你们愿意怎么样呢？是愿意我带着刑杖到你们那里去呢？还是要我存慈爱温柔的心呢？
What is your desire? is my coming to be with punishment, or is it to be in love and a gentle spirit?

风闻在你们中间有淫乱的事。这样的淫乱，连外邦人中也没有，就是有人收了他的继母。
It is said, in fact, that there is among you a sin of the flesh, such as is not seen even among the Gentiles, that one of you has his father's wife.

你们还是自高自大，并不哀痛，把行这事的人从你们中间赶出去。
And in place of feeling sorrow, you are pleased with yourselves, so that he who has done this thing has not been sent away from among you.

我身子虽不在你们那里，心却在你们那里，好像我亲自与你们同在，已经判断了行这事的人，
For I myself, being present in spirit though not in body, have come to a decision about him who has done this thing;

就是你们聚会的时候，我的心也同在，奉我们主耶稣的名，并用我们主耶稣的权能，
In the name of our Lord Jesus, when you have come together with my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus,

要把这样的人交给撒但，败坏他的肉体，使他的灵魂在主耶稣的日子可以得救。
That this man is to be handed over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may have forgiveness in the day of the Lord Jesus.

你们这自夸是不好的。岂不知一点面酵能使全团发起来吗？
This pride of yours is not good. Do you not see that a little leaven makes a change in all the mass?

你们既是无酵的面，应当把旧酵除净，好使你们成为新团。因为我们逾越节的羔羊基督已经被杀献祭了。
Take away, then, the old leaven, so that you may be a new mass, even as you are without leaven. For Christ has been put to death as our Passover.

所以，我们守这节不可用旧酵，也不可用恶毒（或作阴毒），邪恶的酵，只用诚实真正的无酵饼。
Let us then keep the feast, not with old leaven, and not with the leaven of evil thoughts and acts, but with the unleavened bread of true thoughts and right feelings.

我先前写信给你们说，不可与淫乱的人相交。
In my letter I said to you that you were not to keep company with those who go after the desires of the flesh;

此话不是指这世上一概行淫乱的，或贪婪的，勒索的，或拜偶像的，若是这样，你们除非离开世界方可。
But I had not in mind the sinners who are outside the church, or those who have a desire for and take the property of others, or those who give worship to images; for it is not possible to keep away from such people without going out of the world completely:

但如今我写信给你们说，若有称为弟兄，是行淫乱的，或贪婪的，或拜偶像的，或辱骂的，或醉酒的，或勒索的。这样的人不可与他相交。就是与他吃饭都不可。
But the sense of my letter was that if a brother had the name of being one who went after the desires of the flesh, or had the desire for other people's property, or was in the way of using violent language, or being the worse for drink, or took by force what was not his, you might not keep company with such a one, or take food with him.

因为审判教外的人与我何干。教内的人岂不是你们审判的吗？
For it is no business of mine to be judging those who are outside; but it is yours to be judging those who are among you;

至于外人有神审判他们。你们应当把那恶人从你们中间赶出去。
As for those who are outside, God is their judge. So put away the evil man from among you.

你们中间有彼此相争的事，怎敢在不义的人面前求审，不在圣徒面前求审呢？
How is it, that if any one of you has a cause at law against another, he takes it before a Gentile judge and not before the saints?

岂不知圣徒要审判世界吗？若世界为你们所审，难道你们不配审判这最小的事吗？
Is it not certain that the saints will be the judges of the world? if then the world will be judged by you, are you unable to give a decision about the smallest things?

岂不知我们要审判天使吗？何况今生的事呢？
Is it not certain that we are to be the judges of angels? how much more then of the things of this life?

既是这样，你们若有今生的事当审判，是派教会所轻看的人审判吗？
If then there are questions to be judged in connection with the things of this life, why do you put them in the hands of those who have no position in the church?

我说这话，是要叫你们羞耻。难道你们中间没有一个智慧人，能审断弟兄们的事吗？
I say this to put you to shame. Is there not among you one wise man who may be able to give a decision between his brothers?

你们竟是弟兄与弟兄告状，而且告在不信主的人面前。
But a brother who has a cause at law against another takes it before Gentile judges.

你们彼此告状，这已经是你们的大错了。为什么不情愿受欺呢？为什么不情愿吃亏呢？
More than this, it is not to your credit to have causes at law with one another at all. Why not put up with wrong? why not undergo loss?

你们倒是欺压人，亏负人，况且所欺压，所亏负的就是弟兄。
So far from doing this, you yourselves do wrong and take your brothers' property.

你们岂不知不义的人不能承受神的国吗？不要自欺。无论是淫乱的，拜偶像的，奸淫的，作娈童的，亲男色的，
Have you not knowledge that evil-doers will have no part in the kingdom of God? Have no false ideas about this: no one who goes after the desires of the flesh, or gives worship to images, or is untrue when married, or is less than a man, or makes a wrong use of men,

偷窃的，贪婪的，醉酒的，辱骂的，勒索的，都不能承受神的国。
Or is a thief, or the worse for drink, or makes use of strong language, or takes by force what is not his, will have any part in the kingdom of God.

你们中间也有人从前是这样。但如今你们奉主耶稣基督的名，并借着我们神的灵，已经洗净，成圣称义了。
And such were some of you; but you have been washed, you have been made holy, you have been given righteousness in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God.

凡事我都可行。但不都有益处。凡事我都可行，但无论那一件，我总不受他的辖制。
I am free to do all things; but not all things are wise. I am free to do all things; but I will not let myself come under the power of any.

食物是为肚腹，肚腹是为食物。但神要叫这两样都废坏。身子不是为淫乱，乃是为主。主也是为身子。
Food is for the stomach and the stomach for food, and God will put an end to them together. But the body is not for the desires of the flesh, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body:

并且神已经叫主复活，也要用自己的能力叫我们复活。
And God who made the Lord Jesus come back from the dead will do the same for us by his power.

岂不知你们的身子是基督的肢体吗？我可以将基督的肢体作为娼妓的肢体吗？断乎不可。
Do you not see that your bodies are part of the body of Christ? how then may I take what is a part of the body of Christ and make it a part of the body of a loose woman? such a thing may not be.

岂不知与娼妓联合的，便是与她成为一体吗？因为主说，二人要成为一体。
Or do you not see that he who is joined to a loose woman is one body with her? for God has said, The two of them will become one flesh.

但与主联合的，便是与主成为一灵。
But he who is united to the Lord is one spirit.

你们要逃避淫行。人所犯的，无论什么罪，都在身子以外。惟有行淫的，是得罪自己的身子。
Keep away from the desires of the flesh. Every sin which a man does is outside of the body; but he who goes after the desires of the flesh does evil to his body.

岂不知你们的身子就是圣灵的殿吗？这圣灵是从神而来，住在你们里头的。并且你们不是自己的人。
Or are you not conscious that your body is a house for the Holy Spirit which is in you, and which has been given to you by God? and you are not the owners of yourselves;

因为你们是重价买来的。所以要在你们的身子上荣耀神。
For a payment has been made for you: let God be honoured in your body.

论到你们信上所提的事，我说男不近女倒好。
Now, as to the things in your letter to me: It is good for a man to have nothing to do with a woman.

但要免淫乱的事，男子当各有自己的妻子，女子也当各有自己的丈夫。
But because of the desires of the flesh, let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband.

丈夫当用合宜之分待妻子，妻子待丈夫也要如此。
Let the husband give to the wife what is right; and let the wife do the same to the husband.

妻子没有权柄主张自己的身子，乃在丈夫。丈夫也没有权柄主张自己的身子，乃在妻子。
The wife has not power over her body, but the husband; and in the same way the husband has not power over his body, but the wife.

夫妻不可彼此亏负，除非两相情愿，暂时分房，为要专心祷告方可，以后仍要同房，免得撒但趁着你们情不自禁，引诱你们。
Do not keep back from one another what is right, but only for a short time, and by agreement, so that you may give yourselves to prayer, and come together again; so that Satan may not get the better of you through your loss of self-control.

我说这话，原是准你们的，不是命你们的。
But this I say as my opinion, and not as an order of the Lord.

我愿意众人像我一样。只是各人领受神的恩赐，一个是这样，一个是那样。
It is my desire that all men might be even as I am. But every man has the power of his special way of life given him by God, one in this way and one in that.

我对着没有嫁娶的和寡妇说，若他们常像我就好。
But I say to the unmarried and to the widows, It is good for them to be even as I am.

倘若自己禁止不住，就可以嫁娶。与其欲火攻心，倒不如嫁娶为妙。
But if they have not self-control let them get married; for married life is better than the burning of desire.

至于那已经嫁娶的，我吩咐他们，其实不是我吩咐，乃是主吩咐，说，妻子不可离开丈夫。
But to the married I give orders, though not I but the Lord, that the wife may not go away from her husband

若是离开了，不可再嫁。或是仍同丈夫和好。丈夫也不可离弃妻子。
(Or if she goes away from him, let her keep unmarried, or be united to her husband again); and that the husband may not go away from his wife.

我对其余的人说，不是主说，倘若某弟兄有不信的妻子，妻子也情愿和他同住，他就不要离弃妻子。
But to the rest I say, and not the Lord; If a brother has a wife who is not a Christian, and it is her desire to go on living with him, let him not go away from her.

妻子有不信的丈夫，丈夫也情愿和她同住，她就不要离弃丈夫。
And if a woman has a husband who is not a Christian, and it is his desire to go on living with her, let her not go away from her husband.

因为不信的丈夫，就因着妻子成了圣洁。并且不信的妻子，就因着丈夫成了圣洁。（丈夫原文作弟兄）不然，你们的儿女就不洁净。但如今他们是圣洁的了。
For the husband who has not faith is made holy through his Christian wife, and the wife who is not a Christian is made holy through the brother: if not, your children would be unholy, but now are they holy.

倘若那不信的人要离去，就由他离去吧。无论是弟兄，是姐妹，遇着这样的事，都不必拘束。神召我们原是要我们和睦。
But if the one who is not a Christian has a desire to go away, let it be so: the brother or the sister in such a position is not forced to do one thing or the other: but it is God's pleasure that we may be at peace with one another.

你这作妻子的，怎么知道不能救你的丈夫呢？你这作丈夫的，怎么知道不能救你的妻子呢？
For how may you be certain, O wife, that you will not be the cause of salvation to your husband? or you, O husband, that you may not do the same for your wife?

只要照主所分给各人的，和神所召各人的而行。我吩咐各教会都是这样。
Only, as the Lord has given to a man, and as is the purpose of God for him, so let him go on living. And these are my orders for all the churches.

有人已受割礼蒙召呢，就不要废割礼。有人未受割礼蒙召呢，就不要受割礼。
If any man who is a Christian has had circumcision, let him keep so; and if any man who is a Christian has not had circumcision, let him make no change.

受割礼算不得什么，不受割礼也算不得什么。只要守神的诫命就是了。
Circumcision is nothing, and its opposite is nothing, but only doing the orders of God is of value.

各人蒙召的时候是什么身分，仍要守住这身分。
Let every man keep the position in which he has been placed by God.

你是作奴隶蒙召的吗？不要因此忧虑。若能以自由，就求自由更好。
If you were a servant when you became a Christian, let it not be a grief to you; but if you have a chance to become free, make use of it.

因为作奴仆蒙召于主的，就是主所释放的人。作自由之人蒙召的，就是基督的奴仆。
For he who was a servant when he became a Christian is the Lord's free man; and he who was free when he became a Christian is the Lord's servant.

你们是重价买来的。不要作人的奴仆。
It is the Lord who has made payment for you: be not servants of men.

弟兄们，你们各人蒙召的时候是什么身分，仍要在神面前守住这身分。
My brothers, let every man keep in that condition which is the purpose of God for him.

论到童身的人，我没有主的命令，但我既蒙主怜恤，能作忠心的人，就把自己的意见告诉你们。
Now about virgins I have no orders from the Lord: but I give my opinion as one to whom the Lord has given mercy to be true to him.

因现今的艰难，据我看来，人不如守素安常才好。
In my opinion then, because of the present trouble, it is good for a man to keep as he is.

你有妻子缠着呢，就不要求脱离。你没有妻子缠着呢，就不要求妻子。
If you are married to a wife, make no attempt to get free from her: if you are free from a wife, do not take a wife.

你若娶妻，并不是犯罪。处女若出嫁，也不是犯罪。然而这等人肉身必受苦难。我却愿意你们免这苦难。
If you get married it is not a sin; and if an unmarried woman gets married it is not a sin. But those who do so will have trouble in the flesh. But I will not be hard on you.

弟兄们，我对你们说，时候减少了。从此以后，那有妻子的，要像没有妻子。
But I say this, my brothers, the time is short; and from now it will be wise for those who have wives to be as if they had them not;

哀哭的，要像不哀哭。快乐的，要像不快乐。置买的，要像无有所得。
And for those who are in sorrow, to give no signs of it; and for those who are glad, to give no signs of joy; and for those who are getting property, to be as if they had nothing;

用世物的，要像不用世物。因为这世界的样子将要过去了。
And for those who make use of the world, not to be using it fully; for this world's way of life will quickly come to an end.

我愿你们无所挂虑。没有娶妻的，是为主的事挂虑，想怎样叫主喜悦。
But it is my desire for you to be free from cares. The unmarried man gives his mind to the things of the Lord, how he may give pleasure to the Lord:

娶了妻的，是为世上的事挂虑，想怎样叫妻子喜悦。
But the married man gives his attention to the things of this world, how he may give pleasure to his wife.

妇人和处女也有分别。没有出嫁的，是为主的事挂虑，要身体灵魂都圣洁。已经出嫁的，是为世上的事挂虑，想怎样叫丈夫喜悦。
And the wife is not the same as the virgin. The virgin gives her mind to the things of the Lord, so that she may be holy in body and in spirit: but the married woman takes thought for the things of the world, how she may give pleasure to her husband.

我说这话，是为你们的益处。不是要牢笼你们，乃是要叫你们行合宜的事，得以殷勤服事主，没有分心的事。
Now I say this for your profit; not to make things hard for you, but because of what is right, and so that you may be able to give all your attention to the things of the Lord.

若有人以为自己待他的女儿不合宜，女儿也过了年岁，事又当行，他就可随意办理，不算有罪，叫二人成亲就是了。
But if, in any man's opinion, he is not doing what is right for his virgin, if she is past her best years, and there is need for it, let him do what seems right to him; it is no sin; let them be married.

倘若人心里坚定，没有不得已的事，并且由得自己作主，心里又决定了留下女儿不出嫁，如此行也好。
But the man who is strong in mind and purpose, who is not forced but has control over his desires, does well if he comes to the decision to keep her a virgin.

这样看来，叫自己的女儿出嫁是好。不叫她出嫁更是好。
So then, he who gets married to his virgin does well, and he who keeps her unmarried does better.

丈夫活着的时候，妻子是被约束的。丈夫若死了，妻子就可以自由，随意再嫁。只是要嫁这在主里面的人。
It is right for a wife to be with her husband as long as he is living; but when her husband is dead, she is free to be married to another; but only to a Christian.

然而按我的意见，若常守节更有福气。我也想自己是被神的灵感动了。
But it will be better for her to keep as she is, in my opinion: and it seems to me that I have the Spirit of God.

论到祭偶像之物，我们晓得我们都有知识。但知识是叫人自高自大，惟有爱心能造就人。
Now about things offered to images: we all seem to ourselves to have knowledge. Knowledge gives pride, but love gives true strength.

若有人以为自己知道什么，按他所当知道的，他仍是不知道。
If anyone seems to himself to have knowledge, so far he has not the right sort of knowledge about anything;

若有人爱神，这人乃是神所知道的。
But if anyone has love for God, God has knowledge of him.

论到吃祭偶像之物，我们知道偶像在世上算不得什么。也知道神只有一位，再没有别的神。
So, then, as to the question of taking food offered to images, we are certain that an image is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.

虽有称为神的，或在天，或在地。就如那许多的神，许多的主。
For though there are those who have the name of gods, in heaven or on earth, as there are a number of gods and a number of lords,

然而我们只有一位神，就是父，万物都本于他，我们也归于他。并有一位主，就是耶稣基督，万物都是借着他有的，我们也是借着他有的。
There is for us only one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we are for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we have our being through him.

但人不都有这等知识。有人到如今因拜惯了偶像，就以为所吃的是祭偶像之物。他们的良心既然软弱，也就污秽了。
Still, all men have not that knowledge: but some, being used till now to the image, are conscious that they are taking food which has been offered to the image; and because they are not strong in the faith, their minds are troubled.

其实食物不能叫神看中我们。因为我们不吃也无损，吃也无益。
But God's approval of us is not based on the food we take: if we do not take it we are no worse for it; and if we take it we are no better.

只是你们要谨慎，恐怕你们这自由，竟成了那软弱人的绊脚石。
But take care that this power of yours does not give cause for trouble to the feeble.

若有人见你这有知识的，在偶像的庙里坐席，这人的良心若是软弱，岂不放胆去吃那祭偶像之物吗？
For if a man sees you, who have knowledge, taking food as a guest in the house of an image, will it not give him, if he is feeble, the idea that he may take food offered to images?

因此，基督为他死的那软弱弟兄，也就因你的知识沉沦了。
And so, through your knowledge, you are the cause of destruction to your brother, for whom Christ underwent death.

你们这样得罪弟兄们，伤了他们软弱的良心，就是得罪基督。
And in this way, doing evil to the brothers, and causing trouble to those whose faith is feeble, you are sinning against Christ.

所以食物若叫我弟兄跌倒，我就永远不吃肉，免得叫我弟兄跌倒了。
For this reason, if food is a cause of trouble to my brother, I will give up taking meat for ever, so that I may not be a cause of trouble to my brother.

我不是自由的吗？我不是使徒吗？我不是见过我们的主耶稣吗？你们不是我在主里面所作之工吗？
Am I not free? am I not an Apostle? have I not seen Jesus our Lord? are you not my work in the Lord?

假若在别人我不是使徒，在你们我总是使徒。因为你们在主里正是我作使徒的印证。
If to others I am not an Apostle, at least I am one to you: for the fact that you are Christians is the sign that I am an Apostle.

我对那盘问我的人，就是这样分诉。
My answer to those who are judging me is this.

难道我们没有权柄靠福音吃喝吗？
Have we no right to take food and drink?

难道我们没有权柄娶信主的姊妹为妻，带着一同往来，仿佛其余的使徒，和主的弟兄，并矶法一样吗？
Have we no right to take about with us a Christian wife, like the rest of the Apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?

独有我与巴拿巴没有权柄不作工吗？
Or I only and Barnabas, have we no right to take a rest from work?

有谁当兵，自备粮饷呢？有谁栽葡萄园，不吃园里的果子呢？有谁牧养牛羊，不吃牛羊的奶呢？
Who ever goes to war without looking to someone to be responsible for his payment? who puts in vines and does not take the fruit of them? or who takes care of sheep without drinking of their milk?

我说这话，岂是照人的意见。律法不也是这样说吗？
Am I talking as a man? does not the law say the same?

就如摩西的律法记着说，牛在场上踹谷的时候，不可笼住它的嘴。难道神所挂念的是牛吗？
For it says in the law of Moses, It is not right to keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it. Is it for the oxen that God is giving orders?

不全是为我们说的吗？分明是为我们说的。因为耕种的当存着指望去耕种。打场的也当存得粮的指望去打场。
Or has he us in mind? Yes, it was said for us; because it is right for the ploughman to do his ploughing in hope, and for him who is crushing the grain to do his work hoping for a part in the fruits of it.

我们若把属灵的种子撒在你们中间，就是从你们收割奉养肉身之物，这还算大事吗？
If we have been planting the things of the Spirit for you, does it seem a great thing for you to give us a part in your things of this world?

若别人在你们身上有这权柄，何况我们呢？然而我们没有用过这权柄，倒凡事忍受，免得基督的福音被阻隔。
If others have a part in this right over you, have we not even more? But we did not make use of our right, so that we might put nothing in the way of the good news of Christ.

你们岂不知为圣事劳碌的，就吃殿中的物吗？伺候祭坛的，就分领坛上的物吗？
Do you not see that the servants of the holy things get their living from the Temple, and the servants of the altar have their part in the food which is offered on the altar?

主也是这样命定，叫传福音的靠着福音养生。
Even so did the Lord give orders that the preachers of the good news might get their living from the good news.

但这权柄我全没有用过。我写这话，并非要你们这样待我。因为我宁可死，也不叫人使我所夸的落了空。
But I have not made use of any of these things: and I am not writing this in the hope that it may be so for me: for it would be better for me to undergo death, than for any man to make this pride of mine of no effect.

我传福音原没有可夸的。因为我是不得已的。若不传福音，我便有祸了。
For if I am a preacher of the good news, I have no cause for pride in this; because I am forced to do so, for a curse is on me if I do not.

我若甘心作这事，就有赏赐。若不甘心，责任却已经托付我了。
But if I do it gladly, I have a reward; and if not, I am under orders to do it.

既是这样，我的赏赐是什么呢？就是我传福音的时候，叫人不花钱得福音，免得用尽我传福音的权柄。
What then is my reward? This, that when I am giving the good news, I may give it without payment, not making use of my rights as a preacher of the good news.

我虽是自由的，无人辖管，然而我甘心作了众人的仆人，为要多得人。
For though I was free from all men, I made myself a servant to all, so that more might have salvation.

向犹太人，我就作犹太人，为要得犹太人。向律法以下的人，我虽不在律法以下，还是作律法以下的人，为要得律法以下的人。
And to the Jews I was as a Jew, so that I might give the good news to them; to those under the law I was the same, not as being myself under the law, but so that I might give the good news to those under the law.

向没有律法的人，我就作没有律法的人，为要得没有律法的人。其实我在神面前，不是没有律法，在基督面前，正在律法之下。
To those without the law I was as one without the law, not as being without law to God, but as under law to Christ, so that I might give the good news to those without the law.

向软弱的人，我就作软弱的人，为要得软弱的人。向什么样的人，我就作什么样的人。无论如何，总要救些人。
To the feeble, I was as one who is feeble, so that they might have salvation: I have been all things to all men, so that some at least might have salvation.

凡我所行的，都是为福音的缘故，为要与人同得这福音的好处。
And I do all things for the cause of the good news, so that I may have a part in it.

岂不知在场上赛跑的都跑，但得奖赏的只有一人。你们也当这样跑，好叫你们得着奖赏。
Do you not see that in a running competition all take part, but only one gets the reward? So let your minds be fixed on the reward.

凡较力争胜的，诸事都有节制。他们不过是要得能坏的冠冕。我们却是要得不能坏的冠冕。
And every man who takes part in the sports has self-control in all things. Now they do it to get a crown which is of this world, but we for an eternal crown.

所以我奔跑，不像无定向的。我斗拳，不像打空气的。
So then I am running, not uncertainly; so I am fighting, not as one who gives blows in the air:

我是攻克己身，叫身服我。恐怕我传福音给别人，自己反被弃绝了。
But I give blows to my body, and keep it under control, for fear that, after having given the good news to others, I myself might not have God's approval.

弟兄们，我不愿意你们不晓得，我们的祖宗从前都在云下，都从海中经过。
For it is my desire, my brothers, that you may keep in mind how all our fathers were under the cloud, and they all went through the sea;

都在云里海里受洗归了摩西。
And they all had baptism from Moses in the cloud and in the sea;

并且都吃了一样的灵食。
And they all took the same holy food;

也都喝了一样的灵水。所喝的是出于随着他们的灵磐石。那磐石就是基督。
And the same holy drink: for they all took of the water from the holy rock which came after them: and the rock was Christ.

但他们中间，多半是神不喜欢的人。所以在旷野倒毙。
But with most of them God was not pleased: for they came to their end in the waste land.

这些事都是我们的鉴戒，叫我们不要贪恋恶事，像他们那样贪恋的。
Now these things were for an example to us, so that our hearts might not go after evil things, as they did.

也不要拜偶像，像他们有人拜的。如经上所记，百姓坐下吃喝，起来玩耍。
Then do not go after false gods, as some of them did; as it is said in the holy Writings, After resting and feasting, the people got up to take their pleasure.

我们也不要行奸淫，像他们有人行的，一天就倒毙了二万三千人。
Again, let us not give way to the desires of the flesh, as some of them did, of whom twenty-three thousand came to their end in one day.

也不要试探主，（主有古卷作基督）像他们有人试探的，就被蛇所灭。
And let us not put the Lord to the test, as some of them did, and came to their death by snakes.

你们也不要发怨言，像他们有发怨言的，就被灭命的所灭。
And do not say evil things against the Lord, as some of them did, and destruction overtook them.

他们遭遇这些事，都要作为鉴戒。并且写在经上，正是警戒我们这末世的人。
Now these things were done as an example; and were put down in writing for our teaching, on whom the last days have come.

所以自己以为站得稳的，须要谨慎，免得跌倒。
So let him who seems to himself to be safe go in fear of a fall.

你们所遇见的试探，无非是人所能受的。神是信实的，必不叫你们受试探过于所能受的。在受试探的时候，总要给你们开一条出路，叫你们能忍受得住。
You have been put to no test but such as is common to man: and God is true, who will not let any test come on you which you are not able to undergo; but he will make with the test a way out of it, so that you may be able to go through it.

我所亲爱的弟兄阿，你们要逃避拜偶像的事。
For this cause, my dear brothers, give no worship to false gods.

我好像对明白人说的，你们要审察我的话。
What I am saying is for wise men, do you be the judges of it.

我们所祝福的杯，岂不是同领基督的血吗？我们所掰开的饼，岂不是同领基督的身体吗？
The cup of blessing which we take, does it not give us a part in the blood of Christ? and is not the broken bread a taking part in the body of Christ?

我们虽多，仍是一个饼，一个身体。因为我们都是分受这一个饼。
Because we, being a number of persons, are one bread, we are one body: for we all take part in the one bread.

你们看属肉体的以色列人。那吃祭物的，岂不是在祭坛上有分吗？
See Israel after the flesh: do not those who take as food the offerings of the altar take a part in the altar?

我是怎么说呢？岂是说祭偶像之物算得什么呢？或说偶像算得什么呢？
Do I say, then, that what is offered to images is anything, or that the image is anything?

我乃是说，外邦人所献的祭，是祭鬼，不是祭神。我不愿意你们与鬼相交。
What I say is that the things offered by the Gentiles are offered to evil spirits and not to God; and it is not my desire for you to have any part with evil spirits.

你们不能喝主的杯，又喝鬼的杯。不能吃主的筵席，又吃鬼的筵席。
It is not possible for you, at the same time, to take the cup of the Lord and the cup of evil spirits; you may not take part in the table of the Lord and the table of evil spirits.

我们可惹主的愤恨吗？我们比他还有能力吗？
Or may we be the cause of envy to the Lord? are we stronger than he?

凡事都可行。但不都有益处。凡事都可行。但不都造就人。
We are free to do all things, but there are things which it is not wise to do. We are free to do all things, but not all things are for the common good.

无论何人，不要求自己的益处，乃要求别人的益处。
Let a man give attention not only to what is good for himself, but equally to his neighbour's good.

凡市上所卖的，你们只管吃，不要为良心的缘故问什么话。
Whatever meat may be had at the public market, take as food without question of right or wrong;

因为地和其中所充满的，都属乎主。
For the earth is the Lord's and all things in it.

倘有一个不信的人请你们赴席，你们若愿意去，凡摆在你们面前的，只管吃，不要为良心的缘故问什么话。
If a Gentile makes a feast for you, and you are pleased to go as a guest, take whatever is put before you, without question of right or wrong.

若有人对你们说，这是献过祭的物，就要为那告诉你们的人，并为良心的缘故，不吃。
But if anyone says to you, This food has been used as an offering, do not take it, on account of him who said it, and on account of his sense of right and wrong:

我说的良心，不是你的，乃是他的。我这自由，为什么被别人的良心论断呢？
Right and wrong, I say, not for you, but for the other man; for the fact that I am free is not dependent on another man's sense of right or wrong.

我若谢恩而吃，为什么因我谢恩的物被人毁谤呢？
But if I give praise to God for the food which I take, let no man say evil of me for that reason.

所以你们或吃或喝，无论作什么，都要为荣耀神而行。
So then, if it is a question of food or drink, or any other thing, whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.

不拘是犹太人，是希利尼人，是神的教会，你们都不要使他跌倒。
Give no cause of trouble to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the church of God.

就好像我凡事都叫众人喜欢，不求自己的益处，只求众人的益处，叫他们得救。
Even as I give way to all men in all things, not looking for profit for myself, but for the good of others, that they may get salvation.

你们该效法我，像我效法基督一样。
So take me for your example, even as I take Christ for mine.

我称赞你们，因你们凡事记念我，又坚守我所传给你们的。
Now I am pleased to see that you keep me in memory in all things, and that you give attention to the teaching which was handed down from me to you.

我愿意你们知道，基督是各人的头。男人是女人的头，神是基督的头。
But it is important for you to keep this fact in mind, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.

凡男人祷告或是讲道（讲道或作说预言下同），若蒙着头，就羞辱自己的头。
Every man who takes part in prayer, or gives teaching as a prophet, with his head covered, puts shame on his head.

凡女人祷告或是讲道，若不蒙着头，就羞辱自己的头。因为这就如同剃了头发一样。
But every woman who does so with her head unveiled, puts shame on her head: for it is the same as if her hair was cut off.

女人若不蒙着头，就该剪了头发。女人若以剪发剃发为羞愧，就该蒙着头。
For if a woman is not veiled, let her hair be cut off; but if it is a shame to a woman to have her hair cut off, let her be veiled.

男人本不该蒙着头，因为他是神的形像和荣耀，但女人是男人的荣耀。
For it is not right for a man to have his head covered, because he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man.

起初，男人不是由女人而出。女人乃是由男人而出。
For the man did not come from the woman, but the woman from the man.

并且男人不是为女人造的。女人乃是为男人造的。
And the man was not made for the woman, but the woman for the man.

因此，女人为天使的缘故，应当在头上有服权柄的记号。
For this reason it is right for the woman to have a sign of authority on her head, because of the angels.

然而照主的安排，女也不是无男，男也不是无女。
But the woman is not separate from the man, and the man is not separate from the woman in the Lord.

因为女人原是由男人而出，男人也是由女人而出。但万有都是出乎神。
For as the woman is from the man, so the man is through the woman; but all things are from God.

你们自己审察，女人祷告神，不蒙着头，是合宜的吗？
Be judges yourselves of the question: does it seem right for a woman to take part in prayer unveiled?

你们的本性不也指示你们，男人若有长头发，便是他的羞辱吗？
Does it not seem natural to you that if a man has long hair, it is a cause of shame to him?

但女人有长头发，乃是她的荣耀。因为这头发是给她作盖头的。
But if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given to her for a covering.

若有人想要辩驳，我们却没有这样的规矩，神的众教会也是没有的。
But if any man will not be ruled in this question, this is not our way of doing things, and it is not done in the churches of God.

我现今吩咐你们的话，不是称赞你们。因为你们聚会不是受益，乃是招损。
But in giving you this order, there is one thing about which I am not pleased: it is that when you come together it is not for the better but for the worse.

第一，我听说你们聚会的时候，彼此分门别类。我也稍微地信这话。
For first of all, it has come to my ears that when you come together in the church, there are divisions among you, and I take the statement to be true in part.

在你们中间不免有分门结党的事，好叫那些有经验的人，显明出来。
For divisions are necessary among you, in order that those who have God's approval may be clearly seen among you.

你们聚会的时候，算不得吃主的晚餐。
But now, when you come together, it is not possible to take the holy meal of the Lord:

因为吃的时候，各人先吃自己的饭，甚至这个饥饿，那个酒醉。
For when you take your food, everyone takes his meal before the other; and one has not enough food, and another is the worse for drink.

你们要吃喝，难道没有家吗？还是藐视神的教会，叫那没有的羞愧呢？我向你们可怎么说呢？可因此称赞你们吗？我不称赞。
What? have you not houses to take your meals in? or have you no respect for the church of God, putting the poor to shame? What am I to say to you? am I to give you praise? certainly not.

我当日传给你们的，原是从主领受的，就是主耶稣被卖的那一夜，拿起饼来，
For it was handed down to me from the Lord, as I gave it to you, that the Lord Jesus, on the night when Judas was false to him, took bread,

祝谢了，就掰开，说，这是我的身体，为你们舍的（舍有古卷作掰开）。你们应当如此行，为的是记念我。
And when it had been broken with an act of praise, he said, This is my body which is for you: do this in memory of me.

饭后，也照样拿起杯来，说，这杯是用我的血所立的新约。你们每逢喝的时候，要如此行，为的是记念我。
In the same way, with the cup, after the meal, he said, This cup is the new testament in my blood: do this, whenever you take it, in memory of me.

你们每逢吃这饼，喝这杯，是表明主的死，直等到他来。
For whenever you take the bread and the cup you give witness to the Lord's death till he comes.

所以无论何人，不按理吃主的饼，喝主的杯，就是干犯主的身主的血了。
If, then, anyone takes the bread or the cup of the Lord in the wrong spirit, he will be responsible for the body and blood of the Lord.

人应当自己省察，然后吃这饼，喝这杯。
But let no man take of the bread and the cup without testing himself.

因为人吃喝，若不分辨是主的身体，就是吃喝自己的罪了。
For a man puts himself in danger, if he takes part in the holy meal without being conscious that it is the Lord's body.

因此，在你们中间有好些软弱的，与患病的，死的也不少（死原文作睡）。
For this cause a number of you are feeble and ill, and a number are dead.

我们若是先分辨自己，就不至于受审。
But if we were true judges of ourselves, punishment would not come on us.

我们受审的时候，乃是被主惩治。免得我们和世人一同定罪。
But if punishment does come, it is sent by the Lord, so that we may be safe when the world is judged.

所以我弟兄们，你们聚会吃的时候，要彼此等待。
So then, my brothers, when you come together to the holy meal of the Lord, let there be waiting for one another.

若有人饥饿，可以在家里先吃。免得你们聚会自己取罪。其余的事，我来的时候再安排。
If any man is in need of food, let him take his meal in his house; so that you may not come together to your damage. And the rest I will put in order when I come.

弟兄们，论到属灵的恩赐，我不愿意你们不明白。
But about the things of the spirit, my brothers, it is not right for you to be without teaching.

你们作外邦人的时候，随事被牵引受迷惑，去服事那哑吧偶像。这是你们知道的。
You are conscious that when you were Gentiles, in whatever way you were guided, you went after images without voice or power.

所以我告诉你们，被神的灵感动的，没有说耶稣是可咒诅的。若不是被圣灵感动的，也没有能说耶稣是主的。
So it is my desire for you to be clear about this; that no one is able to say by the Spirit of God that Jesus is cursed; and no one is able to say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Holy Spirit.

恩赐原有分别，圣灵却是一位。
Now there are different qualities given to men, but the same Spirit.

职事也有分别，主却是一位。
And there are different sorts of servants, but the same Lord.

功用也有分别，神却是一位，在众人里面运行一切的事。
And there are different operations, but the same God, who is working all things in all.

圣灵显在各人身上，是叫人得益处。
But to every man some form of the Spirit's working is given for the common good.

这人蒙圣灵赐他智慧的言语。那人也蒙这位圣灵赐他知识的言语。
For to one are given words of wisdom through the Spirit; and to another words of knowledge through the same Spirit:

又有一人蒙这位圣灵赐他信心。还有一人蒙这位圣灵赐他医病的恩赐。
To another faith in the same Spirit; and to another the power of taking away disease, by the one Spirit;

又叫一人能行异能。又叫一人能作先知。又叫一人能辨别诸灵。又叫一人能说方言。又叫一人能翻方言。
And to another the power of working wonders; and to another the prophet's word; and to another the power of testing spirits; to another different sorts of tongues; and to another the power of making clear the sense of the tongues:

这一切都是这位圣灵所运行，随己意分给各人的。
But all these are the operations of the one and the same Spirit, giving to every man separately as his pleasure is.

就如身子是一个，却有许多肢体。而且肢体虽多，仍是一个身子。基督也是这样。
For as the body is one, and has a number of parts, and all the parts make one body, so is Christ.

我们不拘是犹太人，是希利尼人，是为奴的，是自主的，都从一位圣灵受洗，成了一个身体。饮于一位圣灵。
For through the baptism of the one Spirit we were all formed into one body, Jews or Greeks, servants or free men, and were all made full of the same Spirit.

身子原不是一个肢体，乃是许多肢体。
For the body is not one part, but a number of parts.

设若脚说，我不是手，所以不属乎身子。它不能因此就不属乎身子。
If the foot says, Because I am not the hand, I am not a part of the body; it is no less a part of the body.

设若耳说，我不是眼，所以不属乎身子。它也不能因此就不属乎身子。
And if the ear says, Because I am not the eye, I am not a part of the body; it is a part of the body all the same.

若全身是眼，从哪里听声呢？若全身是耳，从哪里闻味呢？
If all the body was an eye, where would be the hearing? if all was hearing, where would be the smelling?

但如今神随自己的意思，把肢体俱各安排在身上了。
But now God has put every one of the parts in the body as it was pleasing to him.

若都是一个肢体，身子在哪里呢？
And if they were all one part, where would the body be?

但如今肢体是多的，身子却是一个。
But now they are all different parts, but one body.

眼不能对手说，我用不着你。头也不能对脚说，我用不着你。
And the eye may not say to the hand, I have no need of you: or again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

不但如此，身上肢体人以为软弱的，更是不可少的。
No, those parts which seem to be feeble are the more necessary;

身上肢体，我们看为不体面的，越发给它加上体面。不俊美的，越发得着俊美。
And to those parts of the body which seem to have less honour we give all the more honour; and to those parts of the body which are a cause of shame to us we give the greater respect;

我们俊美的肢体，自然用不着装饰。但神配搭这身子，把加倍的体面给那有缺欠的肢体。
But those parts of the body which are beautiful have no need of such care: and so the body has been joined together by God in such a way as to give more honour to those parts which had need of it;

免得身上分门别类。总要肢体彼此相顾。
So that there might be no division in the body; but all the parts might have the same care for one another.

若一个肢体受苦，所有的肢体就一同受苦。若一个肢体得荣耀，所有的肢体就一同快乐。
And if there is pain in one part of the body, all the parts will be feeling it; or if one part is honoured, all the parts will be glad.

你们就是基督的身子，并且各自作肢体。
Now you are the body of Christ, and every one of you the separate parts of it.

神在教会所设立的，第一是使徒。第二是先知，第三是教师。其次是行异能的。再次是得恩赐医病的。帮助人的。治理事的。说方言的。
And God has put some in the church, first, Apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers; then those with wonder-working powers, then those with the power of taking away disease, helpers, wise guides, users of strange tongues.

岂都是使徒吗？岂都是先知吗？岂都是教师吗？岂都是行异能的吗？
Are all Apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? have all the power of working wonders?

岂都是得恩赐医病的吗？岂都是说方言的吗？岂都是翻方言的吗？
Are all able to take away disease? have all the power of tongues? are all able to give their sense?

你们要切切地求那更大的恩赐，我现今把最妙的道指示你们。
But let your desires be turned to the more important things given by the Spirit. And now I am pointing out to you an even better way.

我若能说万人的方言，并天使的话语却没有爱，我就成了鸣的锣，响的钹一般。
If I make use of the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am like sounding brass, or a loud-tongued bell.

我若有先知讲道之能，也明白各样的奥秘，各样的知识。而且有全备的信，叫我能够移山，却没有爱，我就算不得什么。
And if I have a prophet's power, and have knowledge of all secret things; and if I have all faith, by which mountains may be moved from their place, but have not love, I am nothing.

我若将所有的周济穷人，又舍己身叫人焚烧，却没有爱，仍然与我无益。
And if I give all my goods to the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but have not love, it is of no profit to me.

爱是恒久忍耐，又有恩慈。爱是不嫉妒。爱是不自夸。不张狂。
Love is never tired of waiting; love is kind; love has no envy; love has no high opinion of itself, love has no pride;

不作害羞的事。不求自己的益处。不轻易发怒。不计算人的恶。
Love's ways are ever fair, it takes no thought for itself; it is not quickly made angry, it takes no account of evil;

不喜欢不义。只喜欢真理。
It takes no pleasure in wrongdoing, but has joy in what is true;

凡事包容。凡事相信。凡事盼望。凡事忍耐。
Love has the power of undergoing all things, having faith in all things, hoping all things.

爱是永不止息。先知讲道之能，终必归于无有。说方言之能，终必停止，知识也终必归于无有。
Though the prophet's word may come to an end, tongues come to nothing, and knowledge have no more value, love has no end.

我们现在所知道的有限，先知所讲的也有限。
For our knowledge is only in part, and the prophet's word gives only a part of what is true:

等那完全的来到，这有限的必归于无有了。
But when that which is complete is come, then that which is in part will be no longer necessary.

我作孩子的时候，话语像孩子，心思像孩子，意念像孩子。既成了人，就把孩子的事丢弃了。
When I was a child, I made use of a child's language, I had a child's feelings and a child's thoughts: now that I am a man, I have put away the things of a child.

我们如今仿佛对着镜子观看，模糊不清（模糊不清原文作如同猜谜）。到那时，就要面对面了。我如今所知道的有限。到那时就全知道，如同主知道我一样。
For now we see things in a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now my knowledge is in part; then it will be complete, even as God's knowledge of me.

如今常存的有信，有望，有爱，这三样，其中最大的是爱。
But now we still have faith, hope, love, these three; and the greatest of these is love.

你们要追求爱，也要切慕属灵的恩赐，其中更要羡慕的，是作先知讲道。（原文作是说预言下同）
Go after love; still desiring to have the things which the Spirit gives, but most of all that you may have the prophet's power.

那说方言的，原不是对人说，乃是对神说。因为没有人听出来。然而他在心灵里，却是讲说各样的奥秘。
For he who makes use of tongues is not talking to men but to God; because no one has the sense of what he is saying; but in the Spirit he is talking of secret things.

但作先知讲道的，是对人说，要造就，安慰，劝勉人。
But the word of the prophet gives men knowledge and comfort and strength.

说方言的，是造就自己。作先知讲道的，乃是造就教会。
He who makes use of tongues may do good to himself; but he who gives the prophet's word does good to the church.

我愿意你们都说方言。更愿意你们作先知讲道。因为说方言的，若不翻出来，使教会被造就，那作先知讲道的，就比他强了。
Now though it is my desire for you all to have the power of tongues, it would give me more pleasure to be hearing the prophet's word from you; for this is a greater thing than using tongues, if the sense is not given at the same time, for the good of the church.

弟兄们，我到你们那里去，若只说方言，不用启示，或知识，或预言，或教训，给你们讲解，我与你们有什么益处呢？
But, now, my brothers, if I come to you using tongues, what profit will it be to you, if I do not give you a revelation, or knowledge, or the word of the prophet, or teaching?

就是那有声无气的物，或箫，或琴，若发出来的声音，没有分别，怎能知道所吹所弹的是什么呢？
Even things without life, having a voice, such as a music-pipe or other instrument, if they do not give out different sounds, who may be certain what is being played?

若吹无定的号声，谁能预备打仗呢？
For if the war-horn gives out an uncertain note, who will get ready for the fight?

你们也是如此，舌头若不说容易明白的话，怎能知道所说的是什么呢？这就是向空说话了。
So if you, in using a strange tongue, say words which have no sense, how will anyone take in what you are saying? for you will be talking to the air.

世上的声音，或者甚多，却没有一样是无意思的。
There are, it may be, a number of different voices in the world, and no voice is without sense.

我若不明白那声音的意思，这说话的人必以我为化外之人，我也以他为化外之人。
But if the sense of the voice is not clear to me, I am like a man from a strange country to him who is talking, and he will be the same to me.

你们也是如此。既是切慕属灵的恩赐，就当求多得造就教会的恩赐。
So if you are desiring the things which the Spirit gives, let your minds be turned first to the things which are for the good of the church.

所以那说方言的，就当求着能翻出来。
For this reason, let the man who has the power of using tongues make request that he may, at the same time, be able to give the sense.

我若用方言祷告，是我的灵祷告。但我的悟性没有果效。
For if I make use of tongues in my prayers, my spirit makes the prayer, but not my mind.

这却怎么样呢？我要用灵祷告，也要用悟性祷告。我要用灵歌唱，也要用悟性歌唱。
What then? let my prayer be from the spirit, and equally from the mind; let my song be from the spirit, and equally from mind.

不然，你用灵祝谢，那在座不通方言的人，既然不明白你的话，怎能在你感谢的时候说阿们呢？
For if you give a blessing with the spirit, how will the man who has no knowledge say, So be it, after your prayer, seeing that he has not taken in what you are saying?

你感谢的固然是好，无奈不能造就别人。
For your giving of the blessing is certainly well done, but of no profit to the man without knowledge.

我感谢神，我说方言比你们众人还多。
I give praise to God that I am able to make use of tongues more than you all:

但在教会中，宁可用悟性说五句教导人的话，强如说万句方言。
But in the church it would be better for me to make use of five words of which the sense was clear, so that others might have profit, than ten thousand words in a strange tongue.

弟兄们，在心志上不要作小孩子。然而在恶事上要作婴孩。在心志上总要作大人。
My brothers, do not be children in mind: in evil be as little children, but in mind be of full growth.

律法上记着，主说，我要用外邦人的舌头，和外邦人的嘴唇，向这百姓说话。虽然如此，他们还是不听从我。
In the law it is said, By men of other tongues and by strange lips will my words come to this people; and not even so will they give ear to me, says the Lord.

这样看来，说方言，不是为信的人作证据，乃是为不信的人。作先知讲道，不是为不信的人作证据，乃是为信的人。
For this reason tongues are for a sign, not to those who have faith, but to those who have not: but the prophet's word is for those who have faith, and not for the rest who have not.

所以全教会聚在一处的时候，若都说方言，偶然有不通方言的，或是不信的人进来，岂不说你们癫狂了吗？
If, then, the church has come together, and all are using tongues, and there come in men without knowledge or faith, will they not say that you are unbalanced?

若都作先知讲道，偶然有不信的，或是不通方言的人进来，就被众人劝醒，被众人审明。
But if all are teaching as prophets, and a man without faith or knowledge comes in, he is tested by all, he is judged by all;

他心里的隐情显露出来，就必将脸伏地，敬拜神，说神真是在你们中间了。
The secrets of his heart are made clear; and he will go down on his face and give worship to God, saying that God is truly among you.

弟兄们，这却怎么样呢？你们聚会的时候，各人或有诗歌，或有教训，或有启示，或有方言，或有翻出来的话。凡事都当造就人。
What is it then, my brothers? when you come together everyone has a holy song, or a revelation, or a tongue, or is giving the sense of it. Let everything be done for the common good.

若有说方言的，只好两个人，至多三个人，且要轮流着说，也要一个人翻出来。
If any man makes use of a tongue, let it not be more than two, or at the most three, and in turn; and let someone give the sense:

若没有人翻，就当在会中闭口。只对自己和神说，就是了。
But if there is no one to give the sense, let him keep quiet in the church; and let his words be to himself and to God.

至于作先知讲道的，只好两个人，或是三个人，其余的就当慎思明辨。
And let the prophets give their words, but not more than two or three, and let the others be judges of what they say.

若旁边坐着的得了启示，那先说话的就当闭口不言。
But if a revelation is given to another who is seated near, let the first be quiet.

因为你们都可以一个一个地作先知讲道，叫众人学道理，叫众人得劝勉。
For you may all be prophets in turn so that all may get knowledge and comfort;

先知的灵，原是顺服先知的。
And the spirits of the prophets are controlled by the prophets;

因为神不是叫人混乱，乃是叫人安静。
For God is not a God whose ways are without order, but a God of peace; as in all the churches of the saints.

妇女在会中要闭口不言，像在圣徒的众教会一样。因为不准她们说话。她们总要顺服，正如律法所说的。
Let women keep quiet in the churches: for it is not right for them to be talking; but let them be under control, as it says in the law.

她们若要学什么，可以在家里问自己的丈夫。因为妇女在会中说话原是可耻的。
And if they have a desire for knowledge about anything, let them put questions to their husbands privately: for talking in the church puts shame on a woman.

神的道理，岂是从你们出来吗？岂是单临到你们吗？
What? was it from you that the word of God went out? or did it only come in to you?

若有人以为自己是先知或是属灵的，就该知道，我所写给你们的是主的命令。
If any man seems to himself to be a prophet or to have the Spirit, let him take note of the things which I am writing to you, as being the word of the Lord.

若有不知道的，就由他不知道吧。
But if any man is without knowledge, let him be so.

所以我弟兄们，你们要切慕作先知讲道，也不要禁止说方言。
So then, my brothers, let it be your chief desire to be prophets; but let no one be stopped from using tongues.

凡事都要规规矩矩的按着次序行。
Let all things be done in the right and ordered way.

弟兄们，我如今把先前所传给你们的福音，告诉你们知道，这福音你们也领受了，又靠着站立得住。
Now I am going to make clear to you, my brothers, what the good news was which I gave to you, and which you took, and on which your faith is based,

并且你们若不是徒然相信，能以持守我所传给你们的，就必因这福音得救。
By which you have salvation; that is to say, the form in which it was given to you, if it is fixed in your minds, and if your faith in it is not without effect.

我当日所领受又传给你们的，第一，就是基督照圣经所说，为我们的罪死了。
For I gave to you first of all what was handed down to me, how Christ underwent death for our sins, as it says in the Writings;

而且埋葬了。又照圣经所说，第三天复活了。
And he was put in the place of the dead; and on the third day he came back from the dead, as it says in the Writings;

并且显给矶法看。然后显给十二使徒看。
And he was seen by Cephas; then by the twelve;

后来一时显给五百多弟兄看，其中一大半到如今还在，却也有已经睡了的。
Then by more than five hundred brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, but some are sleeping;

以后显给雅各看。再显给众使徒看。
Then he was seen by James; then by all the Apostles.

末了也显给我看。我如同未到产期而生的人一般。
And last of all, as by one whose birth was out of the right time, he was seen by me.

我原是使徒中最小的，不配称为使徒，因为我从前逼迫神的教会。
For I am the least of the Apostles, having no right to be named an Apostle, because of my cruel attacks on the church of God.

然而我今日成了何等人，是蒙神的恩才成的。并且他所赐我的恩，不是徒然的。我比众使徒格外劳苦。这原不是我，乃是神的恩与我同在。
But by the grace of God, I am what I am: and his grace which was given to me has not been for nothing; for I did more work than all of them; though not I, but the grace of God which was with me.

不拘是我是众使徒，我们如此传，你们也如此信了。
If then it is I who am the preacher, or they, this is our word, and to this you have given your faith.

既传基督是从死里复活了，怎么在你们中间，有人说没有死人复活的事呢？
Now if the good news says that Christ came back from the dead, how do some of you say that there is no coming back from the dead?

若没有死人复活的事，基督也就没有复活了。
But if there is no coming back from the dead, then Christ has not come back from the dead:

若基督没有复活，我们所传的便是枉然，你们所信的也是枉然。
And if Christ did not come again from the dead, then our good news and your faith in it are of no effect.

并且明显我们是为神妄作见证的。因我们见证神是叫基督复活了。若死人真不复活，神也就没有叫基督复活了。
Yes, and we are seen to be false witnesses of God; because we gave witness of God that by his power Christ came again from the dead: which is not true if there is no coming back from the dead.

因为死人若不复活，基督也就没有复活了。
For if it is not possible for the dead to come to life again, then Christ has not come to life again:

基督若没有复活，你们的信便是徒然。你们仍在罪里。
And if that is so, your faith is of no effect; you are still in your sins.

就是在基督里睡了的人也灭亡了。
And, in addition, the dead in Christ have gone to destruction.

我们若靠基督，只在今生有指望，就算比众人更可怜。
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most unhappy.

但基督已经从死里复活，成为睡了之人初熟的果子。
But now Christ has truly come back from the dead, the first-fruits of those who are sleeping.

死既是因一人而来，死人复活也是因一人而来。
For as by man came death, so by man there is a coming back from the dead.

在亚当里众人都死了。照样，在基督里众人也都要复活。
For as in Adam death comes to all, so in Christ will all come back to life.

但各人是按着自己的次序复活。初熟的果子是基督。以后在他来的时候，是那些属基督的。
But every man in his right order: Christ the first-fruits; then those who are Christ's at his coming.

再后末期到了，那时，基督既将一切执政的，掌权的，有能的，都毁灭了，就把国交与父神。
Then comes the end, when he will give up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he will have put an end to all rule and to all authority and power.

因为基督必要作王，等神把一切仇敌，都放在他的脚下。
For his rule will go on till he has put all those who are against him under his feet.

尽末了所毁灭的仇敌，就是死。
The last power to come to an end is death.

因为经上说，神叫万物都服在他的脚下。既说万物都服了他，明显那叫万物服他的不在其内了。
For, as it says, He has put all things under his feet. But when he says, All things are put under him, it is clear that it is not said about him who put all things under him.

万物既服了他，那时，子也要自己服那叫万物服他的，叫神在万物之上，为万物之主。
And when all things have been put under him, then will the Son himself be under him who put all things under him, so that God may be all in all.

不然那些为死人受洗的，将来怎样呢？若死人总不复活，因何为他们受洗呢？
Again, what will they do who are given baptism for the dead? if the dead do not come back at all, why are people given baptism for them?

我们又因何时刻冒险呢？
And why are we in danger every hour?

弟兄们，我在我主基督耶稣里，指着你们所夸的口，极力地说，我是天天冒死。
Yes, truly, by your pride in me, my brothers in Christ Jesus our Lord, my life is one long death.

我若当日像寻常人，在以弗所同野兽战斗，那于我有什么益处呢？若死人不复活，我们就吃吃喝喝吧。因为明天要死了。
If, after the way of men, I was fighting with beasts at Ephesus, what profit is it to me? If the dead do not come to life again, let us take our pleasure in feasting, for tomorrow we come to an end.

你们不要自欺。滥交是败坏善行。
Do not be tricked by false words: evil company does damage to good behaviour.

你们要醒悟为善，不要犯罪。因为有人不认识神。我说这话，是要叫你们羞愧。
Be awake to righteousness and keep yourselves from sin; for some have no knowledge of God: I say this to put you to shame.

或有人问，死人怎样复活。带着什么身体来呢？
But someone will say, How do the dead come back? and with what sort of body do they come?

无知的人哪，你所种的，若不死就不能生。
Foolish man, it is necessary for the seed which you put into the earth to undergo death in order that it may come to life again:

并且你所种的，不是那将来的形体，不过是子粒，即如麦子，或是别样的谷。
And when you put it into the earth, you do not put in the body which it will be, but only the seed, of grain or some other sort of plant;

但神随自己的意思，给它一个形体，并叫各等子粒，各有自己的形体。
But God gives it a body, as it is pleasing to him, and to every seed its special body.

凡肉体各有不同。人是一样，兽又是一样，鸟又是一样，鱼又是一样。
All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one flesh of men, another of beasts, another of birds, and another of fishes.

有天上的形体，也有地上的形体。但天上形体的荣光是一样，地上形体的荣光又是一样。
And there are bodies of heaven and bodies of earth, but the glory of the one is different from that of the other.

日有日的荣光，月有月的荣光，星有星的荣光。这星和那星的荣光，也有分别。
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for the glory of one star is different from that of another.

死人复活也是这样。所种的是必朽坏的，复活的是不朽坏的。
So is it with the coming back from the dead. It is planted in death; it comes again in life:

所种的是羞辱的，复活的是荣耀的。所种的是软弱的，复活的是强壮的。
It is planted in shame; it comes again in glory: feeble when it is planted, it comes again in power:

所种的是血气的身体，复活的是灵性的身体。若有血气的身体，也必有灵性的身体。
It is planted a natural body; it comes again as a body of the spirit. If there is a natural body, there is equally a body of the spirit.

经上也是这样记着说，首先的人亚当，成了有灵的活人。（灵或作血气）末后的亚当，成了叫人活的灵。
And so it is said, The first man Adam was a living soul. The last Adam is a life-giving spirit.

但属灵的不在先，属血气的在先。以后才有属灵的。
But that which is natural comes before that which is of the spirit.

头一个人是出于地，乃属土。第二个人是出于天。
The first man is from the earth, and of the earth: the second man is from heaven.

那属土的怎样，凡属土的也就怎样。属天的怎样，凡属天的也就怎样。
Those who are of the earth are like the man who was from the earth: and those who are of heaven are like the one from heaven.

我们既有属土的形状，将来也必有属天的形状。
And in the same way as we have taken on us the image of the man from the earth, so we will take on us the image of the one from heaven.

弟兄们，我告诉你们说，血肉之体，不能承受神的国。必朽坏的，不能承受不朽坏的。
Now I say this, my brothers, that it is not possible for flesh and blood to have a part in the kingdom of God; and death may not have a part in life.

我如今把一件奥秘的事告诉你们。我们不是都要睡觉，乃是都要改变，
See, I am giving you the revelation of a secret: we will not all come to the sleep of death, but we will all be changed.

就在一霎时，眨眼之间，号筒末次吹响的时候。因号筒要响，死人要复活成为不朽坏的，我们也要改变。
In a second, in the shutting of an eye, at the sound of the last horn: for at that sound the dead will come again, free for ever from the power of death, and we will be changed.

这必朽坏的，总要变成不朽坏的。（变成原文作穿下同）这必死的，总要变成不死的。
For this body which comes to destruction will be made free from the power of death, and the man who is under the power of death will put on eternal life.

这必朽坏的既变成不朽坏的。这必死的既变成不死的。那时经上所记，死被得胜吞灭的话就应验了。
But when this has taken place, then that which was said in the Writings will come true, Death is overcome by life.

死啊，你得胜的权势在哪里？死啊，你的毒钩在哪里？
O death, where is your power? O death, where are your pains?

死的毒钩就是罪。罪的权势就是律法。
The pain of death is sin; and the power of sin is the law:

感谢神，使我们借着我们的主耶稣基督得胜。
But praise be to God who gives us strength to overcome through our Lord Jesus Christ.

所以我亲爱的弟兄们，你们务要坚固不可摇动，常常竭力多作主工，因为知道你们的劳苦，在主里面不是徒然的。
For this cause, my dear brothers, be strong in purpose and unmoved, ever giving yourselves to the work of the Lord, because you are certain that your work is not without effect in the Lord.

论到为圣徒捐钱，我从前怎样吩咐加拉太的众教会，你们也当怎样行。
Now about the giving of money for the saints, as I gave orders to the churches of Galatia, so do you.

每逢七日的第一日，各人要照自己的进项抽出来留着。免得我来的时候现凑。
On the first day of the week, let every one of you put by him in store, in measure as he has done well in business, so that it may not be necessary to get money together when I come.

及至我来到了，你们写信举荐谁，我就打发他们，把你们的捐资送到耶路撒冷去。
And when I come, I will send the men of your selection with letters to take the money you have got together to Jerusalem.

若我也该去，他们可以和我同去。
And if it is possible for me to go there, they will go with me.

我要从马其顿经过。既经过了，就要到你们那里去。
But I will come to you after I have gone through Macedonia, for that is my purpose;

或者和你们同住几时，或者也过冬。无论我往哪里去，你们就可以给我送行。
But I may be with you for a time, or even for the winter, so that you may see me on my way, wherever I go.

我如今不愿意路过见你们。主若许我，我就指望和你们同住几时。
For it is not my desire to see you now, on my way; because it is my hope to be with you for some time, if that is the Lord's pleasure.

但我要仍旧住在以弗所，直等到五旬节。
But I will be at Ephesus till Pentecost;

因为有宽大又有功效的门，为我开了，并且反对的人也多。
For a great and important door there is open to me, and there are a number of people against me.

若是提摩太来到，你们要留心，叫他在你们那里无所惧怕。因为他劳力作主的工，像我一样。
Now if Timothy comes, see that he is with you without fear; because he is doing the Lord's work, even as I am:

所以无论谁，都不可藐视他。只要送他平安前行，叫他到我这里来。因我指望他和弟兄们同来。
See then that he has the honour which is right. But send him on his way in peace, so that he may come to me: for I am looking for him with the brothers.

至于兄弟亚波罗，我再三地劝他，同弟兄们到你们那里去。但这时他决不愿意去。几时有了机会他必去。
But as for Apollos, the brother, I had a great desire for him to come to you with the brothers, but it was not his pleasure to come now; but he will come when he has a chance.

你们务要儆醒，在真道上站立得稳，要作大丈夫，要刚强。
Be on the watch, unmoved in the faith, and be strong like men.

凡你们所作的，都要凭爱心而作。
Let all you do be done in love.

弟兄们，你们晓得司提反一家，是亚该亚初结的果子。并且他们专以服事圣徒为念。
Now I make my request to you, my brothers, for you have knowledge that the house of Stephanas is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have made themselves the servants of the saints,

我劝你们顺服这样的人，并一切同工同劳的人。
That you put yourselves under such, and under everyone who is helping the Lord's work.

司提反，和福徒拿都，并亚该古，到这里来，我很喜欢。因为你们待我有不及之处，他们补上了。
And I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for they have done what was needed to make your work complete.

他们叫我和你们心里都快活。这样的人，你们务要敬重。
For they gave comfort to my spirit and to yours: for which cause give respect to such people.

亚西亚的众教会问你们安。亚居拉和百基拉，并在他们家里的教会，因主多多地问你们安。
The churches of Asia send their love to you. So do Aquila and Prisca, with the church which is in their house.

众弟兄都问你们安。你们要亲嘴问安，彼此务要圣洁。
All the brothers send their love to you. Give one another a holy kiss.

我保罗亲笔问安。
I, Paul, send you these words of love in my writing.

若有人不爱主，这人可诅可咒。主必要来。
If any man has not love for the Lord, let him be cursed. Maran atha (our Lord comes).

愿主耶稣基督的恩，常与你们众人同在。
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

我在基督耶稣里的爱与你们众人同在。阿们。
My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. So be it.

