奉神旨意，作基督耶稣使徒的保罗，和兄弟提摩太，写信给在哥林多神的教会，并亚该亚遍处的众圣徒。
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, and Timothy the brother, to the church of God which is in Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:

愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父和主耶稣基督归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

愿颂赞归与我们的主耶稣基督的父神，就是发慈悲的父，赐各样安慰的神。
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort;

我们在一切患难中，他就安慰我们，叫我们能用神所赐的安慰，去安慰那遭各样患难的人。
Who gives us comfort in all our troubles, so that we may be able to give comfort to others who are in trouble, through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.

我们既多受基督的苦楚，就靠基督多得安慰。
For as we undergo more of the pain which Christ underwent, so through Christ does our comfort become greater.

我们受患难呢，是为叫你们得安慰得拯救。我们得安慰呢，也是为叫你们得安慰。这安慰能叫你们忍受我们所受的那样苦楚。
But if we are troubled, it is for your comfort and salvation; or if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which takes effect through your quiet undergoing of the same troubles which we undergo:

我们为你们所存的盼望是确定的。因为知道你们既是同受苦楚，也必同得安慰。
And our hope for you is certain; in the knowledge that as you take part in the troubles, so you will take part in the comfort.

弟兄们，我们不要你们不晓得，我们从前在亚西亚遭遇苦难，被压太重，力不能胜，甚至连活命的指望都绝了。
For it is our desire that you may not be without knowledge of our trouble which came on us in Asia, that the weight of it was very great, more than our power, so that it seemed that we had no hope even of life:

自己心里也断定是必死的，叫我们不靠自己，只靠叫死人复活的神。
Yes, we ourselves have had the answer of death in ourselves, so that our hope might not be in ourselves, but in God who is able to give life to the dead:

他曾救我们脱离那极大的死亡，现在仍要救我们，并且我们指望他将来还要救我们。
Who gave us salvation from so great a death: on whom we have put our hope that he will still go on to give us salvation;

你们以祈祷帮助我们，好叫许多人为我们谢恩，就是为我们因许多人所得的恩。
You at the same time helping together by your prayer for us; so that for what has been given to us through a number of persons, praise may go up to God for us from all of them.

我们所夸的，是自己的良心，见证我们凭着神的圣洁和诚实，在世为人，不靠人的聪明，乃靠神的恩惠，向你们更是这样。
For our glory is in this, in the knowledge which we have that our way of life in the world, and most of all in relation to you, has been holy and true in the eyes of God; not in the wisdom of the flesh, but in the grace of God.

我们现在写给你们的话，并不外乎你们所念的，所认识的，我也盼望你们到底还是要认识。
For in our letters we say no other things to you, but those which you are reading, and to which you give agreement, and, it is my hope, will go on doing so to the end:

正如你们已经有几分认识我们。以我们夸口，好像我们在我们主耶稣的日子，以你们夸口一样。
Even as you have been ready, in part, to say that we are your glory, in the same way that you are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus.

我既然这样深信，就早有意到你们那里去，叫你们再得益处。
And being certain of this, it was my purpose to come to you before, so that you might have a second grace;

也要从你们那里经过，往马其顿去，再从马其顿回到你们那里，叫你们给我送行往犹太去。
And by way of Corinth to go into Macedonia, and from there to come back again to you, so that you might send me on my way to Judaea.

我有此意，岂是反复不定吗？我所起的意，岂是从情欲起的，叫我忽是忽非吗？
If then I had such a purpose, did I seem to be changing suddenly? or am I guided in my purposes by the flesh, saying, Yes, today, and, No, tomorrow?

我指着信实的神说，我们向你们所传的道，并没有是而又非的。
As God is true, our word to you is not Yes and No.

因为我和西拉，并提摩太，在你们中间所传神的儿子耶稣基督，总没有是而又非的，在他只有一是。
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, whom we were preaching among you, even I and Silvanus and Timothy, was not Yes and No, but in him is Yes.

神的应许，不论有多少，在基督都是是的，所以借着他也都是实在的，（实在原文作阿们）叫神因我们得荣耀。
For he is the Yes to all the undertakings of God: and by him all the words of God are made certain and put into effect, to the glory of God through us.

那在基督里坚固我们和你们，并且膏我们的，就是神。
Now he who makes our faith strong together with you, in Christ, and has given us of his grace, is God;

他又用印印了我们，并赐圣灵在我们心里作凭据。（原文作质）。
And it is he who has put his stamp on us, even the Spirit, as the sign in our hearts of the coming glory.

我呼吁神给我的心作见证，我没有往哥林多去，是为要宽容你们。
But God is my witness that it was in pity for you that I did not come to Corinth at that time.

我们并不是辖管你们的信心，乃是帮助你们的快乐。因为你们凭信才站立得住。
Not that we have authority over your faith, but we are helpers of your joy: for it is faith which is your support.

我自己定了主意，再到你们那里去，必须大家没有忧愁。
But it was my decision for myself, not to come again to you with sorrow.

倘若我叫你们忧愁，除了我叫那忧愁的人以外，谁能叫我快乐呢？
For if I give you sorrow, who then will make me glad, but he who is made sad by me?

我曾把这事写给你们，恐怕我到的时候，应该叫我快乐的那些人，反倒叫我忧愁。我也深信，你们众人都以我的快乐为自己的快乐。
And I said this very thing in my letter, for fear that when I came I might have sorrow from those from whom it was right for me to have joy; being certain of this, that my joy is the joy of you all.

我先前心里难过痛苦，多多地流泪，写信给你们。不是叫你们忧愁，乃是叫你们知道我格外的疼爱你们。
For out of much trouble and pain of heart and much weeping I sent my letter to you; not to give you sorrow, but so that you might see how great is the love which I have to you.

若有叫人忧愁的，他不但叫我忧愁，也是叫你们众人有几分忧愁，我说几分，恐怕说得太重。
But if anyone has been a cause of sorrow, he has been so, not to me only, but in some measure to all of you (I say this that I may not be over-hard on you).

这样的人，受了众人的责罚，也就够了。
Let it be enough for such a man to have undergone the punishment which the church put on him;

倒不如赦免他，安慰他，免得他忧愁太过，甚至沉沦了。
So that now, on the other hand, it is right for him to have forgiveness and comfort from you, for fear that his sorrow may be over-great.

所以我劝你们，要向他显出坚定不移的爱心来。
For which cause my desire is that you will make your love to him clear by your acts.

为此我先前也写信给你们，要试验你们，看你们凡事顺从不顺从。
And for the same reason I sent you a letter so that I might be certain of your desire to do my orders in all things.

你们赦免谁，我也赦免谁，我若有所赦免的，是在基督面前为你们赦免的。
But if you give forgiveness to anyone, I do the same: for if I have given forgiveness for anything, I have done it because of you, in the person of Christ;

免得撒但趁着机会胜过我们。因我们并非不晓得他的诡计。
So that Satan may not get the better of us: for we are not without knowledge of his designs.

我从前为基督的福音到了特罗亚，主也给我开了门。
Now when I came to Troas for the good news of Christ, and there was an open door for me in the Lord,

那时因为没有遇见兄弟提多，我心里不安，便辞别那里的人往马其顿去了。
I had no rest in my spirit because Titus my brother was not there: so I went away from them, and came into Macedonia.

感谢神，常帅领我们在基督里夸胜，并借着我们在各处显扬那因认识基督而有的香气。
But praise be to God who makes us strong to overcome in Christ, and makes clear through us in every place the value of the knowledge of him.

因为我们在神面前，无论在得救的人身上，或灭亡的人身上，都有基督馨香之气。
For we are a sweet perfume of Christ to God in those who are getting salvation and in those who are going to destruction;

在这等人，就作了死的香气叫他死。在那等人，就作了活的香气叫他活。这事谁能当得起呢？
To the one it is a perfume of death to death; to the other a perfume of life to life. And who is enough for such things?

我们不像那许多人，为利混乱神的道。乃是由于诚实，由于神，在神面前凭着基督讲道。
For we are not like the great number who make use of the word of God for profit: but our words are true, as from God, being said as before God in Christ.

我们岂是又举荐自己吗？岂像别人，用人的荐信给你们，或用你们的荐信给人吗？
Do we seem to be again attempting to put ourselves in the right? or have we need, as some have, of letters of approval to you or from you?

你们就是我们的荐信，写在我们的心里，被众人所知道所念诵的。
You yourselves are our letter, whose writing is in our heart, open for every man's reading and knowledge;

你们明显是基督的信，借着我们修成的。不是用墨写的，乃是用永生神的灵写的。不是写在石版上，乃是写在心版上。
For you are clearly a letter of Christ, the fruit of our work, recorded not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in stone, but in hearts of flesh.

我们因基督所以在神面前才有这样的信心，
And this is the certain faith which we have in God through Christ:

并不是我们凭自己能承担什么事，我们所能承担的，乃是出于神。
Not as if we were able by ourselves to do anything for which we might take the credit; but our power comes from God;

他叫我们能承当这新约的执事。不是凭着字句，乃是凭着精意。因为那字句是叫人死，精意是叫人活。（精意或作圣灵）。
Who has made us able to be servants of a new agreement; not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter gives death, but the Spirit gives life.

那用字刻在石头上属死的职事，尚且有荣光，甚至以色列人因摩西面上的荣光，不能定睛看他的脸。这荣光原是渐渐退去的。
For if the operation of the law, giving death, recorded in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the eyes of the children of Israel had to be turned away from the face of Moses because of its glory, a glory which was only for a time:

何况那属灵的职事，岂不更有荣光吗？
Will not the operation of the Spirit have a much greater glory?

若是定罪的职事有荣光，那称义的职事，荣光就越发大了。
For if the operation of the law, producing punishment, had its glory, how much greater will be the operation of the Spirit causing righteousness?

那从前有荣光的，因这极大的荣光，就算不得有荣光了。
For the glory of the first no longer seems to be glory, because of the greater glory of that which comes after.

若那废掉的有荣光，这长存的就更有荣光了。
For if the order which was for a time had its glory, much more will the eternal order have its glory.

我们既有这样的盼望，就大胆讲说，
Having then such a hope, we keep nothing back,

不像摩西将帕子蒙在脸上，叫以色列人不能定睛看到那将废者的结局。
And are not like Moses, who put a veil on his face, so that the children of Israel might not see clearly to the end of the present order of things:

但他们的心地刚硬。直到今日诵读旧约的时候，这帕子还没有揭去。这帕子在基督里已经废去了。
But their minds were made hard: for to this very day at the reading of the old agreement the same veil is still unlifted; though it is taken away in Christ.

然而直到今日，每逢诵读摩西书的时候，帕子还在他们心上。
But to this day, at the reading of the law of Moses, a veil is over their heart.

但他们的心几时归向主，帕子就几时除去了。
But when it is turned to the Lord, the veil will be taken away.

主就是那灵。主的灵在哪里，哪里就得以自由。
Now the Lord is the Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there the heart is free.

我们众人既然敞着脸，得以看见主的荣光，好像从镜子里返照，就变成主的形状，荣上加荣，如同从主的灵变成的。
But we all, with unveiled face giving back as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord who is the Spirit.

我们既然蒙怜悯，受了这职分，就不丧胆。
For this reason, because we have been made servants of this new order, through the mercy given to us, we are strong:

乃将那些暗昧可耻的事弃绝了，不行诡诈，不谬讲神的道理。只将真理表明出来，好在神面前把自己荐与各人的良心。
And we have given up the secret things of shame, not walking in false ways, and not making use of the word of God with deceit; but by the revelation of what is true, as before God, we have the approval of every man's sense of right and wrong.

如果我们的福音蒙蔽，就是蒙蔽在灭亡的人身上。
But if our good news is veiled, it is veiled from those who are on the way to destruction:

此等不信之人，被这世界的神弄瞎了心眼，不叫基督荣耀福音的光照着他们。基督本是神的像。
Because the god of this world has made blind the minds of those who have not faith, so that the light of the good news of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, might not be shining on them.

我们原不是传自己，乃是传基督耶稣为主，并且自己因耶稣作你们的仆人。
For our preaching is not about ourselves, but about Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants through Jesus.

那吩咐光从黑暗里照出来的神，已经照在我们心里，叫我们得知神荣耀的光，显在耶稣基督的面上。
Seeing that it is God who said, Let light be shining out of the dark, who has put in our hearts the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

我们有这宝贝放在瓦器里，要显明这莫大的能力，是出于神，不是出于我们。
But we have this wealth in vessels of earth, so that it may be seen that the power comes not from us but from God;

我们四面受敌，却不被困住。心里作难，却不至失望。
Troubles are round us on every side, but we are not shut in; things are hard for us, but we see a way out of them;

遭逼迫，却不被丢弃。打倒了，却不至死亡。
We are cruelly attacked, but not without hope; we are made low, but we are not without help;

身上常带着耶稣的死，使耶稣的生，也显明在我们身上。
In our bodies there is ever the mark of the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our bodies.

因为我们这活着的人，是常为耶稣被交于死地，使耶稣的生，在我们这必死的身上显明出来，
For, while living, we are still being given up to death because of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may be seen in our flesh, though it is under the power of death.

这样看来，死是在我们身上发动，生却在你们身上发动。
So then, death is working in us, but life in you.

但我们既有信心，正如经上记着说，我因信，所以如此说话。我们也信，所以也说话。
But having the same spirit of faith, as it is said in the Writings, The words of my mouth came from the faith in my heart; in the same way, our words are the outcome of our faith;

自己知道，那叫主耶稣复活的，也必叫我们与耶稣一同复活，并且叫我们与你们一同站在他面前。
Because we are certain that he who made the Lord Jesus come back from the dead, will do the same for us, and will give us a place in his glory with you.

凡事都是为你们，好叫恩惠因人多越发加增，感谢格外显多，以致荣耀归与神。
For we go through all things on account of you, because the greater the number to whom the grace is given, the greater is the praise to the glory of God.

所以我们不丧胆。外体虽然毁坏，内心却一天新似一天。
For which cause we do not give way to weariness; but though our outer man is getting feebler, our inner man is made new day by day.

我们这至暂至轻的苦楚，要为我们成就极重无比永远的荣耀。
For our present trouble, which is only for a short time, is working out for us a much greater weight of glory;

原来我们不是顾念所见的，乃是顾念所不见的。因为所见的是暂时的，所不见的是永远的。
While our minds are not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are for a time; but the things which are not seen are eternal.

我们原知道，我们这地上的帐棚若拆毁了，必得神所造，不是人手所造，在天上永存的房屋。
For we are conscious that if this our tent of flesh is taken down, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in heaven.

我们在这帐棚里叹息，深想得那从天上来的房屋，好像穿上衣服。
For in this we are crying in weariness, greatly desiring to be clothed with our house from heaven:

倘若穿上，被遇见的时候就不至于赤身了。
So that our spirits may not be unclothed.

我们在这帐棚里，叹息劳苦，并非愿意脱下这个，乃是愿意穿上那个，好叫这必死的被生命吞灭了。
For truly, we who are in this tent do give out cries of weariness, for the weight of care which is on us; not because we are desiring to be free from the body, but so that we may have our new body, and death may be overcome by life.

为此培植我们的就是神，他又赐给我们圣灵作凭据。（原文作质）。
Now he who has made us for this very thing is God, who has given us the Spirit as a witness of what is to come.

所以我们时常坦然无惧，并且晓得我们住在身内，便与主相离。
So, then, we are ever without fear, and though conscious that while we are in the body we are away from the Lord,

因我们行事为人，是凭着信心，不是凭着眼见。
(For we are walking by faith, not by seeing,)

我们坦然无惧，是更愿意离开身体与主同住。
We are without fear, desiring to be free from the body, and to be with the Lord.

所以无论是住在身内，离开身外，我们立了志向，要得主的喜悦。
For this reason we make it our purpose, in the body or away from it, to be well-pleasing to him.

因为我们众人，必要在基督台前显露出来，叫各人按着本身所行的，或善或恶受报。
For we all have to come before Christ to be judged; so that every one of us may get his reward for the things done in the body, good or bad.

我们既知道主是可畏的，所以劝人，但我们在神面前是显明的，盼望在你们的良心里，也是显明的。
Having in mind, then, the fear of the Lord, we put these things before men, but God sees our hearts; and it is my hope that we may seem right in your eyes.

我们不是向你们再举荐自己，乃是叫你们因我们有可夸之处，好对那凭外貌不凭内心夸口的人，有言可答。
We are not again requesting your approval, but we are giving you the chance of taking pride in us, so that you may be able to give an answer to those whose glory is in seeming, and not in the heart.

我们若果颠狂，是为神。若果谨守，是为你们。
For if we are foolish, it is to God; or if we are serious, it is for you.

原来基督的爱激励我们。因我们想一人既替众人死，众人就都死了。
For it is the love of Christ which is moving us; because we are of the opinion that if one was put to death for all, then all have undergone death;

并且他替众人死，是叫那些活着的人，不再为自己活，乃为替他们死而复活的主活。
And that he underwent death for all, so that the living might no longer be living to themselves, but to him who underwent death for them and came back from the dead.

所以我们从今以后，不凭着外貌（原文作肉体本节同）认人了。虽然凭着外貌认过基督，如今却不再这样认他了。
For this reason, from this time forward we have knowledge of no man after the flesh: even if we have had knowledge of Christ after the flesh, we have no longer any such knowledge.

若有人在基督里，他就是新造的人。旧事已过，都变成新的了。
So if any man is in Christ, he is in a new world: the old things have come to an end; they have truly become new.

一切都是出于神，他借着基督使我们与他和好，又将劝人与他和好的职分赐给我们。
But all things are of God, who has made us at peace with himself through Christ, and has given to us the work of making peace;

这就是神在基督里叫世人与自己和好，不将他们的过犯归到他们身上。并且将这和好的道理托付了我们。
That is, that God was in Christ making peace between the world and himself, not putting their sins to their account, and having given to us the preaching of this news of peace.

所以我们作基督的使者，就好像神借我们劝你们一般。我们替基督求你们与神和好。
So we are the representatives of Christ, as if God was making a request to you through us: we make our request to you, in the name of Christ, be at peace with God.

神使那无罪的（无罪原文作不知罪），替我们成为罪。好叫我们在他里面成为神的义。
For him who had no knowledge of sin God made to be sin for us; so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.

我们与神同工的，也劝你们，不可徒受他的恩典。
We then, working together with God, make our request to you not to take the grace of God to no purpose.

因为他说，在悦纳的时候，我应允了你。在拯救的日子，我搭救了你。看哪，现在正是悦纳的时候，现在正是拯救的日子。
(For he says, I have given ear to you at a good time, and I have been your helper in a day of salvation: see, now is the good time; now is the day of salvation):

我们凡事都不叫人有妨碍，免得这职分被人毁谤。
Giving no cause for trouble in anything, so that no one may be able to say anything against our work;

反倒在各样的事上，表明自己是神的用人，就如在许多的忍耐，患难，穷乏，困苦，
But in everything making it clear that we are the servants of God, in quiet strength, in troubles, in need, in sorrow,

鞭打，监禁，扰乱，勤劳，儆醒，不食，
In blows, in prisons, in attacks, in hard work, in watchings, in going without food;

廉洁，知识，恒忍，恩慈，圣灵的感化，无伪的爱心，
In a clean heart, in knowledge, in long waiting, in being kind, in the Holy Spirit, in true love,

真实的道理，神的大能。仁义的兵器在左在右。
In the true word, in the power of God; with the arms of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,

荣耀羞辱，恶名美名。似乎是诱惑人的，却是诚实的。
By glory and by shame, by an evil name and a good name; as untrue, and still true;

似乎不为人所知，却是人所共知的。似乎要死却是活着的。似乎受责罚，却是不至丧命的。
Unnoted, but still kept fully in mind; as near to death, but still living; as undergoing punishment, but not put to death;

似乎忧愁，却是常常快乐的。似乎贫穷，却是叫许多人富足的。似乎一无所有，却是样样都有的。
As full of sorrow, but ever glad; as poor, but giving wealth to others; as having nothing, but still having all things.

哥林多人哪，我们向你们，口是张开的，心是宽宏的。
Our mouth is open to you, O Corinthians, our heart is wide.

你们狭窄，原不在乎我们，是在乎自己的心肠狭窄。
It is not our feelings to you which are narrow, but yours to us.

你们也要照样用宽宏的心报答我。我这话正像对自己的孩子说的。
Now to give me back payment of the same sort (I am talking as to my children), let your hearts be wide open to me.

你们和不信的原不相配，不要同负一轭。义和不义有什么相交呢？光明和黑暗有什么相通呢？
Do not keep company with those who have not faith: for what is there in common between righteousness and evil, or between light and dark?

基督和彼列（彼列就是撒但的别名）有什么相和呢？信主的和不信主的有什么相干呢？
And what agreement is there between Christ and the Evil One? or what part has one who has faith with one who has not?

神的殿和偶像有什么相同呢？因为我们是永生神的殿。就如神曾说，我要在他们中间居住，在他们中间来往。我要作他们的神，他们要作我的子民。
And what agreement has the house of God with images? for we are a house of the living God; even as God has said, I will be living among them, and walking with them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.

又说，你们务要从他们中间出来，与他们分别，不要沾不洁净的物，我就收纳你们。
For which cause, Come out from among them, and be separate, says the Lord, and let no unclean thing come near you; and I will take you for myself,

我要作你们的父，你们要作我的儿女。这是全能的主说的。
And will be a Father to you; and you will be my sons and daughters, says the Lord, the Ruler of all.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我们既有这等应许，就当洁净自己，除去身体灵魂一切的污秽，敬畏神，得以成圣。
Because God, then, will give us such rewards, dear brothers, let us make ourselves clean from all evil of flesh and spirit, and become completely holy in the fear of God.

你们要心地宽大收纳我们。我们未曾亏负谁，未曾败坏谁，未曾占谁的便宜。
Let your hearts be open to us: we have done no man wrong, no man has been damaged by us, we have made no profit out of any man,

我说这话，不是要定你们的罪。我已经说过，你们常在我们心里，情愿与你们同生同死。
It is not with the purpose of judging you that I say this: for I have said before that you are in our hearts for life and death together.

我大大地放胆向你们说话。我因你们多多夸口，满得安慰。我们在一切患难中分外的快乐。
My words to you are without fear, I am full of pride on account of you: I have great comfort and joy in all our troubles.

我们从前就是到了马其顿的时候，身体也不得安宁，周围遭患难，外有争战，内有惧怕。
For even when we had come into Macedonia our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; there were fightings outside and fears inside.

但那安慰丧气之人的神，借着提多来安慰了我们。
But God who gives comfort to the poor in spirit gave us comfort by the coming of Titus;

不但借着他来，也借着他从你们所得的安慰，安慰了我们。因他把你们的想念，哀恸，和向我的热心，都告诉了我，叫我更加欢喜。
And not by his coming only, but by the comfort which he had in you, while he gave us word of your desire, your sorrow, your care for me; so that I was still more glad.

我先前写信叫你们忧愁。我后来虽然懊悔，如今却不懊悔。因我知道那信叫你们忧愁，不过是暂时的。
For though my letter gave you pain, I have no regret for it now, though I had before; for I see that the letter gave you pain, but only for a time.

如今我欢喜，不是因你们忧愁，是因你们从忧愁中生出懊悔来。你们依着神的意思忧愁，凡事就不至于因我们受亏损了。
Now I am glad, not that you had sorrow, but that your sorrow was the cause of a change of heart; for yours was a holy sorrow so that you might undergo no loss by us in anything.

因为依着神的意思忧愁，就生出没有后悔的懊悔来，以致得救。但世俗的忧愁，是叫人死。
For the sorrow which God gives is the cause of salvation through a change of heart, in which there is no reason for grief: but the sorrow of the world is a cause of death.

你看，你们依着神的意思忧愁，从此就生出何等的殷勤，自诉，自恨，恐惧，想念，热心，责罚（或作自责），在这一切事上你们都表明自己是洁净的。
For you see what care was produced in you by this very sorrow of yours before God, what clearing of yourselves, what wrath against sin, what fear, what desire, what serious purpose, what punishment. In everything you have made it clear that you are free from sin in this business.

我虽然从前写信给你们却不是为那亏负人的，也不是为那受人亏负的，乃要在神面前，把你们顾念我们的热心，表明出来。
So though I sent you a letter, it was not only because of the man who did the wrong, or because of him to whom the wrong was done, but so that your true care for us might be made clear in the eyes of God.

故此我们得了安慰，并且在安慰之中，因你们众人使提多心里畅快欢喜，我们就更加欢喜了。
So we have been comforted: and we had the greater joy in our comfort because of the joy of Titus, for his spirit had been made glad by you all.

我若对提多夸奖了你们什么，也觉得没有惭愧。因我对提多夸奖你们的话，成了真的。正如我对你们所说的话，也都是真的。
For I was not put to shame in anything in which I may have made clear to him my pride in you; but as we said nothing to you but what was true, so the good things which I said to Titus about you were seen by him to be true.

并且提多想起你们众人的顺服，是怎样恐惧战兢地接待他，他爱你们的心肠就越发热了。
And his love to you is the more increased by his memory of you all, how you gave way to his authority, and how you took him to your hearts with fear and honour.

我如今欢喜，能在凡事上为你们放心。
It gives me great joy to see you answering to my good opinion of you in every way.

弟兄们，我把神赐给马其顿众教会的恩告诉你们。
And now we give you news, brothers, about the grace of God which has been given to the churches of Macedonia;

就是他们在患难中受大试炼的时候，仍有满足的快乐，在极穷之间，还格外显出他们乐捐的厚恩。
How while they were undergoing every sort of trouble, and were in the greatest need, they took all the greater joy in being able to give freely to the needs of others.

我可以证明他们是按着力量，而且也过了力量，自己甘心乐意的捐助。
For I give them witness, that as they were able, and even more than they were able, they gave from the impulse of their hearts,

再三地求我们，准他们在这供给圣徒的恩情上有分。
Seriously requesting us that they might have a part in this grace of being servants to the needs of the saints:

并且他们所作的，不但照我们所想望的，更照神的旨意，先把自己献给主，又归附了我们。
And going even farther than our hope, they first gave themselves to the Lord and to us after the purpose of God.

因此我劝提多，既然在你们中间开办这慈惠的事，就当办成了。
So that we made a request to Titus that, as he had made a start before, so he might make this grace complete in you.

你们既然在信心，口才，知识，热心，和待我们的爱心上，都格外显出满足来，就当在这慈惠的事上，也格外显出满足来。
And that as you are full of every good thing, of faith, of the word, of knowledge, of a ready mind, and of love to us, so you may be full of this grace in the same way.

我说这话，不是吩咐你们，乃是借着别人的热心，试验你们爱心的实在。
I am not giving you an order, but using the ready mind of others as a test of the quality of your love.

你们知道我们主耶稣基督的恩典。他本来富足，却为你们成了贫穷，叫你们因他的贫穷，可以成为富足。
For you see the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, how though he had wealth, he became poor on your account, so that through his need you might have wealth.

我在这事上把我的意见告诉你们，是与你们有益。因为你们下手办这事，而且起此心意，已经有一年了。
And in this I give my opinion: for it is to your profit, who were the first to make a start a year before, not only to do this, but to make clear that your minds were more than ready to do it.

如今就当办成这事。既有愿作的心，也当照你们所有的去办成。
Then make the doing of it complete; so that as you had a ready mind, you may give effect to it as you are able.

因为人若有愿作的心，必蒙悦纳，乃是照他所有的，并不是照他所无的。
For if there is a ready mind, a man will have God's approval in the measure of what he has, and not of what he has not.

我原不是要别人轻省，你们受累，
And I am not saying this so that others may get off free, while the weight comes on you:

乃要均平。就是要你们的富余，现在可以补他们的不足，使他们的富余，将来也可以补你们的不足，这就均平了。
But so that things may be equal; that from those things of which you have more than enough at the present time their need may be helped, and that if you are in any need they may be a help to you in the same way, making things equal.

如经上所记，多收的也没有余，少收的也没有缺。
As it says in the Writings, He who had taken up much had nothing over and he who had little had enough.

多谢神，感动提多的心，叫他待你们殷勤，像我一样。
But praise be to God, who puts the same care for you into the heart of Titus.

他固然是听了我的劝。但自己更是热心，情愿往你们那里去。
For while he gladly gave ear to our request, he was interested enough to go to you from the impulse of his heart.

我们还打发一位兄弟和他同去。这人在福音上得了众教会的称赞。
And with him we have sent a brother whose praise in the good news has gone through all the churches;

不但这样，他也被众教会挑选，和我们同行，把所托与我们的这捐赀送到了，可以荣耀主，又表明我们乐意的心。
And not only so, but he was marked out by the churches to go with us in the grace of this giving which we have undertaken to the glory of the Lord and to make clear that our mind was ready:

这就免得有人因我们收的捐银很多，就挑我们的不是。
And so that no man might be able to say anything against us in the business of this giving which has been put into our hands:

我们留心行光明的事，不但在主面前，就在人面前，也是这样。
For the business has been so ordered by us as to have the approval, not only of the Lord, but of men.

我们又打发一位兄弟同去。这人的热心，我们在许多事上，屡次试验过，现在他因为深信你们，就更加热心了。
And we have sent with them our brother, whose ready spirit has been made clear to us at times and in ways without number, but it is now all the more so because of the certain faith which he has in you.

论到提多，他是我的同伴，一同为你们劳碌的。论到那两位兄弟，他们是众教会的使者，是基督的荣耀。
If any question comes up about Titus, he is my brother-worker, working with me for you; or about the others, they are the representatives of the churches to the glory of Christ.

所以你们务要在众教会面前，显明你们爱心的凭据，并我所夸奖你们的凭据。
Make clear then to them, as representatives of the churches, the quality of your love, and that the things which we have said about you are true.

论到供给圣徒的事，我不必写信给你们。
But there is no need for me to say anything in my letter about the giving to the saints:

因为我知道你们乐意的心，常对马其顿人夸奖你们，说亚该亚人预备好了，已经有一年了。并且你们的热心激动了许多人。
For I have before made clear to those of Macedonia my pride in your ready mind, saying to them that Achaia has been ready for a year back; and a great number have been moved to do the same by your example.

但我打发那几位弟兄去，要叫你们照我的话预备妥当。免得我们在这事上夸奖你们的话落了空。
But I have sent the brothers, so that the good things we said about you may be seen to be true, and that, as I said, you may be ready:

万一有马其顿人与我同去，见你们没有预备，就叫我们所确信的，反成了羞愧。你们羞愧，更不用说了。
For fear that, if any from Macedonia come with me, and you are not ready, we (not to say, you) might be put to shame in this thing.

因此我想不得不求那几位弟兄，先到你们那里去，把从前所应许的捐赀，预备妥当，就显出你们所捐的，是出于乐意，不是出于勉强。
So it seemed to me wise for the brothers to go before, and see that the amount which you had undertaken to give was ready, so that it might be a cause for praise, and not as if we were making profit out of you.

少种的少收，多种的多收。这话是真的。
But in the Writings it says, He who puts in only a small number of seeds, will get in the same; and he who puts them in from a full hand, will have produce in full measure from them.

各人要随本心所酌定的。不要作难，不要勉强，因为捐得乐意的人，是神所喜爱的。
Let every man do after the purpose of his heart; not giving with grief, or by force: for God takes pleasure in a ready giver.

神能将各样的恩惠，多多地加给你们。使你们凡事常常充足，能多行各样善事。
And God is able to give you all grace in full measure; so that ever having enough of all things, you may be full of every good work:

如经上所记，他施舍钱财，周济贫穷。他的仁义存到永远。
As it is said in the Writings, He has sent out far and wide, he has given to the poor; his righteousness is for ever.

那赐种给撒种的，赐粮给人吃的，必多多加给你们种地的种子，又增添你们仁义的果子。
And he who gives seed for putting into the field and bread for food, will take care of the growth of your seed, at the same time increasing the fruits of your righteousness;

叫你们凡事富足，可以多多施舍，就借着我们使感谢归于神。
Your wealth being increased in everything, with a simple mind, causing praise to God through us.

因为办这供给的事，不但补圣徒的缺乏，而且叫许多人越发感谢神。
For this work of giving not only takes care of the needs of the saints, but is the cause of much praise to God;

他们从这供给的事上得了凭据，知道你们承认基督顺服他的福音，多多地捐钱给他们和众人，便将荣耀归与神。
For when, through this work of giving, they see what you are, they give glory to God for the way in which you have given yourselves to the good news of Christ, and for the wealth of your giving to them and to all;

他们也因神极大的恩赐，显在你们心里，就切切地想念你们，为你们祈祷。
While their hearts go out to you in love and in prayer for you, because of the great grace of God which is in you.

感谢神，因他有说不尽的恩赐。
Praise be to God for what he has given, which words have no power to say.

我保罗就是与你们见面的时候是谦卑的，不在你们那里的时候向你们是勇敢的，如今亲自借着基督的温柔和平，劝你们。
Now I, Paul, myself make request to you by the quiet and gentle behaviour of Christ, I who am poor in spirit when with you, but who say what is in my mind to you without fear when I am away from you:

有人以为我是凭着血气行事，我也以为必须用勇敢待这等人，求你们不要叫我在你们那里的时候，有这样的勇敢。
Yes, I make my request to you, so that when I am with you I may not have to make use of the authority which may be needed against some to whom we seem to be walking after the flesh.

因为我们虽然在血气中行事，却不凭着血气争战。
For though we may be living in the flesh, we are not fighting after the way of the flesh

我们争战的兵器，本不是属血气的，乃是在神面前有能力可以攻破坚固的营垒，
(For the arms with which we are fighting are not those of the flesh, but are strong before God for the destruction of high places);

将各样的计谋，各样拦阻人认识神的那些自高之事，一概攻破了，又将人所有的心意夺回，使他都顺服基督。
Putting an end to reasonings, and every high thing which is lifted up against the knowledge of God, and causing every thought to come under the authority of Christ;

并且我已经预备好了，等你们十分顺服的时候，要责罚那一切不顺服的人。
Being ready to give punishment to whatever is against his authority, after you have made it clear that you are completely under his control.

你们是看眼前的吗？倘若有人自信是属基督的，他要再想想，他如何属基督，我们也是如何属基督的。
Give attention to the things which are before you. If any man seems to himself to be Christ's, let him keep in mind that we are as much Christ's as he is.

主赐给我们权柄是要造就你们，并不是要败坏你们。我就是为这权柄稍微夸口，也不至于惭愧。
For though I might take pride in our authority (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for your destruction), it will not be a cause of shame to me:

我说这话免得你们以为我写信是要威吓你们。
That I may not seem to have the desire of causing you fear by my letters.

因为有人说，他的信，又沉重，又利害。及至见面，却是气貌不扬，言语粗俗的。
For his letters, they say, have weight and are strong; but in body he is feeble, and his way of talking has little force.

这等人当想，我们不在那里的时候，信上的言语如何，见面的时候，行事也必如何。
Let those who say this keep in mind that, what we are in word by letters when we are away, so will we be in act when we are present.

因为我们不敢将自己和那自荐的人同列相比。他们用自己度量自己，用自己比较自己，乃是不通达的。
For we will not make comparison of ourselves with some of those who say good things about themselves: but these, measuring themselves by themselves, and making comparison of themselves with themselves, are not wise.

我们不愿意分外夸口，只要照神所量给我们的界限，构到你们那里。
We will not give glory to ourselves in over-great measure, but after the measure of the rule which God has given us, a measure which comes even to you.

我们并非过了自己的界限，好像构不到你们那里。因为我们早到你们那里，传了基督的福音。
For we have no need to make ourselves seem more than we are, as if our authority did not come as far as to you: for we came even as far as you with the good news of Christ:

我们不仗着别人所劳碌的，分外夸口。但指望你们信心增长的时候，所量给我们的界限，就可以因着你们更加开展，
Not taking credit to ourselves for what is not our business, that is, for the work of others; but having hope that, with the growth of your faith, we may get the credit for an increase which is the effect of our work,

得以将福音传到你们以外的地方，并不是在别人界限之内，借着他现成的事夸口。
So that we may be able to go on and take the good news to countries still farther away than you are, and not take credit for another man's work in making things ready to our hand.

但夸口的当指着主夸口。
But whoever has a desire for glory, let his glory be in the Lord.

因为蒙悦纳的，不是自己称许的，乃是主所称许的。
For the Lord's approval of a man is not dependent on his opinion of himself, but on the Lord's opinion of him.

但愿你们宽容我这一点愚妄。其实你们原是宽容我的。
Put up with me if I am a little foolish: but, truly, you do put up with me.

我为你们起的愤恨，原是神那样的愤恨。因为我曾把你们许配一个丈夫，要把你们如同贞洁的童女，献给基督。
For I have a very great care for you: because you have been married by me to one husband, and it is my desire to give you completely holy to Christ.

我只怕你们的心或偏于邪，失去那向基督所存纯一清洁的心，就像蛇用诡诈诱惑了夏娃一样。
But I have a fear, that in some way, as Eve was tricked by the deceit of the snake, your minds may be turned away from their simple and holy love for Christ.

假如有人来，另传一个耶稣，不是我们所传过的。或者你们另受一个灵，不是你们所受过的。或者另得一个福音，不是你们所得过的。你们容让他也就罢了。
For if anyone comes preaching another Jesus from the one whose preachers we are, or if you have got a different spirit, or a different sort of good news from those which came to you, how well you put up with these things.

但我想，我一点不在那些最大的使徒以下。
For in my opinion, I am in no way less than the most important of the Apostles.

我的言语虽然粗俗，我的知识却不粗俗。这是我们在凡事上，向你们众人显明出来的。
But though I am rough in my way of talking, I am not so in knowledge, as we have made clear to all by our acts among you.

我因为白白传神的福音给你们，就自居卑微，叫你们高升，这算是我犯罪吗？
Or did I do wrong in making myself low so that you might be lifted up, because I gave you the good news of God without reward?

我亏负了别的教会，向他们取了工价来，给你们效力。
I took money from other churches as payment for my work, so that I might be your servant;

我在你们那里缺乏的时候，并没有累着你们一个人。因我所缺乏的，那从马其顿来的弟兄们都补足了。我向来凡事谨守，后来也必谨守，总不至于累着你们。
And when I was present with you, and was in need, I let no man be responsible for me; for the brothers, when they came from Macedonia, gave me whatever was needed; and in everything I kept myself from being a trouble to you, and I will go on doing so.

既有基督的诚实在我里面，就无人能在亚该亚一带地方阻挡我这自夸。
As the true word of Christ is in me, I will let no man take from me this my cause of pride in the country of Achaia.

为什么呢？是因我不爱你们吗？这有神知道。
Why? because I have no love for you? let God be judge.

我现在所作的，后来还要作，为要断绝那些寻机会人的机会，使他们在所夸的事上，也不过与我们一样。
But what I do, that I will go on doing, so that I may give no chance to those who are looking for one; so that, in the cause of their pride, they may be seen to be the same as we are.

那等人是假使徒，行事诡诈，装作基督使徒的模样。
For such men are false Apostles, workers of deceit, making themselves seem like Apostles of Christ.

这也不足为怪。因为连撒但也装作光明的天使。
And it is no wonder; for even Satan himself is able to take the form of an angel of light.

所以他的差役，若装作仁义的差役，也不算希奇。他们的结局，必然照着他们的行为。
So it is no great thing if his servants make themselves seem to be servants of righteousness; whose end will be the reward of their works.

我再说，人不可把我看作愚妄的。纵然如此，也要把我当作愚妄人接纳，叫我可以略略自夸。
I say again, Let me not seem foolish to anyone; but if I do, put up with me as such, so that I may take a little glory to myself.

我说的话，不是奉主命说的，乃是像愚妄人放胆自夸。
What I am now saying is not by the order of the Lord, but as a foolish person, taking credit to myself, as it seems.

既有好些人凭着血气自夸，我也要自夸了。
Seeing that there are those who take credit to themselves after the flesh, I will do the same.

你们既是精明人，就能甘心忍耐愚妄人。
For you put up with the foolish gladly, being wise yourselves.

假若有人强你们作奴仆，或侵吞你们，或掳掠你们，或悔慢你们，或打你们的脸，你们都能忍耐他。
You put up with a man if he makes servants of you, if he makes profit out of you, if he makes you prisoners, if he puts himself in a high place, if he gives you blows on the face.

我说这话，是羞辱自己。好像我们从前是软弱的。然而人在何事上勇敢，（我说句愚妄话）我也勇敢。
I say this by way of shaming ourselves, as if we had been feeble. But if anyone puts himself forward (I am talking like a foolish person), I will do the same.

他们是希伯来人吗？我也是。他们是以色列人吗？我也是。他们是亚伯拉罕的后裔吗？我也是。
Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they of Israel? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I.

他们是基督的仆人吗？（我说句狂话）我更是。我比他们多受劳苦，多下监牢，受鞭打是过重的，冒死是屡次有的。
Are they servants of Christ? (I am talking foolishly) I am more so; I have had more experience of hard work, of prisons, of blows more than measure, of death.

被犹太人鞭打五次，每次四十，减去一下。
Five times the Jews gave me forty blows but one.

被棍打了三次，被石头打了一次，遇着船坏三次，一昼一夜在深海里。
Three times I was whipped with rods, once I was stoned, three times the ship I was in came to destruction at sea, a night and a day I have been in the water;

又屡次行远路，遭江河的危险，盗贼的危险，同族的危险，外邦人的危险，城里的危险，旷野的危险，海中的危险，假弟兄的危险。
In frequent travels, in dangers on rivers, in dangers from outlaws, in dangers from my countrymen, in dangers from the Gentiles, in dangers in the town, in dangers in the waste land, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers;

受劳碌，受困苦，多次不得睡，又饥又渴，多次不得食。受寒冷，赤身露体。
In hard work and weariness, in frequent watchings, going without food and drink, cold and in need of clothing.

除了这外面的事，还有为众教会挂心的事，天天压在我身上。
In addition to all the other things, there is that which comes on me every day, the care of all the churches.

有谁软弱，我不软弱呢？有谁跌倒，我不焦急呢？
Who is feeble and I am not feeble? who is in danger of falling, and I am not angry?

我若必须自夸，就夸那关乎我软弱的事便了。
If I have to take credit to myself, I will do so in the things in which I am feeble.

那永远可称颂之主耶稣的父神，知道我不说谎。
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever, is witness that the things which I say are true.

在大马色亚哩达王手下的提督，把守大马色城要捉拿我。
In Damascus, the ruler under Aretas the king kept watch over the town of the people of Damascus, in order to take me:

我就从窗户中，在筐子里从城墙上被人缒下去，脱离了他的手。
And being let down in a basket from the wall through a window, I got free from his hands.

我自夸固然无益，但我是不得已的。如今我要说到主的显现和启示。
As it is necessary for me to take glory to myself, though it is not a good thing, I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

我认得一个在基督里的人，他前十四年被提到第三层天上去。或在身内，我不知道。或在身外，我也不知道。只有神知道。
I have knowledge of a man in Christ, fourteen years back (if he was in the body, or out of the body, I am not able to say, but God only), who was taken up to the third heaven.

我认得这人，或在身内，或在身外，我都不知道。只有神知道。
And I have knowledge of such a man (if he was in the body, or out of the body, I am not able to say, but God only),

他被提到乐园里，听见隐秘的言语，是人不可说的。
How he was taken up into Paradise, and words came to his ears which may not be said, and which man is not able to say.

为这人，我要夸口。但是为我自己，除了我的软弱以外，我并不夸口。
On account of such a one I will have glory: for myself I will take no glory, but only in my feeble body.

我就是愿意夸口，也不算狂。因为我必说实话。只是我禁止不说，恐怕有人把我看高了，过于他在我身上所看见所听见的。
For if I had a desire to take credit to myself, it would not be foolish, for I would be saying what is true: but I will not, for fear that I might seem to any man more than he sees me to be, or has word from me that I am.

又恐怕我因所得的启示甚大，就过于自高，所以有一根刺加在我肉体上，就是撒但的差役，要攻击我，免得我过于自高。
And because the revelations were so very great, in order that I might not be overmuch lifted up, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, one sent from Satan to give me pain.

为这事，我三次求过主，叫这刺离开我。
And about this thing I made request to the Lord three times that it might be taken away from me.

他对我说，我的恩典够你用的。因为我的能力，是在人的软弱上显得完全。所以我更喜欢夸自己的软弱，好叫基督的能力覆庇我。
And he said to me, My grace is enough for you, for my power is made complete in what is feeble. Most gladly, then, will I take pride in my feeble body, so that the power of Christ may be on me.

我为基督的缘故，就以软弱，凌辱，急难，逼迫，困苦，为可喜乐的。因我什么时候软弱，什么时候就刚强了。
So I take pleasure in being feeble, in unkind words, in needs, in cruel attacks, in troubles, on account of Christ: for when I am feeble, then am I strong.

我成了愚妄人，是被你们强逼的。我本该被你们称许才是。我虽算不了什么，却没有一件事在那些最大的使徒以下。
I have been forced by you to become foolish, though it was right for my praise to have come from you: for in no way was I less than the chief of the Apostles, though I am nothing.

我在你们中间，用百般的忍耐，借着神迹奇事异能，显出使徒的凭据来。
Truly the signs of an Apostle were done among you in quiet strength, with wonders and acts of power.

除了我不累着你们这一件事，你们还有什么事不及别的教会呢？这不公之处，求你们饶恕我吧。
For what is there in which you were made less than the other churches, but in the one thing that I was not a trouble to you? Let me have forgiveness for this wrong.

如今我打算第三次到你们那里去，也必不累着你们，因我所求的是你们，不是你们的财物。儿女不该为父母积财，父母该为儿女积财。
This is now the third time that I am ready to come to you; and I will not be a trouble to you: my desire is for you, not for your property: for it is not the children's business to make store for their fathers, but the fathers for the children.

我也甘心乐意为你们的灵魂费财费力。难道我越发爱你们，就越发少得你们的爱吗？
And I will gladly give all I have for your souls. If I have the more love for you, am I to be loved the less?

罢了，我自己并没有累着你们，你们却有人说，我是诡诈，用心计牢笼你们。
But let it be so, that I was not a trouble to you myself; but (someone may say) being false, I took you with deceit.

我所差到你们那里去的人，我借着他们一个人占过你们的便宜吗？
Did I make a profit out of you by any of those whom I sent to you?

我劝了提多到你们那里去，又差那位兄弟与他同去。提多占过你们的便宜吗？我们行事，不同是一个心灵吗？不同是一个脚踪吗？（心灵或作圣灵）。
I gave orders to Titus, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus make any profit out of you? were we not guided by the same Spirit, in the same ways?

你们到如今，还想我们是向你们分诉。我们本是在基督里当神面前说话。亲爱的弟兄阿，一切的事，都是为造就你们。
It may seem to you that all this time we have been attempting to put ourselves in the right; but we are saying these things before God in Christ. For all things, dear brothers, are for your profit.

我怕我再来的时候，见你们不合我所想望的，你们见我也不合你们所想望的。又怕有分争，嫉妒，恼怒，结党，毁谤，谗言，狂傲，混乱的事。
For I have a fear that, when I come, you may not be answering to my desire, and that I may not be answering to yours; that there may be fighting, hate, angry feeling, divisions, evil talk about others, secrets, thoughts of pride, outbursts against authority;

且怕我来的时候，我的神叫我在你们面前惭愧。又因许多人从前犯罪，行污秽奸淫邪荡的事，不肯悔改，我就忧愁。
And that when I come again, my God may put me to shame among you, and I may have grief for those who have done wrong before and have had no regret for their unclean ways, and for the evil desires of the flesh to which they have given way.

这是我第三次要到你们那里去。凭两三个人的口作见证，句句都要定准。
This is the third time that I am coming to you. From the mouth of two or three witnesses will every word be made certain.

我从前说过，如今不在你们那里又说，正如我第二次见你们的时候所说的一样，就是对那犯了罪的，和其余的人说，我若再来必不宽容。
I said before, and still say it before I come, as being present for the second time, though I am still away from you, to those who have done wrong before, and to all the others, that if I come again I will not have pity;

你们既然寻求基督在我里面说话的凭据，我必不宽容。因为基督在你们身上，不是软弱的。在你们里面，是有大能的。
Seeing that you are looking for a sign of Christ giving out his word in me; who is not feeble in relation to you, but is strong in you:

他因软弱被钉在十字架上，却因神的大能，仍然活着。我们也是这样同他软弱，但因神向你们所显的大能，也必与他同活。
For he was feeble in that he was put to death on the cross, but he is living by the power of God. And we are feeble in him, but we will be living with him through the power of God in relation to you.

你们总要自己省察有信心没有。也要自己试验。岂不知你们若不是可弃绝的，就有耶稣基督在你们心里吗？
Make a test of yourselves, if you are in the faith; make certain of yourselves. Or are you not conscious in yourselves that Jesus Christ is in you, if you are truly Christ's?

我却盼望你们晓得我们不是可弃绝的人。
But it is my hope that you will have no doubt that we are truly Christ's.

我们求神，叫你们一件恶事都不作。这不是要显明我们是蒙悦纳的，是要你们行事端正，任凭人看我们是被弃绝的吧。
Now our prayer to God is that you may do no evil; not in order that it may be put to our credit, but so that you may do what is right, whatever we may seem.

我们凡事不能敌挡真理，只能扶助真理。
Because we are able to do nothing against what is true, but only for it.

即使我们软弱，你们刚强，我们也欢喜。并且我们所求的，就是你们作完全人。
For we are glad when we are feeble and you are strong: and this is our prayer, even that you may be made complete.

所以我不在你们那里的时候，把这话写给你们，好叫我见你们的时候，不用照主所给我的权柄，严厉地待你们。这权柄原是为造就人，并不是为败坏人。
For this cause I am writing these things while I am away, so that there may be need for me, when I am present, to make use of sharp measures, by the authority which the Lord has given me for building up and not for destruction.

还有末了的话，愿弟兄们都喜乐。要作完全人。要受安慰。要同心合意。要彼此和睦。如此仁爱和平的神，必常与你们同在。
Let this be my last word, brothers; be glad; be complete; be comforted; be of the same mind; be at peace with one another: and the God of love and peace will be with you.

你们亲嘴问安。彼此务要圣洁。
Give one another a holy kiss.

众圣徒都问你们安。
All the saints send their love to you.

愿主耶稣基督的恩惠，神的慈爱，圣灵的感动，常与你们众人同在。
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the harmony of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.

