希伯来书 Hebrews


神既在古时借着众先知，多次多方的晓谕列祖，
In times past the word of God came to our fathers through the prophets, in different parts and in different ways;

就在这末世，借着他儿子晓谕我们，又早已立他为承受万有的，也曾借着他创造诸世界。
But now, at the end of these days, it has come to us through his Son, to whom he has given all things for a heritage, and through whom he made the order of the generations;

他是神荣耀所发的光辉，是神本体的真像，常用他权能的命令托住万有，他洗净了人的罪，就坐在高天至大者的右边。
Who, being the outshining of his glory, the true image of his substance, supporting all things by the word of his power, having given himself as an offering making clean from sins, took his seat at the right hand of God in heaven;

他所承受的名，既比天使的名更尊贵，就远超过天使。
Having become by so much better than the angels, as the name which is his heritage is more noble than theirs.

所有的天使，神从来对那一个说，你是我的儿子，我今日生你。又指着那一个说，我要作他的父，他要作我的子。
To which of the angels did God say at any time, You are my Son, this day I have given you being? or, I will be his Father, and he will be my Son?

再者，神使长子到世上来的时候，（或作神再使长子到世上来的时候）就说，神的使者都要拜他。
And again, when he is sending his only Son into the world, he says, Let all the angels of God give him worship.

论到使者，又说，神以风为使者，以火焰为仆役。
And of the angels he says, Who makes his angels winds, and his servants flames of fire:

论到子却说，神阿，你的宝座是永永远远的，你的国权是正直的。
But of the Son he says, Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; and the rod of your kingdom is a rod of righteousness.

你喜爱公义，恨恶罪恶。所以神就是你的神，用喜乐油膏你，胜过膏你的同伴。
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil; and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head more than on the heads of those who are with you.

又说，主阿，你起初立了地的根基，天也是你手所造的。
You, Lord, at the first did put the earth on its base, and the heavens are the works of your hands:

天地都要灭没，你却要长存。天地都要像衣服渐渐旧了。
They will come to their end; but you are for ever; they will become old as a robe;

你要将天地卷起来，像一件外衣，天地就都改变了。惟有你永不改变，你的年数没有穷尽。
They will be rolled up like a cloth, even like a robe, and they will be changed: but you are the same and your years will have no end.

所有的天使，神从来对那一个说，你坐在我的右边，等我使你仇敌作你的脚凳。
But of which of the angels has he said at any time, Take your seat at my right hand till I put all those who are against you under your feet?

天使岂不都是服役的灵，奉差遣为那将要承受救恩的人效力吗？
Are they not all helping spirits, who are sent out as servants to those whose heritage will be salvation?

所以我们当越发郑重所听见的道理，恐怕我们随流失去。
For this reason there is the more need for us to give attention to the things which have come to our ears, for fear that by chance we might be slipping away.

那借着天使所传的话，既是确定的，凡干犯悖逆的，都受了该受的报应。
Because if the word which came through the angels was fixed, and in the past every evil act against God's orders was given its full punishment;

我们若忽略这么大的救恩，怎能逃罪呢？这救恩起先是主亲自讲的，后来是听见的人给我们证实了。
What will come on us, if we do not give our minds to such a great salvation? a salvation of which our fathers first had knowledge through the words of the Lord, and which was made certain to us by those to whom his words came;

神又按自己的旨意，用神迹奇事，和百般的异能，并圣灵的恩赐，同他们作见证。
And God was a witness with them, by signs and wonders, and by more than natural powers, and by his distribution of the Holy Spirit at his pleasure.

我们所说将来的世界，神原没有交给天使管辖。
For he did not make the angels rulers over the world to come, of which I am writing.

但有人在经上某处证明说，人算什么，你竟顾念他，世人算什么，你竟眷顾他。
But a certain writer has given his witness, saying, What is man, that you keep him in mind? what is the son of man, that you take him into account?

你叫他比天使微小一点，（或作你叫他暂时比天使小）赐他荣耀尊贵为冠冕，并将你手所造的都派他管理。
You made him a little lower than the angels; you gave him a crown of glory and honour, and made him ruler over all the works of your hands:

叫万物都服在他的脚下。既叫万物都服他，就没有剩下一样不服他的。只是如今我们还不见万物都服他。
You put all things under his feet. For in making man the ruler over all things, God did not put anything outside his authority; though we do not see everything under him now.

惟独见那成为比天使小一点的耶稣，（或作惟独见耶稣暂时比天使小）因为受死的苦，就得了尊贵荣耀为冠冕，叫他因着神的恩，为人人尝了死味。
But we see him who was made a little lower than the angels, even Jesus, crowned with glory and honour, because he let himself be put to death so that by the grace of God he might undergo death for all men.

原来那为万物所属，为万物所本的，要领许多的儿子进荣耀里去，使救他们的元帅，因受苦难得以完全，本是合宜的。
Because it was right for him, for whom and through whom all things have being, in guiding his sons to glory, to make the captain of their salvation complete through pain.

因那使人成圣的，和那些得以成圣的，都是出于一。所以他称他们为弟兄，也不以为耻，
For he who makes holy and those who are made holy are all of one family; and for this reason it is no shame for him to give them the name of brothers,

说，我要将你的名传与我的弟兄，在会中我要颂扬你。
Saying, I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers, I will make a song of praise to you before the church.

又说，我要倚赖他。又说，看哪，我与神所给我的儿女。
And again he says, I will put my faith in him. And again, See, I am here, and the children which God has given to me.

儿女既同有血肉之体，他也照样亲自成了血肉之体。特要借着死，败坏那掌死权的，就是魔鬼。
And because the children are flesh and blood, he took a body himself and became like them; so that by his death he might put an end to him who had the power of death, that is to say, the Evil One;

并要释放那些一生因怕死而为奴仆的人。
And let those who all their lives were in chains because of their fear of death, go free.

他并不救拔天使，乃是救拔亚伯拉罕的后裔。
For, truly, he does not take on the life of angels, but that of the seed of Abraham.

所以他凡事该与他的弟兄相同，为要在神的事上，成为慈悲忠信的大祭司，为百姓的罪献上挽回祭。
Because of this it was necessary for him to be made like his brothers in every way, so that he might be a high priest full of mercy and keeping faith in everything to do with God, making offerings for the sins of the people.

他自己既然被试探而受苦，就能搭救被试探的人。
For having been put to the test himself, he is able to give help to others when they are tested.

同蒙天召的圣洁弟兄阿，你们应当思想，我们所认为使者，为大祭司的耶稣。
For this reason, holy brothers, marked out to have a part in heaven, give thought to Jesus the representative and high priest of our faith;

他为那设立他的尽忠，如同摩西在神的全家尽忠一样。
Who kept faith with God who gave him his place, even as Moses did in all his house.

他比摩西算是更配多得荣耀，好像建造房屋的比房屋更尊荣。
And it was right for this man to have more honour than Moses, even as the builder of a house has more honour than the house.

因为房屋都必有人建造。但建造万物的就是神。
For every house has a builder; but the builder of all things is God.

摩西为仆人，在神的全家诚然尽忠，为要证明将来必传说的事。
And Moses certainly kept faith as a servant, in all his house, and as a witness of those things which were to be said later;

但基督为儿子，治理神的家。我们若将可夸的盼望和胆量，坚持到底，便是他的家了。
But Christ as a son, over his house; whose house are we, if we keep our hearts fixed in the glad and certain hope till the end.

圣灵有话说，你们今日若听他的话，
And so, as the Holy Spirit says, Today if you let his voice come to your ears,

就不可硬着心，像在旷野惹他发怒，试探他的时候一样。
Be not hard of heart, as when you made me angry, on the day of testing in the waste land,

在那里，你们的祖宗试我探我，并且观看我的作为，有四十年之久。
When your fathers put me to the test, and saw my works for forty years.

所以我厌烦那世代的人，说，他们心里常常迷糊，竟不晓得我的作为。
So that I was angry with this generation, and I said, Their hearts are in error at all times, and they have no knowledge of my ways;

我就在怒中起誓说，他们断不可进入我的安息。
And being angry I made an oath, saying, They may not come into my rest.

弟兄们，你们要谨慎，免得你们中间，或有人存着不信的恶心，把永生神离弃了。
My brothers, take care that there is not by chance in any one of you an evil heart without belief, turning away from the living God:

总要趁着还有今日，天天彼此相劝，免得你们中间，有人被罪迷惑，心里就刚硬了。
But give comfort to one another every day as long as it is still Today; so that no one among you may be made hard by the deceit of sin:

我们若将起初确实的信心，坚持到底，就在基督里有分了。
For if we keep the substance of the faith which we had at the start, even till the end, we have a part with Christ;

经上说，你们今日若听他的话，就不可硬着心，像惹他发怒的日子一样。
As it is said, Today if you will let his voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart, as when you made him angry.

那时听见他话惹他发怒的是谁呢？岂不是跟着摩西从埃及出来的众人吗？
Who made him angry when his voice came to them? was it not all those who came out of Egypt with Moses?

神四十年之久，又厌烦谁呢？岂不是那些犯罪尸首倒在旷野的人吗？
And with whom was he angry for forty years? was it not with those who did evil, who came to their deaths in the waste land?

又向谁起誓，不容他们进入他的安息呢？岂不是向那些不信从的人吗？
And to whom did he make an oath that they might not come into his rest? was it not to those who went against his orders?

这样看来，他们不能进入安息，是因为不信的缘故了。
So we see that they were not able to go in because they had no belief.

我们既蒙留下有进入他安息的应许，就当畏惧，免得我们中间，（我们原文作你们）或有人似乎是赶不上了。
Let us then, though we still have God's word that we may come into his rest, go in fear that some of you may be unable to do so.

因为有福音传给我们，像传给他们一样。只是所听见的道与他们无益，因为他们没有信心与所听见的道调和。
And, truly, the good news came to us, even as it did to them; but the hearing of the word did them no good, because they were not united in faith with the true hearers.

但我们已经相信的人，得以进入那安息，正如神所说，我在怒中起誓说，他们断不可进入我的安息。其实造物之工，从创世以来已经成全了。
For those of us who have belief come into his rest; even as he has said, As I said in my oath when I was angry, They may not come into my rest: though the works were done from the time of the making of the world.

论到第七日，有一处说，到第七日神就歇了他一切的工。
For in one place he has said of the seventh day, And God had rest from all his works on the seventh day;

又有一处说，他们断不可进入我的安息。
And in the same place he says again, They will not come into my rest.

既有必进安息的人，那先前听见福音的，因为不信从，不得进去。
So that as it is clear that some have to go in, and that the first hearers of the good news were not able to go in because they went against God's orders,

所以过了多年，就在大卫的书上，又限定一日，如以上所引的说，你们今日若听他的话，就不可硬着心。
After a long time, again naming a certain day, he says in David, Today (as he had said before), Today if you will let his voice come to your ears, be not hard of heart,

若是约书亚已叫他们享了安息，后来神就不再提别的日子了。
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have said anything about another day.

这样看来，必另有一安息日的安息，为神的子民存留。
So that there is still a Sabbath-keeping for the people of God.

因为那进入安息的，乃是歇了自己的工，正如神歇了他的工一样。
For the man who comes into his rest has had rest from his works, as God did from his.

所以我们务必竭力进入那安息，免得有人学那不信从的样子跌倒了。
Because of this, let us have a strong desire to come into that rest, and let no one go after the example of those who went against God's orders.

神的道是活泼的，是有功效的，比一切两刃的剑更快，甚至魂与灵，骨节与骨髓，都能刺入剖开，连心中的思念和主意，都能辨明。
For the word of God is living and full of power, and is sharper than any two-edged sword, cutting through and making a division even of the soul and the spirit, the bones and the muscles, and quick to see the thoughts and purposes of the heart.

并且被造的，没有一样在他面前不显然的。原来万物，在那与我们有关系的主眼前，都是赤露敞开的。
And there is nothing made which is not completely clear to him; there is nothing covered, but all things are open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.

我们既然有一位已经升入高天尊荣的大祭司，就是神的儿子耶稣，便当持定所承认的道。
Having then a great high priest, who has made his way through the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God, let us be strong in our faith.

因我们的大祭司，并非不能体恤我们的软弱。他也曾凡事受过试探，与我们一样。只是他没有犯罪。
For we have not a high priest who is not able to be touched by the feelings of our feeble flesh; but we have one who has been tested in all points as we ourselves are tested, but without sin.

所以我们只管坦然无惧地，来到施恩的宝座前，为要得怜恤，蒙恩惠作随时的帮助。
Then let us come near to the seat of grace without fear, so that mercy may be given to us, and we may get grace for our help in time of need.

凡从人间挑选的大祭司，是奉派替人办理属神的事，为要献上礼物，和赎罪祭。（或作要为罪献上礼物和祭物）
Every high priest who is taken from among men is given his position to take care of the interests of men in those things which have to do with God, so that he may make offerings for sins.

他能体谅那愚蒙的，和失迷的人，因为他自己也是被软弱所困。
He is able to have feeling for those who have no knowledge and for those who are wandering from the true way, because he himself is feeble;

故此他理当为百姓和自己献祭赎罪。
And being feeble, he has to make sin-offerings for himself as well as for the people.

这大祭司的尊荣，没有人自取，惟要蒙神所召，像亚伦一样。
And no man who is not given authority by God, as Aaron was, takes this honour for himself.

如此，基督也不是自取荣耀作大祭司，乃是在乎向他说，你是我的儿子，我今日生你。的那一位。
In the same way Christ did not take for himself the glory of being made a high priest, but was given it by him who said, You are my Son, this day I have given you being:

就如经上又有一处说，你是照着麦基洗德的等次永远为祭司。
As he says in another place, You are a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

基督在肉体的时候，既大声哀哭，流泪祷告恳求那能救他免死的主，就因他的虔诚，蒙了应允。
Who in the days of his flesh, having sent up prayers and requests with strong crying and weeping to him who was able to give him salvation from death, had his prayer answered because of his fear of God.

他虽然为儿子，还是因所受的苦难学了顺从。
And though he was a Son, through the pain which he underwent, the knowledge came to him of what it was to be under God's orders;

他既得以完全，就为凡顺从他的人，成了永远得救的根源。
And when he had been made complete, he became the giver of eternal salvation to all those who are under his orders;

并蒙神照着麦基洗德的等次称他为大祭司。
Being named by God a high priest of the order of Melchizedek.

论到麦基洗德，我们有好些话，并且难以解明，因为你们听不进去。
Of whom we have much to say which it is hard to make clear, because you are slow of hearing.

看你们学习的工夫，本该作师傅，谁知还得有人将神圣言小学的开端，另教导你们。并且成了那必须吃奶，不能吃干粮的人。
And though by this time it would be right for you to be teachers, you still have need of someone to give you teaching about the first simple rules of God's revelation; you have become like babies who have need of milk, and not of solid food.

凡只能吃奶的，都不熟练仁义的道理。因为他是婴孩。
For everyone who takes milk is without experience of the word of righteousness: he is a child.

惟独长大成人的，才能吃干粮，他们的心窍，习练得通达，就能分辨好歹了。
But solid food is for men of full growth, even for those whose senses are trained by use to see what is good and what is evil.

所以我们应当离开基督道理的开端，竭力进到完全的地步。不必再立根基，就如那懊悔死行，信靠神，
For this reason let us go on from the first things about Christ to full growth; not building again that on which it is based, that is, the turning of the heart from dead works, and faith in God,

各样洗礼，按手之礼，死人复活，以及永远审判，各等教训。
The teaching of baptisms, and of the putting on of hands, and of the future life of the dead, and of the judging on the last day.

神若许我们，我们必如此行。
Now we will do this, if God lets us.

论到那些已经蒙了光照，尝过天恩的滋味，又于圣灵有分，
As for those who at one time saw the light, tasting the good things from heaven, and having their part in the Holy Spirit,

并尝过神善道的滋味，觉悟来世权能的人，
With knowledge of the good word of God, and of the powers of the coming time,

若是离弃道理，就不能叫他们从新懊悔了。因为他们把神的儿子重钉十字架，明明地羞辱他。
And then let themselves be turned away, it is not possible for their hearts to be made new a second time; because they themselves put the Son of God on the cross again, openly shaming him.

就如一块田地，吃过屡次下的雨水，生长菜蔬合乎耕种的人用，就从神得福。
For a land, drinking in the frequent rain and producing good plants for those for whom it is worked, has a blessing from God:

若长荆棘和蒺藜，必被废弃，近于咒诅，结局就是焚烧。
But if it sends up thorns and evil plants, it is of no use and is ready to be cursed; its only end is to be burned.

亲爱的弟兄们，我们虽是这样说，却深信你们的行为强过这些，而且近乎得救。
But, my loved ones, though we say this, we are certain that you have better things in you, things which go with salvation;

因为神并非不公义，竟忘记你们所作的工，和你们为他名所显的爱心，就是先前伺候圣徒，如今还是伺候。
For God is true, and will not put away from him the memory of your work and of your love for his name, in the help which you gave and still give to the saints.

我们愿你们各人都显出这样的殷勤，使你们有满足的指望，一直到底。
And it is our desire that you may all keep the same high purpose in certain hope to the end:

并且不懈怠。总要效法那些凭信心和忍耐承受应许的人。
So that you may not be slow in heart, but may take as your example those to whom God has given their heritage, because of their faith and their long waiting.

当初神应许亚伯拉罕的时候，因为没有比自己更大可以指着起誓的，就指着自己起誓说，
For when God made his oath to Abraham, because there was no greater oath, he made it by himself,

论福，我必赐大福给你。论子孙，我必叫你的子孙多起来。
Saying, Be certain that I will give you my blessing, and make your numbers very great.

这样，亚伯拉罕既恒久忍耐，就得了所应许的。
And so, when he had been waiting calmly for a long time, God's word to him was put into effect.

人都是指着比自己大的起誓。并且以起誓为实据，了结各样的争论。
For men at all times make their oaths by what is greater; and any argument is ended by the decision of the oath.

照样，神愿意为那承受应许的人，格外显明他的旨意是不更改的，就起誓为证。
So that when it was God's desire to make it specially clear to those who by his word were to have the heritage, that his purpose was fixed, he made it more certain with an oath;

借这两件不更改的事，神决不能说谎，好叫我们这逃往避难所，持定摆在我们前头指望的人，可以大得勉励。
So that we, who have gone in flight from danger to the hope which has been put before us, may have a strong comfort in two unchanging things, in which it is not possible for God to be false;

我们有这指望如同灵魂的锚，又坚固又牢靠，且通入幔内。
And this hope is like a strong band for our souls, fixed and certain, and going in to that which is inside the veil;

作先锋的耶稣，既照着麦基洗德的等次，成了永远的大祭司，就为我们进入幔内。
Where Jesus has gone before us, as a high priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

这麦基洗德，就是撒冷王，又是至高神的祭司，本是长远为祭司的。他当亚伯拉罕杀败诸王回来的时候，就迎接他，给他祝福。
For this Melchizedek, the king of Salem, a priest of the Most High God, who gave Abraham his blessing, meeting him when he came back after putting the kings to death,

亚伯拉罕也将自己所得来的取十分之一给他。他头一个名翻出来，就是仁义王，他又名撒冷王，就是平安王的意思。
And to whom Abraham gave a tenth part of everything which he had, being first named King of righteousness, and then in addition, King of Salem, that is to say, King of peace;

他无父，无母，无族谱，无生之始，无命之终，乃是与神的儿子相似。
Being without father or mother, or family, having no birth or end to his life, being made like the Son of God, is a priest for ever.

你们想一想，先祖亚伯拉罕，将自己所掳来上等之物取十分之一给他，这人是何等尊贵呢。
Now see how great this man was, to whom our father Abraham gave a tenth part of what he had got in the fight.

那得祭司职任的利未子孙，领命照例向百姓取十分之一，这百姓是自己的弟兄，虽是从亚伯拉罕身中生的，（身原文作腰），还是照例取十分之一
And it is true that by the law, those of the sons of Levi who have the position of priests may take a tenth part of the people's goods; that is to say, they take it from their brothers though these are the sons of Abraham.

独有麦基洗德，不与他们同谱，倒收纳亚伯拉罕的十分之一，为那蒙应许的亚伯拉罕祝福。
But this man, who was not of their family, took the tenth from Abraham, and gave a blessing to him to whom God had given his undertaking.

从来位分大的给位分小的祝福，这是驳不倒的理。
But there is no doubt that the less gets his blessing from the greater.

在这里收十分之一的都是必死的人。但在那里收十分之一的，有为他作见证的说，他是活的。
Now at the present time, men over whom death has power take the tenth; but then it was taken by one of whom it is witnessed that he is living.

并且可说，那受十分之一的利未，也是借着亚伯拉罕纳了十分之一。
And we may say that in Abraham, even Levi, who has a right to take the tenth part, gave it;

因为麦基洗德迎接亚伯拉罕的时候，利未已经在他先祖的身中。（身原文作腰）
Because he was still in his father's body when Melchizedek came to him.

从前百姓在利未人祭司职任以下受律法，倘若借这职任能得完全，又何用另外兴起一位祭司，照麦基洗德的等次，不照亚伦的等次呢？
Now if it was possible for things to be made complete through the priests of the house of Levi (for the law was given to the people in connection with them), what need was there for another priest who was of the order of Melchizedek and not of the order of Aaron?

祭司的职任既已更改，律法也必须更改。
Because if the priests are changed, it is necessary to make a change in the law.

因为这话所指的人，本属别的支派，那支派里从来没有一人伺候祭坛。
For he of whom these things are said comes of another tribe, of which no man has ever made offerings at the altar.

我们的主分明是从犹大出来的。但这支派，摩西并没有提到祭司。
Because it is clear that our Lord comes out of Judah, and Moses said nothing about priests from that tribe.

倘若照麦基洗德的样式，另外兴起一位祭司来，我的话更是显而易见的了。
And this is even more clear if a second priest has come up who is like Melchizedek,

他成为祭司，并不是照属肉体的条例，乃是照无穷之生命的大能。（无穷原文作不能毁坏）。
That is to say, not made by a law based on the flesh, but by the power of a life without end:

因为有给他作见证的说，你是照着麦基洗德的等次永远为祭司。
For it has been witnessed of him, You are a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

先前的条例，因软弱无益，所以废掉了。
So the law which went before is put on one side, because it was feeble and without profit.

（律法原来一无所成）就引进了更美的指望，靠这指望我们便可以进到神面前。
(Because the law made nothing complete), and in its place there is a better hope, through which we come near to God.

再者，耶稣为祭司，并不是不起誓立的。
And as this is not without the taking of an oath

至于那些祭司，原不是起誓立的，只有耶稣是起誓立的。因为那立他的对他说，主起了誓决不后悔，你是永远为祭司。
(For those were made priests without an oath, but this one was made a priest with an oath by him who says of him, The Lord gave his oath, which he will not take back, that you are a priest for ever);

既是起誓立的，耶稣就作了更美之约的中保。
By so much is it a better agreement which we have through Jesus.

那些成为祭司的，数目本来多，是因为有死阻隔不能长久。
And it is true that there have been a great number of those priests, because death does not let them go on for ever;

这位既是永远常存的，他祭司的职任，就长久不更换。
But this priest, because his life goes on for ever, is unchanging.

凡靠着他进到神面前的人，他都能拯救到底。因为他是长远活着，替他们祈求。
So that he is fully able to be the saviour of all who come to God through him, because he is ever living to make prayer to God for them.

像这样圣洁，无邪恶，无玷污，远离罪人，高过诸天的大祭司，原是与我们合宜的。
It was right for us to have such a high priest, one who is holy and without evil, doing no wrong, having no part with sinners, and made higher than the heavens:

他不像那些大祭司，每日必须先为自己的罪，后为百姓的罪献祭，因为他只一次将自己献上，就把这事成全了。
Who has no need to make offerings for sins every day, like those high priests, first for himself, and then for the people; because he did this once and for ever when he made an offering of himself.

律法本是立软弱的人为大祭司。但在律法以后起誓的话，是立儿子为大祭司，乃是成全到永远的。
The law makes high priests of men who are feeble; but the word of the oath, which was made after the law, gives that position to a Son, in whom all good is for ever complete.

我们所讲的事，其中第一要紧的，就是我们有这样的大祭司，已经坐在天上至大者宝座的右边，
Now of the things we are saying this is the chief point: We have such a high priest, who has taken his place at the right hand of God's high seat of glory in heaven,

在圣所，就是真帐幕里，作执事。这帐幕是主所支的，不是人所支的。
As a servant of the holy things and of the true Tent, which was put up by God, not by man.

凡大祭司都是为献礼物和祭物设立的。所以这位大祭司也必须有所献的。
Now every high priest is given authority to take to God the things which are given and to make offerings; so that it is necessary for this man, like them, to have something for an offering.

他若在地上，必不得为祭司，因为已经有照律法献礼物的祭司。
If he had been on earth he would not have been a priest at all, because there are other priests who make the offerings ordered by the law;

他们供奉的事，本是天上事的形状和影像，正如摩西将要造帐幕的时候，蒙神警戒他，说，你要谨慎，作各样的物件，都要照着在山上指示你的样式。
Being servants of that which is a copy and an image of the things in heaven, as Moses, when he was about to make the Tent, had special orders from God: for, See, he said, that you make everything like the design which you saw in the mountain.

如今耶稣所得的职任是更美的，正如他作更美之约的中保。这约原是凭更美之应许立的。
But now his position as priest is higher. because through him God has made a better agreement with man, based on the giving of better things.

那前约若没有瑕疵，就无处寻求后约了。
For if that first agreement had been as good as possible, there would have been no place for a second.

所以主指责他的百姓说，（或作所以主指前约的缺欠说）日子将到，我要与以色列家，和犹大家，另立新约。
For, protesting against them, he says, See, the days are coming when I will make a new agreement with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah;

不像我拉着他们祖宗的手，领他们出埃及的时候，与他们所立的约。因为他们不恒心守我的约，我也不理他们。这是主说的。
Not like the agreement which I made with their fathers when I took them by the hand, to be their guide out of the land of Egypt; for they did not keep the agreement with me, and I gave them up, says the Lord.

主又说，那些日子以后，我与以色列家所立的约乃是这样。我要将我的律法放在他们里面，写在他们心上，我要作他们的神，他们要作我的子民。
For this is the agreement which I will make with the people of Israel after those days: I will put my laws into their minds, writing them in their hearts: and I will be their God, and they will be my people:

他们不用各人教导自己的乡邻，和自己的弟兄，说，你该认识主。因为他们从最小的到至大的，都必认识我。
And there will be no need for every man to be teaching his brother, or his neighbour, saying, This is the knowledge of the Lord: for they will all have knowledge of me, great and small.

我要宽恕他们的不义，不再记念他们的罪愆。
And I will have mercy on their evil-doing, and I will not keep their sins in mind.

既说新约，就以前约为旧了。但那渐旧渐衰的，就必快归无有了。
When he says, A new agreement, he has made the first agreement old. But anything which is getting old and past use will not be seen much longer.

原来前约有礼拜的条例，和属世界的圣幕。
Now the first agreement had its rules of worship, and a holy order.

因为有预备的帐幕，头一层叫作圣所。里面有灯台，桌子，和陈设饼。
For the first Tent was made ready, having in it the vessels for the lights and the table and the ordering of the bread; and this is named the holy place.

第二幔子后，又有一层帐幕，叫作至圣所。
And inside the second veil was the place which is named the Holy of holies;

有金香炉，（炉或作坛）有包金的约柜，柜里有盛吗哪的金罐，和亚伦发过芽的杖，并两块约版。
Having a vessel of gold in it for burning perfumes, and the ark of the agreement, which was covered with gold and which had in it a pot made of gold for the manna, and Aaron's rod which put out buds, and the stones with the writing of the agreement;

柜上面有荣耀基路伯的影罩着施恩座。（施恩原文作蔽罪）这几件我现在不能一一细说。
And over it were the winged ones of glory with their wings covering the mercy-seat; about which it is not possible now to say anything in detail.

这些物件既如此预备齐了，众祭司就常进头一层帐幕，行拜神的礼。
Now while these things were in existence, the priests went into the first Tent at all times, for prayer and the making of offerings.

至于第二层帐幕，惟有大祭司一年一次独自进去，没有不带着血，为自己和百姓的过错献上。
But only the high priest went into the second, once a year, not without making an offering of blood for himself and for the errors of the people:

圣灵用此指明，头一层帐幕仍存的时候，进入至圣所的路还未显明。
The Holy Spirit witnessing by this that the way into the holy place had not at that time been made open, while the first Tent was still in being;

那头一层帐幕作现今的一个表样，所献的礼物和祭物，就着良心说，都不能叫礼拜的人得以完全。
And this is an image of the present time; when the offerings which are given are not able to make the heart of the worshipper completely clean,

这些事连那饮食和诸般洗濯的规矩，都不过是属肉体的条例，命定到振兴的时候为止。
Because they are only rules of the flesh, of meats and drinks and washings, which have their place till the time comes when things will be put right.

但现在基督已经来到，作了将来美事的大祭司，经过那更大更全备的帐幕，不是人手所造也不是属乎这世界的。
But now Christ has come as the high priest of the good things of the future, through this greater and better Tent, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this world,

并且不用山羊和牛犊的血，乃用自己的血，只一次进入圣所，成了永远赎罪的事。
And has gone once and for ever into the holy place, having got eternal salvation, not through the blood of goats and young oxen, but through his blood.

若山羊和公牛的血，并母牛犊的灰洒在不洁的人身上，尚且叫人成圣，身体洁净。
For if the blood of goats and oxen, and the dust from the burning of a young cow, being put on the unclean, make the flesh clean:

何况基督借着永远的灵，将自己无瑕无疵献给神，他的血岂不更能洗净你们的心。（原文作良心）除去你们的死行，使你们事奉那永生神吗？
How much more will the blood of Christ, who, being without sin, made an offering of himself to God through the Holy Spirit, make your hearts clean from dead works to be servants of the living God?

为此他作了新约的中保。既然受死赎了人在前约之时所犯的罪过，便叫蒙召之人得着所应许永远的产业。
And for this cause it is through him that a new agreement has come into being, so that after the errors under the first agreement had been taken away by his death, the word of God might have effect for those who were marked out for an eternal heritage.

凡有遗命，必须等到留遗命的人死了。（遗命原文与约字同）
Because where there is a testament, there has to be the death of the man who made it.

因为人死了，遗命才有效力，若留遗命的尚在，那遗命还有用处吗？
For a testament has effect after death; for what power has it while the man who made it is living?

所以前约也不是不用血立的。
So that even the first agreement was not made without blood.

因为摩西当日照着律法，将各样诫命传给众百姓，就拿朱红色绒和牛膝草，把牛犊山羊的血和水，洒在书上，又洒在众百姓身上，说，
For when Moses had given all the rules of the law to the people, he took the blood of goats and young oxen, with water and red wool and hyssop, and put it on the book itself and on all the people,

这血就是神与你们立约的凭据。
Saying, This blood is the sign of the agreement which God has made with you.

他又照样把血洒在帐幕，和各样器皿上。
And the blood was put on the Tent and all the holy vessels in the same way.

按着律法，凡物差不多都是用血洁净的，若不流血，罪就不得赦免了。
And by the law almost all things are made clean with blood, and without blood there is no forgiveness.

照着天上样式作的物件，必须用这些祭物去洁净。但那天上的本物，自然当用更美的祭物去洁净。
For this cause it was necessary to make the copies of the things in heaven clean with these offerings; but the things themselves are made clean with better offerings than these.

因为基督并不是进了人手所造的圣所，（这不过是真圣所的影像）乃是进了天堂，如今为我们显在神面前。
For Christ did not go into a holy place which had been made by men's hands as the copy of the true one; but he went into heaven itself, and now takes his place before the face of God for us.

也不是多次将自己献上，像那大祭司每年带着牛羊的血进入圣所（牛羊的血原文作不是自己的血）。
And he did not have to make an offering of himself again and again, as the high priest goes into the holy place every year with blood which is not his;

如果这样，他从创世以来，就必多次受苦了。但如今在这末世显现一次，把自己献为祭，好除掉罪。
For then he would have undergone a number of deaths from the time of the making of the world: but now he has come to us at the end of the old order, to put away sin by the offering of himself.

按着定命，人人都有一死，死后且有审判。
And because by God's law death comes to men once, and after that they are judged;

象这样，基督既然一次被献，担当了多人的罪，将来要向那等候他的人第二次显现，并与罪无关，乃是为拯救他们。
So Christ, having at his first coming taken on himself the sins of men, will be seen a second time, without sin, by those who are waiting for him, for their salvation.

律法既是将来美事的影儿，不是本物的真像，总不能借着每年常献一样的祭物，叫那近前来的人得以完全。
For the law, being only a poor copy of the future good things, and not the true image of those things, is never able to make the people who come to the altar every year with the same offerings completely clean.

若不然，献祭的事岂不早已止住了吗？因为礼拜的人，良心既被洁净，就不再觉得有罪了。
For if this had been possible, would there not have been an end of those offerings, because the worshippers would have been made completely clean and would have been no longer conscious of sins?

但这些祭物是叫人每年想起罪来。
But year by year there is a memory of sins in those offerings.

因为公牛和山羊的血，断不能除罪。
Because it is not possible for the blood of oxen and goats to take away sins.

所以基督到世上来的时候，就说，神阿祭物和礼物是你不愿意的，你曾给我预备了身体。
So that when he comes into the world, he says, You had no desire for offerings, but you made a body ready for me;

燔祭和赎罪祭是你不喜欢的。
You had no joy in burned offerings or in offerings for sin.

那时我说，神阿，我来了为要照你的旨意行。我的事在经卷上已经记载了。
Then I said, See, I have come to do your pleasure, O God (as it is said of me in the roll of the book).

以上说，祭物和礼物，燔祭和赎罪祭，是你不愿意的，也是你不喜欢的，（这都是按着律法献的）。
After saying, You had no desire for offerings, for burned offerings or offerings for sin (which are made by the law) and you had no pleasure in them,

后又说我来了为要照你的旨意行。可见他是除去在先的，为要立定在后的。
Then he said, See, I have come to do your pleasure. He took away the old order, so that he might put the new order in its place.

我们凭这旨意，靠耶稣基督只一次献上他的身体，就得以成圣。
By that pleasure we have been made holy, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once and for ever.

凡祭司天天站着事奉神，屡次献上一样的祭物。这祭物永不能除罪。
And every priest takes his place at the altar day by day, doing what is necessary, and making again and again the same offerings which are never able to take away sins.

但基督献了一次永远的赎罪祭，就在神的右边坐下了。
But when Jesus had made one offering for sins for ever, he took his place at the right hand of God;

从此等候他仇敌成了他的脚凳。
And has been waiting there from that time, till all who are against him are made a foot-rest for his feet.

因为他一次献祭，便叫那得以成圣的人永远完全。
Because by one offering he has made complete for ever those who are made holy.

圣灵也对我们作见证。因为他既已说过，
And the Holy Spirit is a witness for us: for after he had said,

主说，那些日子以后，我与他们所立的约乃是这样。我要将我的律法写在他们心上，又要放在他们的里面。
This is the agreement which I will make with them after those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws in their hearts, writing them in their minds; he said,

以后就说，我不再记念他们的罪愆，和他们的过犯。
And I will keep no more memory of their sins and of their evil-doings.

这些罪过既已赦免，就不用再为罪献祭了。
Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no more offering for sin.

弟兄们，我们既因耶稣的血，得以坦然进入至圣所，
So then, my brothers, being able to go into the holy place without fear, because of the blood of Jesus,

是借着他给我们开了一条又新又活的路从幔子经过，这幔子就是他的身体。
By the new and living way which he made open for us through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;

又有一位大祭司治理神的家。
And having a great priest over the house of God,

并我们心中天良的亏欠已经洒去，身体用清水洗净了，就当存着诚心，和充足的信心，来到神面前。
Let us go in with true hearts, in certain faith, having our hearts made free from the sense of sin and our bodies washed with clean water:

也要坚守我们所承认的指望，不至摇动。因为那应许我们的是信实的。
Let us keep the witness of our hope strong and unshaking, for he is true who has given his word:

又要彼此相顾，激发爱心，勉励行善。
And let us be moving one another at all times to love and good works;

你们不可停止聚会，好像那些停止惯了的人，倒要彼此劝勉。既知道（原文作看见）那日子临近，就更当如此。
Not giving up our meetings, as is the way of some, but keeping one another strong in faith; and all the more because you see the day coming near.

因为我们得知真道以后，若故意犯罪，赎罪的祭就再没有了。
For if we do evil on purpose after we have had the knowledge of what is true, there is no more offering for sins,

惟有战惧等候审判和那烧灭众敌人的烈火。
But only a great fear of being judged, and of the fire of wrath which will be the destruction of the haters of God.

人干犯摩西的律法，凭两三个见证人，尚且不得怜恤而死。
A man who has gone against the law of Moses is put to death without pity on the word of two or three witnesses:

何况人践踏神的儿子，将那使他成圣之约的血当作平常，又亵慢施恩的圣灵，你们想，他要受的刑罚该怎样加重呢。
But will not the man by whom the Son of God has been crushed under foot, and the blood of the agreement with which he was washed clean has been taken as an unholy thing, and who has had no respect for the Spirit of grace, be judged bad enough for a very much worse punishment?

因为我们知道谁说，伸冤在我，我必报应。又说，主要审判他的百姓。
For we have had experience of him who says, Punishment is mine, I will give reward. And again, The Lord will be judge of his people.

落在永生神的手里真是可怕的。
We may well go in fear of falling into the hands of the living God.

你们要追念往日，蒙了光照以后，所忍受大争战的各样苦难。
But give thought to the days after you had seen the light, when you went through a great war of troubles;

一面被毁谤，遭患难，成了戏景，叫众人观看。一面陪伴那些受这样苦难的人。
In part, in being attacked by angry words and cruel acts, before the eyes of everyone, and in part, in being united with those who were attacked in this way.

因为你们体恤了那些被捆锁的人，并且你们的家业被人抢去，也甘心忍受，知道自己有更美长存的家业。
For you had pity on those who were in prison, and had joy in the loss of your property, in the knowledge that you still had a better property and one which you would keep for ever.

所以你们不可丢弃勇敢的心，存这样的心必得大赏赐。
So do not give up your hope which will be greatly rewarded.

你们必须忍耐，使你们行完了神的旨意，就可以得着所应许的。
For, having done what was right in God's eyes, you have need of waiting before his word has effect for you.

因为还有一点点时候，那要来的就来，并不迟延。
In a very little time he who is coming will come; he will not be slow.

只是义人必因信得生。（义人有古卷作我的义人）他若退后，我心里就不喜欢他。
But the upright man will be living by his faith; and if he goes back, my soul will have no pleasure in him.

我们却不是退后入沉沦的那等人，乃是有信心以致灵魂得救的人。
But we are not of those who go back to destruction; but of those who have faith even to the salvation of the soul.

信就是所望之事的实底，是未见之事的确据。
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the sign that the things not seen are true.

古人在这信上得了美好的证据。
For by it our fathers had God's approval.

我们因着信，就知道诸世界是借神话造成的。这样，所看见的，并不是从显然之物造出来的。
By faith it is clear to us that the order of events was fixed by the word of God, so that what is seen has not been made from things which only seem to be.

亚伯因着信献祭与神，比该隐所献的更美，因此便得了称义的见证，就是神指他礼物作的见证。他虽然死了，却因这信仍旧说话。
By faith Abel made a better offering to God than Cain, and he had witness through it of his righteousness, God giving his approval of his offering: and his voice still comes to us through it though he is dead.

以诺因着信被接去，不至于见死。人也找不着他，因为神已经把他接去了。只是他被接去以先，已经得了神喜悦他的明证。
By faith Enoch was taken up to heaven so that he did not see death; he was seen no longer, for God took him away: for before he was taken, witness had been given that he was well-pleasing to God:

人非有信就不能得神的喜悦。因为到神面前来的人，必须信有神，且信他赏赐那寻求他的人。
And without faith it is not possible to be well-pleasing to him, for it is necessary for anyone who comes to God to have the belief that God is, and that he is a rewarder of all those who make a serious search for him.

挪亚因着信，既蒙神指示他未见的事，动了敬畏的心，预备了一只方舟，使他全家得救。因此就定了那世代的罪，自己也承受了那从信而来的义。
By faith Noah, being moved by the fear of God, made ready an ark for the salvation of his family, because God had given him news of things which were not seen at the time; and through it the world was judged by him, and he got for his heritage the righteousness which is by faith.

亚伯拉罕因着信，蒙召的时候，就遵命出去，往将来要得为业的地方去。出去的时候，还不知往哪里去。
By faith Abraham did as God said when he was ordered to go out into a place which was to be given to him as a heritage, and went out without knowledge of where he was going.

他因着信，就在所应许之地作客，好像在异地居住帐棚，与那同蒙一个应许的以撒，雅各一样。
By faith he was a wanderer in the land of the agreement, as in a strange land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, who had a part with him in the same heritage:

因为他等候那座有根基的城，就是神所经营所建造的。
For he was looking for the strong town, whose builder and maker is God.

因着信，连撒拉自己，虽然过了生育的岁数，还能怀孕。因他以为那应许他的是可信的。
And by faith Sarah herself had power to give birth, when she was very old, because she had faith in him who gave his word;

所以从一个仿佛已死的人就生出子孙，如同天上的星那样众多，海边的沙那样无数。
So that from one man, who was near to death, came children in number as the stars in heaven, or as the sand by the seaside, which may not be numbered.

这些人都是存着信心死的，并没有得着所应许的，却从远处望见，且欢喜迎接，又承认自己在世上是客旅，是寄居的。
All these came to their end in faith, not having had the heritage; but having seen it with delight far away, they gave witness that they were wanderers and not of the earth.

说这样话的人，是表明自己要找一个家乡。
For those who say such things make it clear that they are searching for a country for themselves.

他们若想念所离开的家乡，还有可以回去的机会。
And truly if they had kept in mind the country from which they went out, they would have had chances of turning back.

他们却羡慕一个更美的家乡，就是在天上的。所以神被称为他们的神，并不以为耻。因为他已经给他们预备了一座城。
But now their desire is for a better country, that is to say, for one in heaven; and so it is no shame to God to be named their God; for he has made ready a town for them.

亚伯拉罕因着信，被试验的时候，就把以撒献上。这便是那欢喜领受应许的，将自己独生的儿子献上。
By faith Abraham made an offering of Isaac, when he was tested: and he with whom the agreement had been made gave up as an offering the only son of his body,

论到这儿子曾有话说，从以撒生的才要称为你的后裔。
Of whom it had been said, From Isaac will your seed take their name:

他以为神还能叫人从死里复活。他也仿佛从死中得回他的儿子来。
Judging that God was able to give life even to the dead; and because of this he did get him back as if from death.

以撒因着信，就指着将来的事，给雅各以扫祝福。
By faith Isaac, blessing Jacob and Esau, gave news of things to come.

雅各因着信，临死的时候，给约瑟的两个儿子各自祝福，扶着杖头敬拜神。
By faith Jacob gave a blessing to the two sons of Joseph, when he was near to death; and gave God worship, supported by his stick.

约瑟因着信，临终的时候，提到以色列族将来要出埃及，并为自己的骸骨留下遗命。
By faith Joseph, when his end was near, said that the children of Israel would go out of Egypt; and gave orders about his bones.

摩西生下来，他的父母见他是个俊美的孩子，就因着信把他藏了三个月，并不怕王命。
By faith Moses was kept secretly by his father and mother for three months after his birth, because they saw that he was a fair child; and they had no fear of the king's orders.

摩西因着信，长大了就不肯称为法老女儿之子。
By faith Moses, when he became a man, had no desire to be named the son of Pharaoh's daughter;

他宁可和神的百姓同受苦害，也不愿暂时享受罪中之乐。
Feeling that it was better to undergo pain with the people of God, than for a short time to have a taste of the pleasures of sin;

他看为基督受的凌辱，比埃及的财物更宝贵。因他想望所要得的赏赐。
Judging a part in the shame of Christ to be better than all the wealth of Egypt; for he was looking forward to his reward.

他因着信就离开埃及，不怕王怒。因为他恒心忍耐，如同看见那不能看见的主。
By faith he went out of Egypt, not being turned from his purpose by fear of the wrath of the king; for he kept on his way, as seeing him who is unseen.

他因着信，就守逾越节，（守或作立）行洒血的礼，免得那灭长子的临近以色列人。
By faith he kept the Passover, and put the sign of the blood on the houses, so that the angel of destruction might not put their oldest sons to death.

他们因着信，过红海如行干地。埃及人试着要过去，就被吞灭了。
By faith they went through the Red Sea as if it had been dry land, though the Egyptians were overcome by the water when they made an attempt to do the same.

以色列人因着信，围绕耶利哥城七日，城墙就倒塌了。
By faith the walls of Jericho came down, after they had been circled for seven days.

妓女喇合因着信，曾和和平平的接待探子，就不与那些不顺从的人一同灭亡。
By faith Rahab, the loose woman, was not put to death with those who had gone against God's orders, because she had taken into her house in peace those sent to see the land.

我又何必再说呢？若要一一细说，基甸，巴拉，参孙，耶弗他，大卫，撒母耳，和众先知的事，时候就不够了。
What more am I to say? For there would not be time to give the stories of Gideon, Barak, Samson, and Jephthah, of David and Samuel and the prophets:

他们因着信，制伏了敌国，行了公义，得了应许，堵了狮子的口。
Who through faith overcame kingdoms, did righteousness, got their reward, kept the mouths of lions shut,

灭了烈火的猛势，脱了刀剑的锋刃，软弱变为刚强，争战显出勇敢，打退外邦的全军。
Put out the power of fire, got safely away from the edge of the sword, were made strong when they had been feeble, became full of power in war, and put to flight the armies of the nations.

有妇人得自己的死人复活，又有人忍受严刑，不肯苟且得释放，（释放原文作赎）为要得着更美的复活。
Women had their dead given back to them living; others let themselves be cruelly attacked, having no desire to go free, so that they might have a better life to come;

又有人忍受戏弄，鞭打，捆锁，监禁，各等的磨炼。
And others were tested by being laughed at or by blows, and even with chains and prisons:

被石头打死，被锯锯死，受试探，被刀杀。披着绵羊山羊的皮各处奔跑，受穷乏，患难，苦害。
They were stoned, they were cut up with knives, they were tested, they were put to death with the sword, they went about in sheepskins and in goatskins; being poor and in pain and cruelly attacked,

在旷野，山岭，山洞，地穴，飘流无定。本是世界不配有的人。
Wandering in waste places and in mountains and in holes in the rocks; for whom the world was not good enough.

这些人都是因信得了美好的证据，却仍未得着所应许的。
And not one of these got the good things of the agreement, though they all had a good record through faith,

因为神给我们预备了更美的事，叫他们若不与我们同得，就不能完全。
Because God had kept some better thing for us, so that it was not possible for them to become complete without us.

我们既有这许多的见证人，如同云彩围着我们，就当放下各样的重担，脱去容易缠累我们的罪，存心忍耐，奔那摆在我们前头的路程，
For this reason, as we are circled by so great a cloud of witnesses, putting off every weight, and the sin into which we come so readily, let us keep on running in the way which is marked out for us,

仰望为我们信心创始成终的耶稣。（或作仰望那将真道创始成终的耶稣）他因那摆在前面的喜乐，就轻看羞辱，忍受了十字架的苦难，便坐在神宝座的右边。
Having our eyes fixed on Jesus, the guide and end of our faith, who went through the pains of the cross, not caring for the shame, because of the joy which was before him, and who has now taken his place at the right hand of God's seat of power.

那忍受罪人这样顶撞的，你们要思想，免得疲倦灰心。
Give thought to him who has undergone so much of the hate of sinners against himself, so that you may not be tired and feeble of purpose.

你们与罪恶相争，还没有抵挡到流血的地步。
Till now you have not given your blood in your fight against sin:

你们又忘了那劝你们如同劝儿子的话，说，我儿，你不可轻看主的管教，被他责备的时候，也不可灰心。
And you have not kept in mind the word which says to you as to sons, My son, do not make little of the Lord's punishment, and do not give up hope when you are judged by him;

因为主所爱的他必管教，又鞭打凡所收纳的儿子。
For the Lord sends punishment on his loved ones; everyone whom he takes as his son has experience of his rod.

你们所忍受的，是神管教你们，待你们如同待儿子。焉有儿子不被父亲管教的呢？
It is for your training that you undergo these things; God is acting to you as a father does to his sons; for what son does not have punishment from his father?

管教原是众子所共受的，你们若不受管教，就是私子，不是儿子了。
But if you have not that punishment of which we all have our part, then you are not true sons, but children of shame.

再者，我们曾有生身的父管教我们，我们尚且敬重他，何况万灵的父，我们岂不更当顺服他得生吗？
And again, if the fathers of our flesh gave us punishment and had our respect, how much more will we be under the authority of the Father of spirits, and have life?

生身的父都是暂随己意管教我们。惟有万灵的父管教我们，是要我们得益处，使我们在他的圣洁上有分。
For they truly gave us punishment for a short time, as it seemed good to them; but he does it for our profit, so that we may become holy as he is.

凡管教的事，当时不觉得快乐，反觉得愁苦。后来却为那经练过的人，结出平安的果子，就是义。
At the time all punishment seems to be pain and not joy: but after, those who have been trained by it get from it the peace-giving fruit of righteousness.

所以你们要把下垂的手，发酸的腿，挺起来。
For this cause let the hands which are hanging down be lifted up, and let the feeble knees be made strong,

也要为自己的脚把道路修直了，使瘸子不至歪脚，反得痊愈。（歪脚或作差路）
And make straight roads for your feet, so that the feeble may not be turned out of the way, but may be made strong.

你们要追求与众人和睦，并要追求圣洁。非圣洁没有人能见主。
Let your desire be for peace with all men, and to be made holy, without which no man may see the Lord;

又要谨慎，恐怕有人失了神的恩。恐怕有毒根生出来扰乱你们，因此叫众人沾染污秽。
Looking with care to see that no man among you in his behaviour comes short of the grace of God; for fear that some bitter root may come up to be a trouble to you, and that some of you may be made unclean by it;

恐怕有淫乱的，有贪恋世俗如以扫的。他因一点食物把自己长子的名分卖了。
And that there may not be any evil liver, or any man without respect for God, like Esau, who let his birthright go for a plate of food.

后来想要承受父所祝的福，竟被弃绝，虽然号哭切求，却得不着门路，使他父亲的心意回转，这是你们知道的。
For you have knowledge that even long after, when he was desiring the blessing for his heritage, he was turned away, though he made his request frequently and with weeping; because the past might not be changed.

你们原不是来到那能摸的山，此山有火焰，密云，黑暗，暴风，
You have not come to a mountain which may be touched, and is burning with fire, and to a black cloud, and a dark smoke, and a violent wind,

角声与说话的声音。那些听见这声音的。都求不要再向他们说话。
And to the sound of a horn, and the voice of words, the hearers of which made request that not a word more might be said to them:

因为他们当不起所命他们的话说，靠近这山的，即便是走兽，也要用石头打死。
For the order which said, If the mountain is touched even by a beast, the beast is to be stoned, seemed hard to them;

所见的极其可怕，甚至摩西说，我甚是恐惧战兢。
And the vision was so overpowering that even Moses said, I am shaking and full of fear.

你们乃是来到锡安山，永生神的城邑，就是天上的耶路撒冷。那里有千万的天使，
But you have come to the mountain of Zion, to the place of the living God, to the Jerusalem which is in heaven, and to an army of angels which may not be numbered,

有名录在天上诸长子之会所共聚的总会，有审判众人的神，和被成全之义人的灵魂。
To the great meeting and church of the first of those who are named in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of good men made complete,

并新约的中保耶稣，以及所洒的血。这血所说的比亚伯的血所说的更美。
And to Jesus by whom the new agreement has been made between God and man, and to the sign of the blood which says better things than Abel's blood.

你们总要谨慎，不可弃绝那向你们说话的。因为那些弃绝在地上警戒他们的，尚且不能逃罪，何况我们违背那从天上警戒我们的呢？
See that you give ear to his voice which comes to you. For if those whose ears were shut to the voice which came to them on earth did not go free from punishment, what chance have we of going free if we give no attention to him whose voice comes from heaven?

当时他的声音震动了地。但如今他应许说，再一次我不单要震动地，还要震动天。
Whose voice was the cause of the shaking of the earth; but now he has made an oath, saying, There will be still one more shaking, not only of the earth, but of heaven.

这再一次的话，是指明被震动的，就是受造之物，都要挪去，使那不被震动的常存。
And the words, Still one more, make it clear that there will be a taking away of those things which are shaking, as of things which are made, so that there may be only those things of which no shaking is possible.

所以我们既得了不能震动的国，就当感恩，照神所喜悦的，用虔诚敬畏的心事奉神。
If then, we have a kingdom which will never be moved, let us have grace, so that we may give God such worship as is pleasing to him with fear and respect:

因为我们的神乃是烈火。
For our God is an all-burning fire.

你们务要常存弟兄相爱的心。
Go on loving your brothers in the faith.

不可忘记用爱心接待客旅。因为曾有接待客旅的，不知不觉就接待了天使。
Take care to keep open house: because in this way some have had angels as their guests, without being conscious of it.

你们要记念被捆绑的人，好像与他们同受捆绑，也要记念遭苦害的人，想到自己也在肉身之内。
Keep in mind those who are in chains, as if you were chained with them, and those who are in trouble, as being yourselves in the body.

婚姻，人人都当尊重，床也不可污秽。因为苟合行淫的人神必要审判。
Let married life be honoured among all of you and not made unclean; for men untrue in married life will be judged by God.

你们存心不可贪爱钱财。要以自己所有的为足。因为主曾说，我总不撇下你，也不丢弃你。
Be free from the love of money and pleased with the things which you have; for he himself has said, I will be with you at all times.

所以我们可以放胆说，主是帮助我的，我必不惧怕。人能把我怎么样呢？
So that we say with a good heart, The Lord is my helper; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?

从前引导你们，传神之道给你们的人，你们要想念他们，效法他们的信心，留心看他们为人的结局。
Keep in mind those who were over you, and who gave you the word of God; seeing the outcome of their way of life, let your faith be like theirs.

耶稣基督，昨日今日一直到永远是一样的。
Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and for ever.

你们不要被那诸般怪异的教训勾引了去。因为人心靠恩得坚固才是好的。并不是靠饮食。那在饮食上专心的，从来没有得着益处。
Do not be turned away by different strange teachings, because it is good for your hearts to be made strong by grace, and not by meats, which were of no profit to those who took so much trouble over them.

我们有一祭坛，上面的祭物是那些在帐幕中供职的人不可同吃的。
We have an altar from which those priests who are servants in the Tent may not take food.

原来牲畜的血，被大祭司带入圣所作赎罪祭，牲畜的身子，被烧在营外。
For the bodies of the beasts whose blood is taken into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin are burned outside the circle of the tents.

所以耶稣，要用自己的血叫百姓成圣，也就在城门外受苦。
For this reason Jesus was put to death outside the walls, so that he might make the people holy by his blood.

这样，我们也当出到营外就了他去，忍受他所受的凌辱。
Let us then go out to him outside the circle of the tents, taking his shame on ourselves.

我们在这里本没有常存的城，乃是寻求那将来的城。
For here we have no fixed resting-place, but our search is for the one which is to come.

我们应当靠着耶稣，常常以颂赞为祭献给神，这就是那承认主名之人嘴唇的果子。
Let us then make offerings of praise to God at all times through him, that is to say, the fruit of lips giving witness to his name.

只是不可忘记行善，和捐输的事。因为这样的祭，是神所喜悦的。
But go on doing good and giving to others, because God is well-pleased with such offerings.

你们要依从那些引导你们的，且要顺服。因他们为你们的灵魂时刻儆醒，好像那将来交账的人。你们要使他们交的时候有快乐，不至忧愁。若忧愁就与你们无益了。
Give ear to those who are rulers over you, and do as they say: for they keep watch over your souls, ready to give an account of them; let them be able to do this with joy and not with grief, because that would be of no profit to you.

请你们为我们祷告。因我们自觉良心无亏，愿意凡事按正道而行。
Make prayers for us, for we are certain that our hearts are free from the sense of sin, desiring the right way of life in all things.

我更求你们为我祷告，使我快些回到你们那里去。
I make this request more strongly, in the hope of coming back to you more quickly.

但愿赐平安的神，就是那凭永约之血使群羊的大牧人我主耶稣，从死里复活的神，
Now may the God of peace, who made that great keeper of his flock, even our Lord Jesus, come back from the dead through the blood of the eternal agreement,

在各样善事上，成全你们，叫你们遵行他的旨意，又借着耶稣基督在你们心里行他所喜悦的事。愿荣耀归给他，直到永永远远。阿们。
Make you full of every good work and ready to do all his desires, working in us whatever is pleasing in his eyes through Jesus Christ; and may the glory be given to him for ever and ever. So be it.

弟兄们，我略略写信给你们，望你们听我劝勉的话。
But, brothers, take kindly the words which I have said for your profit; for I have not sent you a long letter.

你们该知道我们的兄弟提摩太已经释放了。他若快来，我必同他去见你们。
Our brother Timothy has been let out of prison; and if he comes here in a short time, he and I will come to you together.

请你们问引导你们的诸位和众圣徒安。从义大利来的人也问你们安。
Give words of love from me to those who are rulers over you, and to all the saints. Those who are in Italy send you their love.

愿恩惠常与你们众人同在。阿们。
May grace be with you all.

