帖撒罗尼迦后书 Thessalonians


保罗，西拉，提摩太，写信给帖撒罗尼迦在神我们的父，与主耶稣基督里的教会。
Paul and Silvanus and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:

愿恩惠平安，从父神和主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

弟兄们，我们该为你们常常感谢神，这本是合宜的。因你们的信心格外增长，并且你们众人彼此相爱的心也都充足。
It is right for us to give praise to God at all times for you, brothers, because of the great increase of your faith, and the wealth of your love for one another;

甚至我们在神的各教会里为你们夸口，都因你们在所受的一切逼迫患难中，仍旧存忍耐和信心。
So that we ourselves take pride in you in the churches of God for your untroubled mind and your faith in all the troubles and sorrows which you are going through;

这正是神公义判断的明证。叫你们可算配得神的国，你们就是为这国受苦。
Which is a clear sign of the decision which God in his righteousness has made; to give you a part in his kingdom, for which you have undergone this pain;

神既是公义的，就必将患难报应那加患难给你们的人。
For it is an act of righteousness on God's part to give trouble as their reward to those who are troubling you,

也必使你们这受患难的人，与我们同得平安。那时，主耶稣同他有能力的天使从天上在火焰中显现，
And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus comes from heaven with the angels of his power in flames of fire,

要报应那不认识神，和那不听从我主耶稣福音的人。
To give punishment to those who have no knowledge of God, and to those who do not give ear to the good news of our Lord Jesus:

他们要受刑罚，就是永远沉沦，离开主的面和他权能的荣光。
Whose reward will be eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his strength,

这正是主降临要在他圣徒的身上得荣耀，又在一切信的人身上显为希奇的那日子。（我们对你们作的见证，你们也信了。）
At his coming, when he will have glory in his saints, and will be a cause of wonder in all those who had faith (because our witness among you had effect) in that day.

因此，我们常为你们祷告，愿我们的神看你们配得过所蒙的召。又用大能成就你们一切所羡慕的良善，和一切因信心所作的工夫。
For this reason, you are ever in our prayers, that you may seem to our God such as may have a part in his purpose and that by his power he will make all his good purpose, and the work of faith, complete;

叫我们主耶稣的名在你们身上得荣耀，你们也在他身上得荣耀，都照着我们的神并主耶稣基督的恩。
So that glory may be given to the name of our Lord Jesus through you, and you may have glory in him, by the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

弟兄们，论到我们主耶稣基督降临，和我们到他那里聚集，
Now as to the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and our meeting with him, it is our desire, my brothers,

我劝你们，无论有灵有言语，有冒我名的书信，说主的日子现在到了，（现在或作就）不要轻易动心，也不要惊慌。
That you may not be moved in mind or troubled by a spirit, or by a word, or by a letter as from us, with the suggestion that the day of the Lord is even now come;

人不拘用什么法子，你们总不要被他诱惑，因为那日子以前，必有离道反教的事，并有那大罪人，就是沉沦之子，显露出来。
Give no belief to false words: because there will first be a falling away from the faith, and the revelation of the man of sin, the son of destruction,

他是抵挡主，高抬自己，超过一切称为神的，和一切受人敬拜的。甚至坐在神的殿里，自称是神。
Who puts himself against all authority, lifting himself up over all which is named God or is given worship; so that he takes his seat in the Temple of God, putting himself forward as God.

我还在你们那里的时候，曾把这些事告诉你们，你们不记得吗？
Have you no memory of what I said when I was with you, giving you word of these things?

现在你们也知道那拦阻他的是什么，是叫他到了的时候，才可以显露。
And now it is clear to you what is keeping back his revelation till the time comes for him to be seen.

因为那不法的隐意已经发动。只是现在有一个拦阻的，等到那拦阻的被除去。
For the secret of evil is even now at work: but there is one who is keeping back the evil till he is taken out of the way.

那时这不法的人，必显露出来。主耶稣要用口中的气灭绝他，用降临的荣光废掉他。
And then will come the revelation of that evil one, whom the Lord Jesus will put to death with the breath of his mouth, and give to destruction by the revelation of his coming;

这不法的人来，是照撒但的运动，行各样的异能神迹，和一切虚假的奇事，
Even the one whose coming is marked by the working of Satan, with all power and signs and false wonders,

并且在那沉沦的人身上，行各样出于不义的诡诈。因他们不领受爱真理的心，使他们得救。
And with every deceit of wrongdoing among those whose fate is destruction; because they were quite without that love of the true faith by which they might have salvation.

故此，神就给他们一个生发错误的心，叫他们信从虚谎。
And for this cause, God will give them up to the power of deceit and they will put their faith in what is false:

使一切不信真理，倒喜爱不义的人，都被定罪。
So that they all may be judged, who had no faith in what is true, but took pleasure in evil.

主所爱的弟兄们哪，我们本该常为你们感谢神。因为他从起初拣选了你们，叫你们因信真道，又被圣灵感动，成为圣洁，能以得救。
But it is right for us to give praise to God at all times for you, brothers, loved by the Lord, because it was the purpose of God from the first that you might have salvation, being made holy by the Spirit and by faith in what is true:

神借我们所传的福音，召你们到这地步，好得着我们主耶稣基督的荣光。
And in this purpose he gave you a part through the good news of which we were the preachers, even that you might have part in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

所以弟兄们，你们要站立得稳，凡所领受的教训，不拘是我们口传的，是信上写的，都要坚守。
So then, brothers, be strong in purpose, and keep the teaching which has been given to you by word or by letter from us.

但愿我们主耶稣基督，和那爱我们，开恩将永远的安慰，并美好的盼望，赐给我们的父神，
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father who had love for us and has given us eternal comfort and good hope through grace,

安慰你们的心，并且在一切善行善言上，坚固你们。
Give you comfort and strength in every good work and word.

弟兄们，我还有话说，请你们为我们祷告，好叫主的道理快快行开，得着荣耀，正如在你们中间一样。
For the rest, my brothers, let there be prayer for us that the word of the Lord may go forward with increasing glory, even as it does with you;

也叫我们脱离无理之恶人的手。因为人不都是有信心。
And that we may be made free from foolish and evil men; for not all have faith.

但主是信实的，要坚固你们，保护你们脱离那恶者。（或作脱离凶恶）
But the Lord is true, who will give you strength and keep you safe from evil.

我们靠主深信你们现在是遵行我们所吩咐的，后来也必要遵行。
And we have faith in the Lord about you, that you are doing and will do the things about which we give you orders.

愿主引导你们的心，叫你们爱神并学基督的忍耐。
And may your hearts be guided by the Lord into the love of God and quiet waiting for Christ.

弟兄们，我们奉主耶稣基督的名吩咐你们，凡有弟兄不按规矩而行，不遵守从我们所受的教训，就当远离他。
Now we give you orders, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to keep away from all those whose behaviour is not well ordered and in harmony with the teaching which they had from us.

你们自己原知道应当怎样效法我们。因为我们在你们中间，未尝不按规矩而行。
For you yourselves are used to taking us as your example, because our life among you was ruled by order,

也未尝白吃人的饭。倒是辛苦劳碌，昼夜作工，免得叫你们一人受累。
And we did not take food from any man for nothing, but were working hard night and day not to be a trouble to any of you:

这并不是因我们没有权柄，乃是要给你们作榜样，叫你们效法我们。
Not because we have not the right, but to make ourselves an example to you, so that you might do the same.

我们在你们那里的时候，曾吩咐你们说，若有人不肯作工，就不可吃饭。
For even when we were with you we gave you orders, saying, If any man does no work, let him not have food.

因我们听说，在你们中间有人不按规矩而行，什么工都不作，反倒专管闲事。
For it has come to our ears that there are some among you whose behaviour is uncontrolled, who do no work at all, but are over-interested in the business of others.

我们靠主耶稣基督，吩咐劝戒这样的人，要安静作工，吃自己的饭。
Now to such we give orders and make request in the Lord Jesus, that, working quietly, they get their living.

弟兄们，你们行善不可丧志。
And you, my brothers, do not get tired of well-doing.

若有人不听从我们这信上的话，要记下他，不和他交往，叫他自觉羞愧。
And if any man does not give attention to what we have said in this letter, take note of that man, and keep away from him, so that he may be shamed.

但不要以他为仇人，要劝他如弟兄。
Have no feeling of hate for him, but take him in hand seriously as a brother.

愿赐平安的主，随时随事亲自给你们平安。愿主常与你们众人同在。
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. May the Lord be with you all.

我保罗亲笔问你们安。凡我的信都以此为记。我的笔迹就是这样。
These words of love to you at the end are in my writing, Paul's writing, and this is the mark of every letter from me.

愿我们主耶稣基督的恩，常与你们众人同在。
May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

