彼得前书 Peter


耶稣基督的使徒彼得，写信给那分散在本都，加拉太，加帕多家，亚西亚，庇推尼寄居的。
Peter, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the saints who are living in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,

就是照父神的先见被拣选，借着圣灵得成圣洁，以致顺服耶稣基督，又蒙他血所洒的人。愿恩惠平安，多多地加给你们。
Who, through the purpose of God, have been made holy by the Spirit, disciples of Jesus, made clean by his blood: May you have grace and peace in full measure.

愿颂赞归与我们主耶稣基督的父神，他曾照自己的大怜悯，借耶稣基督从死里复活重生了我们，叫我们有活泼的盼望，
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who through his great mercy has given us a new birth and a living hope by the coming again of Jesus Christ from the dead,

可以得着不能朽坏，不能玷污，不能衰残，为你们存留在天上的基业。
And a heritage fair, holy and for ever new, waiting in heaven for you,

你们这因信蒙神能力保守的人，必能得着所预备，到末世要显现的救恩。
Who, by the power of God are kept, through faith, for that salvation, which will be seen at the last day.

因此，你们是大有喜乐，但如今，在百般的试炼中暂时忧愁。
You have cause for great joy in this, though it may have been necessary for you to be troubled for a little time, being tested in all sorts of ways,

叫你们的信心既被试验，就比那被火试验，仍然能坏的金子，更显宝贵。可以在耶稣基督显现的时候，得着称赞，荣耀，尊贵。
So that the true metal of your faith, being of much greater value than gold (which, though it comes to an end, is tested by fire), may come to light in praise and glory and honour, at the revelation of Jesus Christ:

你们虽然没有见过他，却是爱他。如今虽不得看见，却因信他就有说不出来，满有荣光的大喜乐。
To whom your love is given, though you have not seen him; and the faith which you have in him, though you do not see him now, gives you joy greater than words and full of glory:

并且得着你们信心的果效，就是灵魂的救恩。
For so you have the true end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

论到这救恩，那预先说你们要得恩典的众先知，早已详细的寻求考察。
For the prophets who gave the news of the grace which would come to you, made search with all care for knowledge of this salvation;

就是考察在他们心里基督的灵，预先证明基督受苦难，后来得荣耀，是指着什么时候，并怎样的时候。
Attempting to see what sort of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them was pointing to, when it gave witness to the pains which Christ would undergo and the glories which would come after them.

他们得了启示，知道他们所传讲的一切事（传讲原文作服事），不是为自己，乃是为你们。那靠着从天上差来的圣灵，传福音给你们的人，现在将这些事报给你们。天使也愿意详细察看这些事。
And it was made clear to those prophets that they were God's servants not for themselves but for you, to give you word of the things which have now come to your ears from the preachers of the good news through the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven; things which even angels have a desire to see.

所以要约束你们的心（原文作束上你们心中的腰），谨慎自守，专心盼望耶稣基督显现的时候所带来给你们的恩。
So make your minds ready, and keep on the watch, hoping with all your power for the grace which is to come to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;

你们既作顺命的儿女，就不要效法从前蒙昧无知的时候，那放纵私欲的样子。
Like children ruled by God, do not go back to the old desires of the time when you were without knowledge:

那召你们的既是圣洁，你们在一切所行的事上也要圣洁。
But be holy in every detail of your lives, as he, whose servants you are, is holy;

因为经上记着说，你们要圣洁，因为我是圣洁的。
Because it has been said in the Writings, You are to be holy, for I am holy.

你们既称那不偏待人，按各人行为审判人的主为父，就当存敬畏的心，度你们在世寄居的日子。
And if you give the name of Father to him who, judging every man by his acts, has no respect for a man's position, then go in fear while you are on this earth:

知道你们得赎，脱去你们祖宗所传流虚妄的行为，不是凭着能坏的金银等物。
Being conscious that you have been made free from that foolish way of life which was your heritage from your fathers, not through a payment of things like silver or gold which come to destruction,

乃是凭着基督的宝血，如同无瑕疵无玷污的羔羊之血。
But through holy blood, like that of a clean and unmarked lamb, even the blood of Christ:

基督在创世以前，是预先被神知道的，却在这末世，才为你们显现。
Who was marked out by God before the making of the world, but was caused to be seen in these last times for you,

你们也因着他，信那叫他从死里复活，又给他荣耀的神，叫你们的信心，和盼望，都在于神。
Who through him have faith in God who took him up again from the dead into glory; so that your faith and hope might be in God.

你们既因顺从真理，洁净了自己的心，以致爱弟兄没有虚假，就当从心里彼此切实相爱。从心里有古卷作从清洁的心
And as you have made your souls clean, being ruled by what is true, and loving one another without deceit, see that your love is warm and from the heart:

你们蒙了重生，不是由于能坏的种子，乃是由于不能坏的种子，是借着神活泼常存的道。
Because you have had a new birth, not from the seed of man, but from eternal seed, through the word of a living and unchanging God.

因为凡有血气的，尽都如草，他的美荣，都像草上的花。草必枯干，花必凋谢。
For it is said, All flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flower of the grass. The grass becomes dry and the flower dead:

惟有主的道是永存的。所传给你们的福音就是这道。
But the word of the Lord is eternal. And this is the word of the good news which was given to you.

所以你们既除去一切的恶毒（或作阴毒），诡诈，并假善，嫉妒，和一切毁谤的话，
So putting away all wrongdoing, and all tricks and deceits and envies and evil talk,

就要爱慕那纯净的灵奶，像才生的婴孩爱慕奶一样，叫你们因此渐长，以致得救。
Be full of desire for the true milk of the word, as babies at their mothers' breasts, so that you may go on to salvation;

你们若尝过主恩的滋味，就必如此
If you have had a taste of the grace of the Lord:

主乃活石。固然是被人所弃的，却是被神所拣选所宝贵的。
To whom you come, as to a living stone, not honoured by men, but of great and special value to God;

你们来到主面前，也就像活石，被建造成为灵宫，作圣洁的祭司，借着耶稣基督奉献神所悦纳的灵祭。
You, as living stones, are being made into a house of the spirit, a holy order of priests, making those offerings of the spirit which are pleasing to God through Jesus Christ.

因为经上说，看哪，我把所拣选所宝贵的房角石，安放在锡安。信靠他的人，必不至于羞愧。
Because it is said in the Writings, See, I am placing a keystone in Zion, of great and special value; and the man who has faith in him will not be put to shame.

所以他在你们信的人就为宝贵，在那不信的人有话说，匠人所弃的石头，已作了房角的头块石头。
And the value is for you who have faith; but it is said for those without faith, The very stone which the builders put on one side, was made the chief stone of the building;

又说，作了绊脚的石头，跌人的磐石。他们既不顺从，就在道理上绊跌。（或作他们绊跌都因不顺从道理）他们这样绊跌也是预定的。
And, A stone of falling, a rock of trouble; the word is the cause of their fall, because they go against it, and this was the purpose of God.

惟有你们是被拣选的族类，是有君尊的祭司，是圣洁的国度，是属神的子民，要叫你们宣扬那召你们出黑暗入奇妙光明者的美德。
But you are a special people, a holy nation, priests and kings, a people given up completely to God, so that you may make clear the virtues of him who took you out of the dark into the light of heaven.

你们从前算不得子民，现在却作了神的子民。从前未曾蒙怜恤，现在却蒙了怜恤。
In the past you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; then there was no mercy for you, but now mercy has been given to you.

亲爱的弟兄阿你们是客旅，是寄居的。我劝你们要禁戒肉体的私欲。这私欲是与灵魂争战的。
My loved ones, I make this request with all my heart, that, as those for whom this world is a strange country, you will keep yourselves from the desires of the flesh which make war against the soul;

你们在外邦人中，应当品行端正，叫那些毁谤你们是作恶的，因看见你们的好行为，便在鉴察的日子（鉴察或作眷顾），归荣耀给神。
Being of good behaviour among the Gentiles; so that though they say now that you are evil-doers, they may see your good works and give glory to God when he comes to be their judge.

你们为主的缘故，要顺服人的一切制度，或是在上的君王，
Keep all the laws of men because of the Lord; those of the king, who is over all,

或是君王所派罚恶赏善的臣宰。
And those of the rulers who are sent by him for the punishment of evil-doers and for the praise of those who do well.

因为神的旨意原是要你们行善，可以堵住那糊涂无知人的口。
Because it is God's pleasure that foolish and narrow-minded men may be put to shame by your good behaviour:

你们虽是自由的，却不可借着自由遮盖恶毒（或作阴毒），总要作神的仆人。
As those who are free, not using your free position as a cover for wrongdoing, but living as the servants of God;

务要尊敬众人。亲爱教中的弟兄。敬畏神。尊敬君王。
Have respect for all, loving the brothers, fearing God, honouring the king.

你们作仆人的，凡事要存敬畏的心顺服主人。不但顺服那善良温和的，就是那乖僻的也要顺服。
Servants, take orders from your masters with all respect; not only if they are good and gentle, but even if they are bad-humoured.

倘若人为叫良心对得住神，就忍受冤屈的苦楚，这是可喜爱的。
For it is a sign of grace if a man, desiring to do right in the eyes of God, undergoes pain as punishment for something which he has not done.

你们若因犯罪受责打，能忍耐，有什么可夸的呢？但你们若因行善受苦，能忍耐，这在神看是可喜爱的。
What credit is it if, when you have done evil, you take your punishment quietly? but if you are given punishment for doing right, and take it quietly, this is pleasing to God.

你们蒙召原是为此。因基督也为你们受过苦，给你们留下榜样，叫你们跟随他的脚踪行。
This is God's purpose for you: because Jesus himself underwent punishment for you, giving you an example, so that you might go in his footsteps:

他并没有犯罪，口里也没有诡诈。
Who did no evil, and there was no deceit in his mouth:

他被骂不还口。受害不说威吓的话。只将自己交托那按公义审判人的主。
To sharp words he gave no sharp answer; when he was undergoing pain, no angry word came from his lips; but he put himself into the hands of the judge of righteousness:

他被挂在木头上亲身担当了我们的罪，使我们既然在罪上死，就得以在义上活。因他受的鞭伤，你们便得了医治。
He took our sins on himself, giving his body to be nailed on the tree, so that we, being dead to sin, might have a new life in righteousness, and by his wounds we have been made well.

你们从前好像迷路的羊。如今却归到你们灵魂的牧人监督了。
Because, like sheep, you had gone out of the way; but now you have come back to him who keeps watch over your souls.

你们作妻子的，要顺服自己的丈夫。这样，若有不信从道理的丈夫，他们虽然不听道，也可以因妻子的品行被感化过来。
Wives, be ruled by your husbands; so that even if some of them give no attention to the word, their hearts may be changed by the behaviour of their wives,

这正是因看见你们有贞洁的品行，和敬畏的心。
When they see your holy behaviour in the fear of God.

你们不要以外面的辫头发，戴金饰，穿美衣，为妆饰，
Do not let your ornaments be those of the body such as dressing of the hair, or putting on of jewels of gold or fair clothing;

只要以里面存着长久温柔安静的心为妆饰。这在神面前是极宝贵的。
But let them be those of the unseen man of the heart, the ever-shining ornament of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great price in the eyes of God.

因为古时仰赖神的圣洁妇人，正是以此为妆饰，顺服自己的丈夫。
And these were the ornaments of the holy women of the past, whose hope was in God, being ruled by their husbands:

就如撒拉听从亚伯拉罕，称他为主。你们若行善，不因恐吓而害怕，便是撒拉的女儿了。
As Sarah was ruled by Abraham, naming him lord; whose children you are if you do well, and are not put in fear by any danger.

你们作丈夫的，也要按情理和妻子同住（情理原文作知识）。因她比你软弱（比你软弱原文作是软弱的器皿），与你一同承受生命之恩的，所以要敬重她。这样便叫你们的祷告没有阻碍。
And you husbands, give thought to your way of life with your wives, giving honour to the woman who is the feebler vessel, but who has an equal part in the heritage of the grace of life; so that you may not be kept from prayer.

总而言之，你们都要同心，彼此体恤，相爱如弟兄，存慈怜谦卑的心。
Last of all, see that you are all in agreement; feeling for one another, loving one another like brothers, full of pity, without pride:

不以恶报恶，以辱骂还辱骂，倒要祝福。因你们是为此蒙召，好叫你们承受福气。
Not giving back evil for evil, or curse for curse, but in place of cursing, blessing; because this is the purpose of God for you that you may have a heritage of blessing.

因为经上说，人若爱生命，愿享美福，须要禁止舌头不出恶言，嘴唇不说诡诈的话。
For it is said, Let the man who has a love of life, desiring to see good days, keep his tongue from evil and his lips from words of deceit:

也要离恶行善。寻求和睦，一心追赶。
And let him be turned from evil and do good; searching for peace and going after it with all his heart.

因为主的眼看顾义人，主的耳听他们的祈祷。惟有行恶的人，主向他们变脸。
For the eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.

你们若是热心行善，有谁害你们呢？
Who will do you any damage if you keep your minds fixed on what is good?

你们就是为义受苦，也是有福的。不要怕人的威吓，也不要惊慌（的威吓或作所怕的）。
But you are happy if you undergo pain because of righteousness; have no part in their fear and do not be troubled;

只要心里尊主基督为圣。有人问你们心中盼望的缘由，就要常作准备，以温柔敬畏的心回答各人。
But give honour to Christ in your hearts as your Lord; and be ready at any time when you are questioned about the hope which is in you, to give an answer in the fear of the Lord and without pride;

存着无亏的良心，叫你们在何事上被毁谤，就在何事上，可以叫那诬赖你们在基督里有好品行的人，自觉羞愧。
Being conscious that you have done no wrong; so that those who say evil things about your good way of life as Christians may be put to shame.

神的旨意若是叫你们因行善受苦，总强如因行恶受苦。
Because if it is God's purpose for you to undergo pain, it is better to do so for well-doing than for evil-doing.

因基督也曾一次为罪受苦（受苦有古卷作受死），就是义的代替不义的，为要引我们到神面前。按着肉体说他被治死。按着灵性说他复活了。
Because Christ once went through pain for sins, the upright one taking the place of sinners, so that through him we might come back to God; being put to death in the flesh, but given life in the Spirit;

他借这灵，曾去传道给那些在监狱里的灵听。
By whom he went to the spirits in prison, preaching to those

就是那从前在挪亚预备方舟，神容忍等待的时候，不信从的人。当时进入方舟，借着水得救的不多，只有八个人。
Who, in the days of Noah, went against God's orders; but God in his mercy kept back the punishment, while Noah got ready the ark, in which a small number, that is to say eight persons, got salvation through water:

这水所表明的洗礼，现在借着耶稣基督复活。也拯救你们。这洗礼本不在乎除掉肉体的污秽，只求在神面前有无亏的良心。
And baptism, of which this is an image, now gives you salvation, not by washing clean the flesh, but by making you free from the sense of sin before God, through the coming again of Jesus Christ from the dead;

耶稣已经进入天堂，在神的右边。众天使和有权柄的，并有能力的，都服从了他。
Who has gone into heaven, and is at the right hand of God, angels and authorities and powers having been put under his rule.

基督既在肉身受苦，你们也当将这样的心志作为兵器。因为在肉身受过苦的，就已经与罪断绝了。
So that as Jesus was put to death in the flesh, do you yourselves be of the same mind; for the death of the flesh puts an end to sin;

你们存这样的心，从今以后，就可以不从人的情欲，只从神的旨意，在世度余下的光阴。
So that you may give the rest of your lives in the flesh, not to the desires of men, but to the purpose of God.

因为往日随从外邦人的心意，行邪淫，恶欲，醉酒，荒宴，群饮，并可恶拜偶像的事，时候已经够了。
Because for long enough, in times past, we have been living after the way of the Gentiles, given up to the desires of the flesh, to drinking and feasting and loose behaviour and unclean worship of images;

他们在这些事上，见你们不与他们同奔那放荡无度的路，就以为怪毁谤你们。
And they are wondering that you no longer go with them in this violent wasting of life, and are saying evil things of you:

他们必在那将要审判活人死人的主面前交账。
But they will have to give an account of themselves to him who is ready to be the judge of the living and the dead.

为此，就是死人也曾有福音传给他们，要叫他们的肉体按着人受审判，他们的灵性却靠神活着。
For this was the reason why the good news of Jesus was given even to the dead, so that they might be judged as men in the flesh, but might be living before God in the spirit.

万物的结局近了。所以你们要谨慎自守，儆醒祷告。
But the end of all things is near: so be serious in your behaviour and keep on the watch with prayer;

最要紧的是彼此切实相爱。因为爱能遮掩许多的罪。
And most of all be warm in your love for one another; because in love there is forgiveness for sins without number:

你们要互相款待，不发怨言。
Keep open house for all with a glad heart;

各人要照所得的恩赐彼此服事，作神百般恩赐的好管家。
Making distribution among one another of whatever has been given to you, like true servants of the unmeasured grace of God;

若有讲道的，要按着神的圣言讲。若有服事人的，要按着神所赐的力量服事。叫神在凡事上因耶稣基督得荣耀。原来荣耀权能都是他的，直到永永远远。阿们。
If anyone has anything to say, let it be as the words of God; if anyone has the desire to be the servant of others, let him do it in the strength which is given by God; so that in all things God may have the glory through Jesus Christ, whose are the glory and the power for ever.

亲爱的弟兄阿，有火炼的试验临到你们，不要以为奇怪，（似乎是遭遇非常的事）
Dear brothers, do not be surprised, as if it was something strange, if your faith is tested as by fire:

倒要欢喜。因为你们是与基督一同受苦，使你们在他荣耀显现的时候，也可以欢喜快乐。
But be glad that you are given a part in the pains of Christ; so that at the revelation of his glory you may have great joy.

你们若为基督的名受辱骂，便是有福的。因为神荣耀的灵，常住在你们身上。
If men say evil things of you because of the name of Christ, happy are you; for the Spirit of glory and of God is resting on you.

你们中间却不可有人，因为杀人，偷窃，作恶，好管闲事而受苦。
Let no one among you undergo punishment as a taker of life, or as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as one who is over-interested in other men's business;

若为作基督徒受苦，却不要羞耻。倒要因这名归荣耀给神。
But if he undergoes punishment as a Christian, that is no shame to him; let him give glory to God in this name.

因为时候到了，审判要从神的家起首。若是先从我们起首，那不信从神福音的人，将有何等的结局呢？
For the time has come for the judging, starting with the church of God; but if it makes a start with us, what will be the end of those who are not under the rule of God?

若是义人仅仅得救，那不虔敬和犯罪的人，将有何地可站呢？
And if it is hard for even the good man to get salvation, what chance has the man without religion or the sinner?

所以那照神旨意受苦的人，要一心为善，将自己灵魂交与那信实的造化之主。
For this reason let those who by the purpose of God undergo punishment, keep on in well-doing and put their souls into the safe hands of their Maker.

我这作长老，作基督受苦的见证，同享后来所要显现之荣耀的，劝你们中间与我同作长老的人。
I who am myself one of the rulers of the church, and a witness of the death of Christ, having my part in the coming glory, send this serious request to the chief men among you:

务要牧养在你们中间神的群羊，按着神旨意照管他们。不是出于勉强，乃是出于甘心。也不是因为贪财，乃是出于乐意。
Keep watch over the flock of God which is in your care, using your authority, not as forced to do so, but gladly; and not for unclean profit but with a ready mind;

也不是辖制所托付你们的，乃是作群羊的榜样。
Not as lords over God's heritage, but making yourselves examples to the flock.

到了牧长显现的时候，你们必得那永不衰残的荣耀冠冕。
And at the coming of the chief Keeper of the sheep, you will be given the eternal crown of glory.

你们年幼的，也要顺服年长的。就是你们众人，也都要以谦卑束腰，彼此顺服。因为神阻挡骄傲的人，赐恩给谦卑的人。
And in the same way, let the younger men be ruled by the older ones. Let all of you put away pride and make yourselves ready to be servants: for God is a hater of pride, but he gives grace to those who make themselves low.

所以你们要自卑，服在神大能的手下，到了时候他必叫你们升高。
For this cause make yourselves low under the strong hand of God, so that when the time comes you may be lifted up;

你们要将一切的忧虑卸给神，因为他顾念你们。
Putting all your troubles on him, for he takes care of you.

务要谨守，儆醒。因为你们的仇敌魔鬼，如同吼叫的狮子，遍地游行，寻找可吞吃的人。
Be serious and keep watch; the Evil One, who is against you, goes about like a lion with open mouth in search of food;

你们要用坚固的信心抵挡他，因为知道你们在世上的众弟兄，也是经历这样的苦难。
Do not give way to him but be strong in your faith, in the knowledge that your brothers who are in the world undergo the same troubles.

那赐诸般恩典的神，曾在基督里召你们，得享他永远的荣耀，等你们暂受苦难之后，必要亲自成全你们，坚固你们，赐力量给你们。
And after you have undergone pain for a little time, the God of all grace who has given you a part in his eternal glory through Christ Jesus, will himself give you strength and support, and make you complete in every good thing;

愿权能归给他，直到永永远远。阿们。
His is the power for ever. So be it.

我略略地写了这信，托我所看为忠心的兄弟西拉转交你们，劝勉你们，又证明这恩是神的真恩。你们务要在这恩上站立得住。
I have sent you this short letter by Silvanus, a true brother, in my opinion; comforting you and witnessing that this is the true grace of God; keep to it.

在巴比伦与你们同蒙拣选的教会问你们安。我儿子马可也问你们安。
She who is in Babylon, who has a part with you in the purpose of God, sends you her love; and so does my son Mark.

你们要用爱心彼此亲嘴问安。愿平安归与你们凡在基督里的人。
Give one another the kiss of love. Peace be to you all in Christ.

