彼得后书 Peter


作耶稣基督仆人和使徒的西门彼得，写信给那因我们的神，和（有古卷无和字）救主耶稣基督之义，与我们同得一样宝贵信心的人。
Simon Peter, a servant and Apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who with us have a part in the same holy faith in the righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:

愿恩惠平安，因你们认识神和我们主耶稣，多多地加给你们。
May grace and peace ever be increasing in you, in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord;

神的神能已将一切关乎生命和虔敬的事赐给我们，皆因我们认识那用自己荣耀和美德召我们的主。
Because by his power he has given us everything necessary for life and righteousness, through the knowledge of him who has been our guide by his glory and virtue;

因此他已将又宝贵又极大的应许赐给我们，叫我们既脱离世上从情欲来的败坏，就得与神的性情有分。
And through this he has given us the hope of great rewards highly to be valued; so that by them we might have our part in God's being, and be made free from the destruction which is in the world through the desires of the flesh.

正因这缘故，你们要分外地殷勤。有了信心，又要加上德行。有了德行，又要加上知识。
So, for this very cause, take every care; joining virtue to faith, and knowledge to virtue,

有了知识，又要加上节制。有了节制，又要加上忍耐。有了忍耐，又要加上虔敬。
And self-control to knowledge, and a quiet mind to self-control, and fear of God to a quiet mind,

有了虔敬，又要加上爱弟兄的心。有了爱弟兄的心，又要加上爱众人的心
And love of the brothers to fear of God, and to love of the brothers, love itself.

你们若充充足足地有这几样，就必使你们在认识我们的主耶稣基督上，不至于闲懒不结果子了。
For if you have these things in good measure, they will make you fertile and full of fruit in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

人若没有这几样，就是眼瞎，只看见近处的，忘了他旧日的罪已经得了洁净。
For the man who has not these things is blind, seeing only what is near, having no memory of how he was made clean from his old sins.

所以弟兄们，应当更加殷勤，使你们所蒙的恩召和拣选坚定不移。你们若行这几样，就永不失脚。
For this reason, my brothers, take all the more care to make your selection and approval certain; for if you do these things you will never have a fall:

这样，必叫你们丰丰富富地，得以进入我们主救主耶稣基督永远的国。
For so the way will be open to you into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

你们虽然晓得这些事，并且在你们已有的真道上坚固，我却要将这些事常常提醒你们。
For this reason I will be ready at all times to keep your memory of these things awake, though you have the knowledge of them now and are well based in your present faith.

我以为应当趁我还在这帐棚的时候提醒你们，激发你们。
And it seems right to me, as long as I am in this tent of flesh, to keep your minds awake by working on your memory;

因为知道我脱离这帐棚的时候快到了，正如我们主耶稣基督所指示我的。
For I am conscious that in a short time I will have to put off this tent of flesh, as our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.

并且我要尽心竭力，使你们在我去世以后，时常记念这些事。
And I will take every care so that you may have a clear memory of these things after my death.

我们从前，将我们主耶稣基督的大能，和他降临的事，告诉你们，并不是随从乖巧捏造的虚言，乃是亲眼见过他的威荣。
For when we gave you news of the power and the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, our teaching was not based on stories put together by art, but we were eye-witnesses of his glory.

他从父神得尊贵荣耀的时候，从极大荣光之中，有声音出来向他说，这是我的爱子，我所喜悦的。
For God the Father gave him honour and glory, when such a voice came to him out of the great glory, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

我们同他在圣山的时候，亲自听见这声音从天上出来。
And this voice came from heaven even to our ears, when we were with him on the holy mountain.

我们并有先知更确的预言，如同灯照在暗处。你们在这预言上留意，直等到天发亮晨星在你们心里出现的时候，才是好的。
And so the words of the prophets are made more certain; and it is well for you to give attention to them as to a light shining in a dark place, till the dawn comes and the morning star is seen in your hearts;

第一要紧的，该知道经上所有的预言，没有可随私意解说的。
Being conscious in the first place that no man by himself may give a special sense to the words of the prophets.

因为预言从来没有出于人意的，乃是人被圣灵感动说出神的话来。
For these words did not ever come through the impulse of men: but the prophets had them from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit.

从前在百姓中有假先知起来，将来在你们中间，也必有假师傅，私自引进陷害人的异端，连买他们的主他们也不承认，自取速速地灭亡。
But there were false prophets among the people, as there will be false teachers among you, who will secretly put forward wrong teachings for your destruction, even turning away from the Lord who gave himself for them; whose destruction will come quickly, and they themselves will be the cause of it.

将有许多人随从他们邪淫的行为，便叫真道，因他们的缘故被毁谤。
And a great number will go with them in their evil ways, through whom the true way will have a bad name.

他们因有贪心，要用捏造的言语，在你们身上取利。他们的刑罚，自古以来并不迟延，他们的灭亡也必速速来到（原文作也不打盹）。
And in their desire for profit they will come to you with words of deceit, like traders doing business in souls: whose punishment has been ready for a long time and their destruction is watching for them.

就是天使犯了罪，神也没有宽容，曾把他们丢在地狱，交在黑暗坑中，等候审判。
For if God did not have pity for the angels who did evil, but sent them down into hell, to be kept in chains of eternal night till they were judged;

神也没有宽容上古的世代，曾叫洪水临到那不敬虔的世代，却保护了传义道的挪亚一家八口。
And did not have mercy on the world which then was, but only kept safe Noah, a preacher of righteousness, with seven others, when he let loose the waters over the world of the evil-doers;

又判定所多玛，蛾摩拉，将二城倾覆，焚烧成灰，作为后世不敬虔人的鉴戒。
And sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah, burning them up with fire as an example to those whose way of life might in the future be unpleasing to him;

只搭救了那常为恶人淫行忧伤的义人罗得。
And kept safe Lot, the upright man, who was deeply troubled by the unclean life of the evil-doers

因为那义人住在他们中间，看见听见他们不法的事，他的义心就天天伤痛。
(Because the soul of that upright man living among them was pained from day to day by seeing and hearing their crimes):

主知道搭救敬虔的人脱离试探，把不义的人留在刑罚之下，等候审判的日子。
The Lord is able to keep the upright safe in the time of testing, and to keep evil-doers under punishment till the day of judging;

那些随肉身，纵污秽的情欲，轻慢主治之人的，更是如此。他们胆大任性，毁谤在尊位的也不知惧怕。
But specially those who go after the unclean desires of the flesh, and make sport of authority. Ready to take chances, uncontrolled, they have no fear of saying evil of those in high places:

就是天使，虽然力量权能更大，还不用毁谤的话在主面前告他们。
Though the angels, who are greater in strength and power, do not make use of violent language against them before the Lord.

但这些人好像没有灵性，生来就是畜类，以备捉拿宰杀的。他们毁谤所不晓得的事，正在败坏人的时候，自己必遭遇败坏。
But these men, like beasts without reason, whose natural use is to be taken and put to death, crying out against things of which they have no knowledge, will undergo that same destruction which they are designing for others;

行的不义，就得了不义的工价。这些人喜爱白昼宴乐，他们已被玷污，又有瑕疵，正与你们一同坐席，就以自己的诡诈为快乐。
For the evil which overtakes them is the reward of their evil-doing: such men take their pleasure in the delights of the flesh even in the daytime; they are like the marks of a disease, like poisoned wounds among you, feasting together with you in joy;

他们满眼是淫色（淫色原文作淫妇），止不住犯罪。引诱那心不坚固的人，心中习惯了贪婪，正是被咒诅的种类。
Having eyes full of evil desire, never having enough of sin; turning feeble souls out of the true way; they are children of cursing, whose hearts are well used to bitter envy;

他们离弃正路，就走差了，随从比珥之子巴兰的路，巴兰就是那贪爱不义之工价的先知。
Turning out of the true way, they have gone wandering in error, after the way of Balaam, the son of Beor, who was pleased to take payment for wrongdoing;

他却为自己的过犯受了责备。那不能说话的驴，以人言拦阻先知的狂妄。
But his wrongdoing was pointed out to him: an ass, talking with a man's voice, put a stop to the error of the prophet.

这些人是无水的井，是狂风催逼的雾气，有墨黑的幽暗为他们存留。
These are fountains without water, and mists before a driving storm; for whom the eternal night is kept in store.

他们说虚妄矜夸的大话，用肉身的情欲，和邪淫的事，引诱那些刚才脱离妄行的人。
For with high-sounding false words, making use of the attraction of unclean desires of the flesh, they get into their power those newly made free from those who are living in error;

他们应许人得以自由，自己却作败坏的奴仆。因为人被谁制伏就是谁的奴仆。
Saying that they will be free, while they themselves are the servants of destruction; because whatever gets the better of a man makes a servant of him.

倘若他们因认识主救主耶稣基督，得以脱离世上的污秽，后来又在其中被缠住制伏，他们末后的景况，就比先前更不好了。
For if, after they have got free from the unclean things of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again taken in the net and overcome, their last condition is worse than their first.

他们晓得义路，竟背弃了传给他们的圣命，倒不如不晓得为妙。
For it would have been better for them to have had no knowledge of the way of righteousness, than to go back again from the holy law which was given to them, after having knowledge of it.

俗语说得真不错，狗所吐的，它转过来又吃。猪洗净了，又回到泥里去滚。这话在他们身上正合式。
They are an example of that true saying, The dog has gone back to the food it had put out, and the pig which had been washed to its rolling in the dirty earth.

亲爱的弟兄啊，我现在写给你们的是第二封信。这两封都是提醒你们，激发你们诚实的心。
My loved ones, this is now my second letter to you, and in this as in the first, I am attempting to keep your true minds awake;

叫你们记念圣先知预先所说的话，和主救主的命令，就是使徒所传给你们的。
So that you may keep in mind the words of the holy prophets in the past, and the law of the Lord and Saviour which was given to you by his Apostles.

第一要紧的，该知道在末世必有好讥诮的人，随从自己的私欲出来讥诮说，
Having first of all the knowledge that in the last days there will be men who, ruled by their evil desires, will make sport of holy things,

主要降临的应许在哪里呢？因为从列祖睡了以来，万物与起初创造的时候仍是一样。
Saying, Where is the hope of his coming? From the death of the fathers till now everything has gone on as it was from the making of the world.

他们故意忘记，从太古凭神的命有了天，并从水而出借水而成的地。
But in taking this view they put out of their minds the memory that in the old days there was a heaven, and an earth lifted out of the water and circled by water, by the word of God;

故此，当时的世界被水淹没就消灭了。
And that the world which then was came to an end through the overflowing of the waters.

但现在的天地，还是凭着那命存留，直留到不敬虔之人受审判遭沉沦的日子，用火焚烧。
But the present heaven and the present earth have been kept for destruction by fire, which is waiting for them on the day of the judging and destruction of evil men.

亲爱的弟兄啊，有一件事你们不可忘记，就是主看一日如千年，千年如一日。
But, my loved ones, keep in mind this one thing, that with the Lord one day is the same as a thousand years, and a thousand years are no more than one day.

主所应许的尚未成就，有人以为他是耽延，其实不是耽延，乃是宽容你们，不愿有一人沉沦，乃愿人人都悔改。
The Lord is not slow in keeping his word, as he seems to some, but he is waiting in mercy for you, not desiring the destruction of any, but that all may be turned from their evil ways.

但主的日子要像贼来到一样。那日天必大有响声废去，有形质的都要被烈火销化。地和其上的物都要烧尽了。
But the day of the Lord will come like a thief; and in that day the heavens will be rolled up with a great noise, and the substance of the earth will be changed by violent heat, and the world and everything in it will be burned up.

这一切既然都要如此销化，你们为人该当怎样圣洁，怎样敬虔，
Seeing then that all these things are coming to such an end, what sort of persons is it right for you to be, in all holy behaviour and righteousness,

切切仰望神的日子来到。在那日天被火烧就销化了，有形质的都要被烈火熔化。
Looking for and truly desiring the coming of the day of God, when the heavens will come to an end through fire, and the substance of the earth will be changed by the great heat?

但我们照他的应许，盼望新天新地，有义居在其中。
But having faith in his word, we are looking for a new heaven and a new earth, which will be the resting-place of righteousness.

亲爱的弟兄啊，你们既盼望这些事，就当殷勤，使自己没有玷污，无可指摘，安然见主。
For this reason, my loved ones, as you are looking for these things, take great care that when he comes you may be in peace before him, free from sin and every evil thing.

并且要以我主长久忍耐为得救的因由，就如我们所亲爱的兄弟保罗，照着所赐给他的智慧，写了信给你们。
And be certain that the long waiting of the Lord is for salvation; even as our brother Paul has said in his letters to you, from the wisdom which was given to him;

他一切的信上，也都是讲论这事。信中有些难明白的，那无学问不坚固的人强解，如强解别的经书一样，就自取沉沦。
And as he said in all his letters, which had to do with these things; in which are some hard sayings, so that, like the rest of the holy Writings, they are twisted by those who are uncertain and without knowledge, to the destruction of their souls.

亲爱的弟兄啊，你们既然预先知道这事，就当防备，恐怕被恶人的错谬诱惑，就从自己坚固的地步上坠落。
For this reason, my loved ones, having knowledge of these things before they take place, take care that you are not turned away by the error of the uncontrolled, so falling from your true faith.

你们却要在我们主救主耶稣基督的恩典和知识上有长进。愿荣耀归给他，从今直到永远。阿们。
But be increased in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. May he have glory now and for ever. So be it.

