提多书 Titus


神的仆人，耶稣基督的使徒保罗，凭着神选民的信心，与敬虔真理的知识，
Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, in agreement with the faith of the saints of God and the full knowledge of what is true in harmony with religion,

盼望那无谎言的神在万古之先所应许的永生，
In the hope of eternal life, which was made certain before eternal time, by the word of God who is ever true;

到了日期，借着传扬的工夫，把他的道显明了。这传扬的责任，是按着神我们救主的命令交托了我。
Who, in his time, made clear his word in the good news, of which, by the order of God our Saviour, I became a preacher;

现在写信给提多，就是照着我们共信之道作我真儿子的。愿恩惠平安，从父神和我们的救主基督耶稣归与你。
To Titus, my true child in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour.

我从前留你在革哩底，是要你将那没有办完的事都办整齐了，又照我所吩咐你的，在各城设立长老。
I did not take you with me when I went away from Crete, so that you might do what was necessary to put things in order there, placing men in authority over the churches in every town, as I said to you;

若有无可指责的人，只作一个妇人的丈夫，儿女也是信主的，没有人告他们是放荡不服约束的，就可以设立。
Men having a good record, husbands of one wife, whose children are of the faith, children of whom it may not be said that they are given to loose living or are uncontrolled.

监督既是神的管家，必须无可指责，不任性，不暴躁，不因酒滋事，不打人，不贪无义之财，
For it is necessary for a Bishop to be a man of virtue, as God's servant; not pushing himself forward, not quickly moved to wrath or blows, not desiring profit for himself;

乐意接待远人，好善，庄重，公平，圣洁，自持。
But opening his house freely to guests; a lover of what is good, serious-minded, upright, holy, self-controlled;

坚守所教真实的道理，就能将纯正的教训劝化人。又能把争辩的人驳倒了。
Keeping to the true word of the teaching, so that he may be able to give comfort by right teaching and overcome the arguments of the doubters.

因为有许多人不服约束，说虚空话，欺哄人。那奉割礼的，更是这样。
For there are men who are not ruled by law; foolish talkers, false teachers, specially those of the circumcision,

这些人的口总要堵住。他们因贪不义之财，将不该教导的教导人，败坏人的全家。
By whom some families have been completely overturned; who take money for teaching things which are not right; these will have to be stopped.

有革哩底人中的一个本地先知说，革哩底人常说谎话，乃是恶兽，又馋又懒。
One of their prophets has said, The men of Crete are ever false, evil beasts, lovers of food, hating work.

这个见证是真的。所以你要严严地责备他们，使他们在真道上纯全无疵。
This witness is true. So say sharp words to them so that they may come to the right faith,

不听犹太人荒渺的言语，和离弃真道之人的诫命。
Giving no attention to the fictions of the Jews and the rules of men who have no true knowledge.

在洁净的人，凡物都洁净。在污秽不信的人，什么都不洁净。连心地和天良，也都污秽了。
To the clean in heart all things are clean: but to those who are unclean and without faith nothing is clean; they become unclean in mind and in thought.

他们说是认识神行事却和他相背。本是可憎恶的，是悖逆的，在各样善事上是可废弃的。
They say that they have knowledge of God, while by their acts they are turning their backs on him; they are hated by all, hard-hearted, and judged to be without value for any good work.

但你所讲的，总要合乎那纯正的道理。
But let your words be in agreement with true and right teaching:

劝老年人，要有节制，端庄，自守，在信心爱心忍耐上，都要纯全无疵。
That old men are to be simple in their tastes, serious, wise, true in faith, in love, and of a quiet mind.

又劝老年妇人，举止行动要恭敬，不说谗言，不给酒作奴仆，用善道教训人。
That old women are to be self-respecting in behaviour, not saying evil of others, not given to taking much wine, teachers of that which is good,

好指教少年妇人，爱丈夫，爱儿女，
Training the younger women to have love for their husbands and children,

谨守贞洁，料理家务，待人有恩，顺服自己的丈夫，免得神的道理被毁谤。
To be wise in mind, clean in heart, kind; working in their houses, living under the authority of their husbands; so that no evil may be said of the word of God.

又劝少年人要谨守。
To the young men give orders to be wise and serious-minded:

你自己凡事要显出善行的榜样，在教训上要正直，端庄，
In all things see that you are an example of good works; holy in your teaching, serious in behaviour,

言语纯全，无可指责，叫那反对的人，既无处可说我们的不是，便自觉羞愧。
Saying true and right words, against which no protest may be made, so that he who is not on our side may be put to shame, unable to say any evil of us.

劝仆人要顺服自己的主人，凡事讨他的喜欢。不可顶撞他。
Servants are to be under the authority of their masters, pleasing them in all things, without argument;

不可私拿东西。要显为忠诚，以致凡事尊荣我们救主神的道。
Not taking what is not theirs, but giving clear signs of their good faith, in all things doing credit to the teaching of God our Saviour.

因为神救众人的恩典，已经显明出来，
For the grace of God has come, giving salvation to all men,

教训我们除去不敬虔的心，和世俗的情欲，在今世自守，公义，敬虔度日。
Training us so that, turning away from evil and the desires of this world, we may be living wisely and uprightly in the knowledge of God in this present life;

等候所盼望的福，并等候至大的神，和（或作无和字）我们救主耶稣基督的荣耀显现。
Looking for the glad hope, the revelation of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ;

他为我们舍了自己，要赎我们脱离一切罪恶，又洁净我们，特作自己的子民，热心为善。
Who gave himself for us, so that he might make us free from all wrongdoing, and make for himself a people clean in heart and on fire with good works.

这些事你要讲明，劝戒人，用各等权柄责备人。不可叫人轻看你。
On all these points give teaching and help, and make clear what is right with all authority. Let all men give you honour.

你要提醒众人，叫他们顺服作官的，掌权的，遵他的命，预备行各样的善事。
Make clear to them that they are to put themselves under rulers and authorities, to do what they are ordered, to be ready for every good work,

不要毁谤，不要争竞，总要和平，向众人大显温柔。
To say no evil of any man, not to be fighters, to give way to others, to be gentle in behaviour to all men.

我们从前也是无知，悖逆，受迷惑，服事各样私欲和宴乐，常存恶毒（或作阴毒）嫉妒的心，是可恨的，又是彼此相恨。
For in the past we were foolish, hard in heart, turned from the true way, servants of evil desires and pleasures, living in bad feeling and envy, hated and hating one another.

但到了神我们救主的恩慈，和他向人所施的慈爱显明的时候，
But when the mercy of God our Saviour, and his love to man was seen,

他便救了我们，并不是因我们自己所行的义，乃是照他的怜悯，借着重生的洗，和圣灵的更新。
Not by works of righteousness which we did ourselves, but in the measure of his mercy, he gave us salvation, through the washing of the new birth and the giving of new life in the Holy Spirit,

圣灵就是神借着耶稣基督我们救主，厚厚浇灌在我们身上的。
Which he gave us freely through Jesus Christ our Saviour;

好叫我们因他的恩得称为义，可以凭着永生的盼望成为后嗣。（或作可以凭着盼望承受永生）。
So that, having been given righteousness through grace, we might have a part in the heritage, the hope of eternal life.

这话是可信的，我也愿你把这些事，切切实实的讲明，使那些已信神的人，留心作正经事业。（或作留心行善）这都是美事，并且与人有益。
This is a true saying; and it is my desire that you may give certain witness about these things, so that those who have had faith in God may give attention to good works. These things are good and of profit to men;

要远避无知的辩论，和家谱的空谈，以及分争，并因律法而起的争竞。因为这都是虚妄无益的。
But have nothing to do with foolish questionings, and lists of generations, and fights and arguments about the law; for they are of no profit and foolish.

分门结党的人，警戒过一两次，就要弃绝他。
A man whose opinions are not those of the church, after a first and second protest, is to be kept out of your society;

因为知道这等人已经背道，犯了罪，自己明知不是，还是去作。
Clearly he is in error and a sinner, being self-judged.

我打发亚提马，或是推基古，到你那里去的时候，你要赶紧往尼哥波立去见我。因为我已经定意在那里过冬。
When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis: for it is my purpose to be there for the winter.

你要赶紧给律师西纳，和亚波罗送行，叫他们没有缺乏。
Send Zenas, the man of law, and Apollos on their journey with all care, so that they may be in need of nothing.

并且我们的人要学习正经事业，（或作要学习行善）预备所需用的，免得不结果子。
And let our people go on with good works for necessary purposes, so that they may not be without fruit.

同我在一处的人都问你安。请代问那些因有信心爱我们的人安。愿恩惠常与你们众人同在。
All who are with me send you their love. Give our love to our friends in the faith. Grace be with you all.

