提摩太后书 Timothy


奉神旨意，照着在基督耶稣里生命的应许，作基督耶稣使徒的保罗，
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the purpose of God, in the hope of the life which is in Christ Jesus,

写信给我亲爱的儿子提摩太。愿恩惠怜悯平安，从父神和我们主基督耶稣，归与你。
To Timothy, my well-loved child: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

我感谢神，就是我接续祖先，用清洁的良心所事奉的神，祈祷的时候，不住地想念你，
I give praise to God, whose servant I have been, with a heart free from sin, from the time of my fathers, because in my prayers at all times the thought of you is with me, night and day

记念你的眼泪，昼夜切切地想要见你，好叫我满心快乐。
Desiring to see you, keeping in my memory your weeping, so that I may be full of joy;

想到你心里无伪之信。这信是先在你外祖母罗以，和你母亲友尼基心里的。我深信也在你的心里。
Having in mind your true faith, which first was in your mother's mother Lois, and in your mother Eunice, and, I am certain, is now in you.

为此我提醒你，使你将神借我按手所给你的恩赐，再如火挑旺起来。
For this reason I say to you, Let that grace of God which is in you, given to you by my hands, have living power.

因为神赐给我们，不是胆怯的心，乃是刚强，仁爱，谨守的心。
For God did not give us a spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of self-control.

你不要以给我们的主作见证为耻，也不要以我这为主被囚的为耻。总要按神的能力，与我为福音同受苦难。
Have no feeling of shame, then, for the witness of our Lord or for me, his prisoner: but undergo all things for the good news in the measure of the power of God;

神救了我们，以圣召召我们，不是按我们的行为，乃是按他的旨意，和恩典。这恩典是万古之先，在基督耶稣里赐给我们的。
Who gave us salvation, marking us out for his purpose, not on account of our works, but in the measure of his purpose and his grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,

但如今借着我们救主基督耶稣的显现，才表明出来了。他已经把死废去，借着福音，将不能坏的生命彰显出来。
But has now been made clear by the revelation of our Saviour Christ Jesus, who put an end to death and made life unending come to light through the good news,

我为这福音奉派作传道的，作使徒，作师傅。
Of which I was made a preacher and an Apostle and a teacher;

为这缘故，我也受这些苦难。然而我不以为耻。因为知道我所信的是谁，也深信他能保全我所交付他的，（或作他所交托我的）直到那日。
And for which I undergo these things: but I have no feeling of shame. For I have knowledge of him in whom I have faith, and I am certain that he is able to keep that which I have given into his care till that day.

你从我听的那纯正话语的规模，要用在基督耶稣里的信心和爱心，常常守着。
Keep the form of those true words which you had from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

从前所交托你的善道，你要靠着那住在我们里面的圣灵，牢牢的守着。
That good thing which was given to you keep safe, through the Holy Spirit which is in us.

凡在亚西亚的人都离弃我，这是你知道的。其中有腓吉路和黑摩其尼。
You have had news that all those in Asia went away from me; among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes:

愿主怜悯阿尼色弗一家的人。因他屡次使我畅快，不以我的锁链为耻。
May the Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus because he frequently gave me help, and had no feeling of shame because I was in chains;

反倒在罗马的时候，殷勤的找我，并且找着了。
But when he was in Rome, he went in search of me everywhere, and came to me

愿主使他在那日得主的怜悯。他在以弗所怎样多多地服事我，是你明明知道的。
(May he have the Lord's mercy in that day); and of all he did for me at Ephesus you have full knowledge.

我儿阿，你要在基督耶稣的恩典上刚强起来。
So then, my child, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus.

你在许多见证人面前听见我所教训的，也要交托那忠心能教导别人的人。
And the things which I have said to you before a number of witnesses, give to those of the faith, so that they may be teachers of others.

你要和我同受苦难，好像基督耶稣的精兵。
Be ready to do without the comforts of life, as one of the army of Christ Jesus.

凡在军中当兵的，不将世务缠身，好叫那招他当兵的人喜悦。
A fighting man, when he is with the army, keeps himself free from the business of this life so that he may be pleasing to him who has taken him into his army.

人若在场上比武，非按规矩，就不能得冠冕。
And if a man takes part in a competition he does not get the crown if he has not kept the rules.

劳力的农夫，理当先得粮食。
It is right for the worker in the fields to be the first to take of the fruit.

我所说的话你要思想。因为凡事主必给你聪明。
Give thought to what I say; for the Lord will give you wisdom in all things.

你要记念耶稣基督乃是大卫的后裔。他从死里复活，正合乎我所传的福音。
Keep in mind Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, who came back from the dead, as my good news gives witness:

我为这福音受苦难，甚至被捆绑，像犯人一样。然而神的道，却不被捆绑。
In which I put up with the hardest conditions, even prison chains, like one who has done a crime; but the word of God is not in chains.

所以我为选民凡事忍耐，叫他们也可以得着那在基督耶稣里的救恩，和永远的荣耀。
But I undergo all things for the saints, so that they may have salvation in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

有可信的话说，我们若与基督同死，也必与他同活。
This is a true saying: If we undergo death with him, then will we be living with him:

我们若能忍耐，也必和他一同作王。我们若不认他，他也必不认我们。
If we go on to the end, then we will be ruling with him: if we say we have no knowledge of him, then he will say he has no knowledge of us:

我们纵然失信，他仍是可信的。因为他不能背乎自己。
If we are without faith, still he keeps faith, for he will never be untrue to himself.

你要使众人回想这些事，在主面前嘱咐他们，不可为言语争辩。这是没有益处的，只能败坏听见的人。
Put these things before them, giving them orders in the name of the Lord to keep themselves from fighting about words, which is of no profit, only causing error in their hearers.

你当竭力，在神面前得蒙喜悦，作无愧的工人，按着正意分解真理的道。
Let it be your care to get the approval of God, as a workman who has no cause for shame, giving the true word in the right way.

但要远避世俗的虚谈。因为这等人必进到更不敬虔的地步。
But take no part in wrong and foolish talk, for those who do so will go farther into evil,

他们的话如同毒疮，越烂越大。其中有许米乃和腓理徒。
And their words will be like poisoned wounds in the flesh: such are Hymenaeus and Philetus;

他们偏离了真道，说复活的事已过，就败坏好些人的信心。
Men whose ideas are all false, who say that the coming back from the dead has even now taken place, overturning the faith of some.

然而神坚固的根基立住了。上面有这印记说，主认识谁是他的人。又说，凡称呼主名的人，总要离开不义。
But God's strong base is unchanging, having this sign, The Lord has knowledge of those who are his: and, Let everyone by whom the name of the Lord is named be turned away from evil.

在大户人家，不但有金器银器，也有木器瓦器。有作为贵重的，有作为卑贱的。
Now in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but others of wood and earth, and some which are honoured and some without honour.

人若自洁，脱离卑贱的事，就必作贵重的器皿，成为圣洁，合乎主用，预备行各样的善事。
If a man makes himself clean from these, he will be a vessel for honour, made holy, ready for the master's use, ready for every good work.

你要逃避少年的私欲，同那清心祷告主的人追求公义，信德，仁爱，和平。
But keep yourself from those desires of the flesh which are strong when the body is young, and go after righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those whose prayers go up to the Lord from a clean heart.

惟有那愚拙无学问的辩论，总要弃绝。因为知道这等事是起争竞的。
And put away foolish and uncontrolled questionings, seeing that they are a cause of trouble.

然而主的仆人不可争竞，只要温温和和的待众人，善于教导，存心忍耐，
For it is not right for the Lord's servant to make trouble, but he is to be gentle to all, ready in teaching, putting up with wrong,

用温柔劝戒那抵挡的人。或者神给他们悔改的心，可以明白真道。
Gently guiding those who go against the teaching; if by chance God may give them a change of heart and true knowledge,

叫他们这已经被魔鬼任意掳去的，可以醒悟，脱离他的网罗。
And so they may get themselves free from the net of the Evil One, being made the prisoners of the Lord's servant, for the purpose of God.

你该知道，末世必有危险的日子来到。
But be certain of this, that in the last days times of trouble will come.

因为那时人要专顾自己，贪爱钱财，自夸，狂傲，谤？？，违背父母，忘恩负义，心不圣洁，
For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, uplifted in pride, given to bitter words, going against the authority of their fathers, never giving praise, having no religion,

无亲情，不解怨，好说谗言，不能自约，性情凶暴，不爱良善，
Without natural love, bitter haters, saying evil of others, violent and uncontrolled, hating all good,

卖主卖友，任意妄为，自高自大，爱宴乐不爱神。
False to their friends, acting without thought, lifted up in mind, loving pleasure more than God;

有敬虔的外貌，却背了敬虔的实意。这等人你要躲开。
Having a form of religion, but turning their backs on the power of it: go not with these.

那偷进人家，牢笼无知妇女的，正是这等人。这些妇女担负罪恶，被各样的私欲引诱。
For these are they who go secretly into houses, making prisoners of foolish women, weighted down with sin, turned from the way by their evil desires,

常常学习，终久不能明白真道。
Ever learning, and never coming to the knowledge of what is true.

从前雅尼和佯庇怎样敌挡摩西，这等人也怎样敌挡真道。他们的心地坏了，在真道上是可废弃的。
And as James and Jambres went against Moses, so do these go against what is true: men of evil minds, who, tested by faith, are seen to be false.

然而他们不能再这样敌挡，因为他们的愚昧，必在众人面前显露出来，像那二人一样。
But they will go no farther: for their foolish behaviour will be clear to all men, as theirs was in the end.

但你已经服从了我的教训，品行，志向，信心，宽容，爱心，忍耐，
But you took as your example my teaching, behaviour, purpose, and faith; my long waiting, my love, my quiet undergoing of trouble;

以及我在安提阿，以哥念，路司得，所遭遇的逼迫，苦难。我所忍受是何等的逼迫。但从这一切苦难中主都把我救出来了。
My punishments and pain; the things which came to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; the cruel attacks made on me: and the Lord made me free from them all.

不但如此，凡立志在基督耶稣里敬虔度日的，也都要受逼迫。
Yes, and all whose purpose is to be living in the knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, will be cruelly attacked.

只是作恶的，和迷惑人的，必越久越恶，他欺哄人也被人欺哄。
Evil and false men will become worse and worse, using deceit and themselves overcome by deceit.

但你所学习的，所确信的，要存在心里。因为你知道是跟谁学的。
But see that you keep to the teaching you have been given and the things of which you are certain, conscious of who has been your teacher;

并且知道你是从小明白圣经。这圣经能使你因信基督耶稣有得救的智慧。
And that from the time when you were a child, you have had knowledge of the holy Writings, which are able to make you wise to salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus.

圣经都是神所默示的（或作凡神所默示的圣经），于教训，督责，使人归正，教导人学义，都是有益的。
Every holy Writing which comes from God is of profit for teaching, for training, for guiding, for education in righteousness:

叫属神的人得以完全，预备行各样的善事。
So that the man of God may be complete, trained and made ready for every good work.

我在神面前，并在将来审判活人死人的基督耶稣面前，凭着他的显现和他的国度嘱咐你。
I give you orders, before God and Christ Jesus, who will be the judge of the living and the dead, and by his revelation and his kingdom;

务要传道。无论得时不得时，总要专心，并用百般的忍耐，各样的教训，责备人，警戒人，劝勉人。
Be preaching the word at all times, in every place; make protests, say sharp words, give comfort, with long waiting and teaching;

因为时候要到，人必厌烦纯正的道理。耳朵发痒，就随从自己的情欲，增添好些师傅。
For the time will come when they will not take the true teaching; but, moved by their desires, they will get for themselves a great number of teachers for the pleasure of hearing them;

并且掩耳不听真道，偏向荒渺的言语。
And shutting their ears to what is true, will be turned away to belief in foolish stories.

你却要凡事谨慎，忍受苦难，作传道的工夫，尽你的职分。
But be self-controlled in all things, do without comfort, go on preaching the good news, completing the work which has been given you to do.

我现在被浇奠，我离世的时候到了。
For I am even now being offered, and my end is near.

那美好的仗我已经打过了。当跑的路我已经跑尽了。所信的道我已经守住了。
I have made a good fight, I have come to the end of my journey, I have kept the faith:

从此以后，有公义的冠冕为我存留，就是按着公义审判的主到了那日要赐给我的。不但赐给我，也赐给凡爱慕他显现的人。
From now on, the crown of righteousness is made ready for me, which the Lord, the upright judge, Will give to me at that day: and not only to me, but to all those who have had love for his revelation.

你要赶紧的到我这里来。
Do your best to come to me before long:

因为底马贪爱现今的世界，就离弃我往帖撒罗尼迦去了。革勒士往加拉太去。提多往挞马太去。
For Demas has gone away from me, for love of this present life, and has gone to Thessalonica: Crescens has gone to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.

独有路加在我这里。你来的时候要把马可带来。因为他在传道的事上于我有益处。（传道或作服事我）
Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and take him with you; for he is of use to me in the work.

我已经打发推基古往以弗所去。
Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.

我在特罗亚留于加布的那件外衣，你来的时候可以带来。那些书也要带来。更要紧的是那些皮卷。
The coat which I did not take from Troas and which is with Carpus, get when you come, and the books, specially the papers.

铜匠亚力山大多多地害我。主必照他所行的报应他。
Alexander the copper-worker did me much wrong: the Lord will give him the reward of his works:

你也要防备他。因为他极力敌挡了我们的话。
But be on the watch for him, for he was violent in his attacks on our teaching.

我初次申诉，没有人前来帮助，竟都离弃我。但愿这罪不归与他们。
At my first meeting with my judges, no one took my part, but all went away from me. May it not be put to their account.

惟有主站在我旁边，加给我力量，使福音被我尽都传明，叫外邦人都听见。我也从狮子口里被救出来。
But the Lord was by my side and gave me strength; so that through me the news might be given out in full measure, and all the Gentiles might give ear: and I was taken out of the mouth of the lion.

主必救我脱离诸般的凶恶，也必救我进他的天国。愿荣耀归给他，直到永永远远。阿们。
The Lord will keep me safe from every evil work and will give me salvation in his kingdom in heaven: to whom be glory for ever and ever. So be it.

问百基拉，亚居拉，和阿尼色弗一家的人安。
Give my love to Prisca and Aquila and those of the house of Onesiphorus.

以拉都在哥林多住下了。特罗非摩病了，我就留他在米利都。
Erastus was stopping at Corinth; but Trophimus, when I last saw him was at Miletus, ill.

你要赶紧在冬天以前到我这里来。有友布罗，布田，利奴，革老底亚，和众弟兄，都问你安。
Do your best to come before the winter. Eubulus sends you his love, and Pudens and Linus and Claudia, and all the brothers.

愿主与你的灵同在。愿恩惠常与你们同在。
The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.

