提摩太前书 Timothy


奉我们救主神，和我们的盼望基督耶稣之命，作基督耶稣使徒的保罗，
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the order of God our Saviour and Christ Jesus our hope;

写信给那因信主作我真儿子的提摩太。愿恩惠怜悯平安，从父神和我们主基督耶稣，归与你。
To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

我往马其顿去的时候，曾劝你仍住在以弗所，好嘱咐那几个人，不可传异教，
It was my desire, when I went on into Macedonia, that you might make a stop at Ephesus, to give orders to certain men not to put forward a different teaching,

也不可听从荒渺无凭的话语，和无穷的家谱。这等事只生辩论，并不发明神在信上所立的章程。
Or to give attention to stories and long lists of generations, from which come questionings and doubts, in place of God's ordered way of life which is in faith;

但命令的总归就是爱。这爱是从清洁的心，和无亏的良心，无伪的信心，生出来的。
But the effect of the order is love coming from a clean heart, and a knowledge of what is right, and true faith:

有人偏离这些，反去讲虚浮的话。
From which some have been turned away, giving themselves to foolish talking;

想要作教法师，却不明白自己所讲说的，所论定的。
Desiring to be teachers of the law, though they have no knowledge of what they say or of the statements which they make so certainly.

我们知道律法原是好的，只要人用得合宜。
We are conscious that the law is good, if a man makes a right use of it,

因为律法不是为义人设立的，乃是为不法和不服的，不虔诚和犯罪的，不圣洁和恋世俗的，弑父母和杀人的，
With the knowledge that the law is made, not for the upright man, but for those who have no respect for law and order, for evil men and sinners, for the unholy and those who have no religion, for those who put their fathers or mothers to death, for takers of life,

行淫和亲男色的，抢人口和说谎话的，并起假誓的，或是为别样敌正道的事设立的。
For those who go after loose women, for those with unnatural desires, for those who take men prisoners, who make false statements and false oaths, and those who do any other things against the right teaching,

这是照着可称颂之神交托我荣耀福音说的。
Which may be seen in the good news of the glory of the great God, which was given into my care.

我感谢那给我力量的，我们主基督耶稣，因他以我有忠心，派我服事他。
I give praise to him who gave me power, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he took me to be true, making me his servant,

我从前是亵渎神的，逼迫人的，侮慢人的。然而我还蒙了怜悯，因我是不信不明白的时候而作的。
Though I had said violent words against God, and done cruel acts, causing great trouble: but I was given mercy, because I did it without knowledge, not having faith;

并且我主的恩是格外丰盛，使我在基督耶稣里有信心和爱心。
And the grace of our Lord was very great, with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

基督耶稣降世，为要拯救罪人。这话是可信的，是十分可佩服的。在罪人中我是个罪魁。
It is a true saying, in which all may put their faith, that Christ Jesus came into the world to give salvation to sinners, of whom I am the chief:

然而我蒙了怜悯，是因耶稣基督要在我这罪魁身上，显明他一切的忍耐，给后来信他得永生的人作榜样。
But for this reason I was given mercy, so that in me, the chief of sinners, Jesus Christ might make clear all his mercy, as an example to those who in the future would have faith in him to eternal life.

但愿尊贵，荣耀归与那不能朽坏不能看见永世的君王，独一的神，直到永永远远。阿们。
Now to the King eternal, ever-living, unseen, the only God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. So be it.

我儿提摩太阿，我照从前指着你的预言，将这命令交托你，叫你因此可以打那美好的仗。
This order I give to you, Timothy my son, in harmony with the words of the prophets about you, so that by them you may be strong, fighting the good fight,

常存信心，和无亏的良心。有人丢弃良心，就在真道上如同船破坏了一般。
Keeping faith, and being conscious of well-doing; for some, by not doing these things, have gone wrong in relation to the faith:

其中有许米乃和亚力山大。我已经把他们交给撒但，使他们受责罚，就不再谤渎了。
Such are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have given up to Satan, so that they may say no more evil words against God.

我劝你第一要为万人恳求祷告，代求，祝谢。
My desire is, first of all, that you will make requests and prayers and give praise for all men;

为君王和一切在位的也该如此。使我们可以敬虔端正，平安无事的度日。
For kings and all those in authority; so that we may have a calm and quiet life in all fear of God and serious behaviour.

这是好的，在神我们救主面前可蒙悦纳。
This is good and pleasing in the eyes of God our Saviour;

他愿意万人得救，明白真道。
Whose desire is that all men may have salvation and come to the knowledge of what is true.

因为只有一位神，在神和人中间，只有一位中保，乃是降世为人的基督耶稣。
For there is one God and one peacemaker between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

他舍自己作万人的赎价。到了时候，这事必证明出来。
Who gave himself as an offering for all; witness of which was to be given at the right time;

我为此奉派，作传道的，作使徒，作外邦人的师傅，教导他们相信，学习真道。我说的是真话，并不是谎言。
And of this I became a preacher and an Apostle (what I say is true, not false,) and a teacher of the Gentiles in the true faith.

我愿男人无忿怒，无争论，（争论或作疑惑），举起圣洁的手，随处祷告。
It is my desire, then, that in every place men may give themselves to prayer, lifting up holy hands, without wrath or argument.

又愿女人廉耻，自守，以正派衣裳为妆饰，不以编发，黄金，珍珠，和贵价的衣裳为妆饰。
And that women may be dressed in simple clothing, with a quiet and serious air; not with twisted hair and gold or jewels or robes of great price;

只要有善行。这才与自称是敬神的女人相宜。
But clothed with good works, as is right for women who are living in the fear of God.

女人要沉静学道，一味地顺服。
Let a woman quietly take the place of a learner and be under authority.

我不许女人讲道，也不许她辖管男人，只要沉静。
In my opinion it is right for a woman not to be a teacher, or to have rule over a man, but to be quiet.

因为先造的是亚当，后造的是夏娃。
For Adam was first formed, then Eve;

且不是亚当被引诱，乃是女人被引诱，陷在罪里。
And Adam was not taken by deceit, but the woman, being tricked, became a wrongdoer.

然而女人若常存信心爱心，又圣洁自守，就必在生产上得救。
But if they go on in faith and love and holy self-control, she will be kept safe at the time of childbirth.

人若想要得监督的职分，就是羡慕善工。这话是可信的。
This is a true saying, A man desiring the position of a Bishop has a desire for a good work.

作监督的，必须无可指责，只作一个妇人的丈夫，有节制，自守，端正。乐意接待远人，善于教导。
The Bishop, then, is to be a man of good name, the husband of one wife, self-controlled, serious-minded, having respect for order, opening his house freely to guests, a ready teacher;

不因酒滋事，不打人，只要温和，不争竞，不贪财。
Not quickly moved to wrath or blows, but gentle; no fighter, no lover of money;

好好管理自己的家，使儿女凡事端庄顺服。（或作端端庄庄地使儿女顺服）
Ruling his house well, having his children under control with all serious behaviour;

人若不知道管理自己的家，焉能照管神的教会呢？
(For if a man has not the art of ruling his house, how will he take care of the church of God?)

初入教的不可作监督，恐怕他自高自大，就落在魔鬼所受的刑罚里。
Not one newly taken into the church, for fear that, through his high opinion of himself, he may come into the same sin as the Evil One.

监督也必须在教外有好名声，恐怕被人毁谤，落在魔鬼的网罗里。
And he is to have a good name among those outside the church, so that nothing may be said against him and he may not be taken by the designs of the Evil One.

作执事的也是如此，必须端庄，不一口两舌，不好喝酒，不贪不义之财。
Deacons, in the same way, are to be serious in their behaviour, not false in word, not given to taking much wine or greatly desiring the wealth of this world;

要存清洁的良心，固守真道的奥秘。
Keeping the secret of the faith in a heart free from sin.

这等人也要先受试验。若没有可责之处，然后叫他们作执事。
And let these first be put to the test; then let them become Deacons if there is nothing against them.

女执事（原文作女人）也是如此，必须端庄，不说谗言，有节制，凡事忠心。
Women are to be serious in behaviour, saying no evil of others, controlling themselves, true in all things.

执事只要作一个妇人的丈夫，好好管理儿女和自己的家。
Let Deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their houses well.

因为善作执事的，自己就得到美好的地步，并且在基督耶稣里的真道上大有胆量。
For those who have done good work as Deacons get for themselves a good position and become free from fear in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

我指望快到你那里去，所以先将这些事写给你。
I am writing these things to you, though I am hoping to come to you before long;

倘若我耽延日久，你也可以知道在神的家中当怎样行。这家就是永生神的教会，真理的柱石和根基。
But if I am long in coming, this will make clear to you what behaviour is right for men in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and base of what is true.

大哉，敬虔的奥秘，无人不以为然，就是神在肉身显现，被圣灵称义，（或作在灵性称义），被天使看见，被传于外邦，被世人信服，被接在荣耀里。
And without argument, great is the secret of religion: He who was seen in the flesh, who was given God's approval in the spirit, was seen by the angels, of whom the good news was given among the nations, in whom the world had faith, who was taken up in glory.

圣灵明说，在后来的时候，必有人离弃真道，听从那引诱人的（邪）灵，和鬼魔的道理。
But the Spirit says clearly that in later times some will be turned away from the faith, giving their minds to spirits of deceit, and the teachings of evil spirits,

这是因为说谎之人的假冒。这等人的良心，如同被热铁烙惯了一般。
Through the false ways of men whose words are untrue, whose hearts are burned as with a heated iron;

他们禁止嫁娶，又禁戒食物，（或作又叫人戒荤）就是神所造叫那信而明白真道的人，感谢着领受的。
Who keep men from being married and from taking food which God made to be taken with praise by those who have faith and true knowledge.

凡神所造的物，都是好的。若感谢着领受，就没有一样可弃的。
Because everything which God has made is good, and nothing is evil, if it is taken with praise:

都因神的道和人的祈求，成为圣洁了。
For it is made holy by the word of God and by prayer.

你若将这些事提醒弟兄们，便是基督耶稣的好执事，在真道的话语，和你向来所服从的善道上，得了教育。
If you keep these things before the minds of the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, trained in the words of the faith and of the right teaching which has been your guide:

只是要弃绝那世俗的言语，和老妇荒渺的话，在敬虔上操练自己。
But have nothing to do with unclean and foolish stories. Give yourself training in religion:

操练身体，益处还少。惟独敬虔，凡事都有益处。因有今生和来生的应许。
For the training of the body is of profit for a little, but religion is of profit in every way, giving hope for the life which now is, and for that which is to come.

这话是可信的，是十分可佩服的。
This is a true saying, in which all may put their faith.

我们劳苦努力，正是为此。因我们的指望在乎永生的神。他是万人的救主，更是信徒的救主。
And this is the purpose of all our work and our fighting, because our hope is in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, and specially of those who have faith.

这些事你要吩咐人，也要教导人。
Let these be your orders and your teaching.

不可叫人小看你年轻。总要在言语，行为，爱心，信心，清洁上，都作信徒的榜样。
Let no one make little of you because you are young, but be an example to the church in word, in behaviour, in love, in faith, in holy living.

你要以宣读，劝勉，教导为念，直等到我来。
Till I come, give attention to the reading of the holy Writings, to comforting the saints, and to teaching.

你不要轻忽所得的恩赐，就是从前借着预言，在众长老按手的时候，赐给你的。
Make use of that grace in you, which was given to you by the word of the prophets, when the rulers of the church put their hands on you.

这些事你要殷勤去作，并要在此专心，使众人看出你的长进来。
Have a care for these things; give yourself to them with all your heart, so that all may see how you go forward.

你要谨慎自己和自己的教训，要在这些事上恒心。因为这样行，又能救自己，又能救听你的人。
Give attention to yourself and your teaching. Go on in these things; for in doing so you will get salvation for yourself and for those who give hearing to you.

不可严责老年人，只要劝他如同父亲。劝少年人如同弟兄。
Do not say sharp words to one who has authority in the church, but let your talk be as to a father, and to the younger men as to brothers:

劝老年妇女如同母亲。劝少年妇女如同姐妹。总要清清洁洁的。
To the older women as to mothers, to the younger as to sisters, with a clean heart.

要尊敬那真为寡妇的。
Give honour to widows who are truly widows.

若寡妇有儿女，或有孙子孙女，便叫他们先在自己家中学着行孝，报答亲恩，因为这在神面前是可悦纳的。
But if any widow has children or children's children, let these see that it is right to take care of their family and their fathers and mothers: for this is pleasing in the eyes of God.

那独居无靠真为寡妇的，是仰赖神，昼夜不住地祈求祷告。
Now she who is truly a widow and without family puts her hope in God, giving herself to prayer day and night.

但那好宴乐的寡妇，正活着的时候也是死的。
But she who gives herself to pleasure is dead while she is living.

这些事你要嘱咐他们，叫他们无可指责。
Give orders to this effect, so that no evil may be said of anyone.

人若不看顾亲属，就是背了真道，比不信的人还不好。不看顾自己家里的人，更是如此。
If anyone has no care for his family and those in his house, he is false to the faith, and is worse than one who has no faith.

寡妇记在册子上，必须年纪到六十岁，从来只作一个丈夫的妻子，
Let no woman be numbered among the widows who is under sixty years old, and only if she has been the wife of one man,

又有行善的名声，就如养育儿女，接待远人，洗圣徒的脚，救济遭难的人，竭力行各样善事。
And if witness is given of her good works; if she has had the care of children, if she has been kind to travellers, washing the feet of the saints, helping those who are in trouble, giving herself to good works.

至于年轻的寡妇，就可以辞她。因为她们的情欲发动，违背基督的时候，就想要嫁人。
But to the younger widows say No: for when their love is turned away from Christ, they have a desire to be married;

她们被定罪，是因废弃了当初所许的愿。
And they are judged because they have been false to their first faith;

并且她们又习惯懒惰，挨家闲游。不但是懒惰，又说长道短，好管闲事，说些不当说的话。
And they get into the way of doing no work, going about from house to house; and not only doing no work, but talking foolishly, being over-interested in the business of others, saying things which they have no right to say.

所以我愿意年轻的寡妇嫁人，生养儿女，治理家务，不给敌人辱骂的把柄。
So it is my desire that the younger widows may be married and have children, controlling their families, and giving the Evil One no chance to say anything against them,

因为已经有转去随从撒但的。
For even now some are turned away to Satan.

信主的妇女，若家中有寡妇，自己就当救济她们，不可累着教会，好使教会能救济那真无倚靠的寡妇。
If any woman of the faith has relations who are widows, let her give them help, so that the care of them does not come on the church, and so it may give help to those who are truly widowed.

那善于管理教会的长老，当以为配受加倍的敬奉。那劳苦传道教导人的，更当如此。
Let rulers whose rule is good be honoured twice over, specially those whose work is preaching and teaching.

因为经上说，牛在场上踹谷的时候，不可笼住它的嘴。又说，工人得工价是应当的。
For the Writings say, It is not right to keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it. And, The worker has a right to his reward.

控告长老的呈子，非有两三个见证就不要收。
Do not take as true any statement made against one in authority, but only if two or three give witness to it.

犯罪的人，当在众人面前责备他，叫其余的人也可以惧怕。
Say sharp words to sinners when all are present, so that the rest may be in fear.

我在神和基督耶稣并蒙拣选的天使面前嘱咐你，要遵守这些话，不可存成见，行事也不可有偏心。
I give you orders before God and Christ Jesus and the angels of God's selection, to keep these orders without giving thought to one side more than another.

给人行按手的礼，不可急促。不要在别人的罪上有分。要保守自己清洁。
Do not put hands on any man without thought, and have no part in other men's sins: keep yourself clean.

因你胃口不清，屡次患病，再不要照常喝水，可以稍微用点酒。
Do not take only water as your drink, but take a little wine for the good of your stomach, and because you are frequently ill.

有些人的罪是明显的，如同先到审判案前。有些人的罪是随后跟了去的。
The sins of some men are clearly seen, going before them to be judged; but with others, their sins go after them.

这样，善行也有明显的。那不明显的，也不能隐藏。
In the same way, there are good works which are clearly seen; and those which are not so, may not be kept secret.

凡在轭下作仆人的，当以自己主人配受十分的恭敬，免得神的名和道理，被人亵渎。
Let all who are servants under the yoke give all honour to their masters, so that no evil may be said against the name of God and his teaching.

仆人有信道的主人，不可因为与他是弟兄就轻看他。更要加意服事他。因为得服事之益处的，是信道蒙爱的。你要以此教训人，劝勉人。
And let those whose masters are of the faith have respect for them because they are brothers, working for them the more readily, because those who take part in the good work are of the faith and are dear. Give orders and teaching about these things.

若有人传异教，不服从我们主耶稣基督纯正的话，与那合乎敬虔的道理。
If any man gives different teaching, not in agreement with the true words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the teaching which is in agreement with true religion,

他是自高自大，一无所知，专好问难争辩言词，从此就生出嫉妒，分争，毁谤，妄疑，
He has an over-high opinion of himself; being without knowledge, having only an unhealthy love of questionings and wars of words, from which come envy, fighting, cruel words, evil thoughts,

并那坏了心术，失丧真理之人的争竞。他们以敬虔为得利的门路。
Bitter talk of men who, being evil in mind and dead to what is true, take the faith to be a way of making profit.

然而敬虔加上知足的心便是大利了。
But true faith, with peace of mind, is of great profit:

因为我们没有带什么到世上来，也不能带什么去。
For we came into the world with nothing, and we are not able to take anything out;

只要有衣有食，就当知足。
But if we have food and a roof over us, let that be enough.

但那些想要发财的人，就陷在迷惑，落在网罗，和许多无知有害的私欲里，叫人沉在败坏和灭亡中。
But those who have a desire for wealth are falling into danger, and are taken as in a net by a number of foolish and damaging desires, through which men are overtaken by death and destruction.

贪财是万恶之根。有人贪恋钱财，就被引诱离了真道，用许多愁苦把自己刺透了。
For the love of money is a root of all evil: and some whose hearts were fixed on it have been turned away from the faith, and been wounded with unnumbered sorrows.

但你这属神的人，要逃避这些事，追求公义，敬虔，信心，爱心，忍耐，温柔。
But you, O man of God, keep yourself from these things, and go after righteousness, religion, faith, love, a quiet mind, gentle behaviour.

你要为真道打那美好的仗，持定永生。你为此被召，也在许多见证人面前，已经作了那美好的见证。
Be fighting the good fight of the faith; take for yourself the life eternal, for which you were marked out, and of which you gave witness in the eyes of all.

我在叫万物生活的神面前，并在向本丢彼拉多作过那美好见证的基督耶稣面前嘱咐你，
I give you orders before God, the giver of life, and Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate gave witness to the faith,

要守这命令，毫不玷污，无可指责，直到我们的主耶稣基督显现。
To keep the word untouched by evil, clear from all shame, till the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ:

到了日期，那可称颂独有权能的，万王之王，万主之主，
Which at the right time he will make clear, who is the eternal and only Ruler, King of kings, and Lord of lords;

就是那独一不死，住在人不能靠近的光里，是人未曾看见，也是不能看见的，要将他显明出来。但愿尊贵和永远的权能，都归给他。阿们。
Who only has life for ever, living in light to which no man may come near; whom no man has seen or is able to see: to whom be honour and power for ever. So be it.

你要嘱咐那些今世富足的人，不要自高，也不要倚靠无定的钱财。只要倚靠那厚赐百物给我们享受的神。
Give orders to those who have money and goods in this life, not to be lifted up in their minds, or to put their hope in the uncertain chances of wealth, but in God who gives us in full measure all things for our use;

又要嘱咐他们行善，在好事上富足，甘心施舍，乐意供给人，（供给或作体贴）
And to do good, having wealth in good works, being quick to give, taking part with one another;

为自己积成美好的根基，预备将来，叫他们持定那真正的生命。
Making ready for themselves a safe place for the time to come, so that the true life may be theirs.

提摩太阿，你要保守所托付你的，躲避世俗的虚谈，和那敌真道似是而非的学问。
O Timothy, take good care of that which is given to you, turning away from the wrong and foolish talk and arguments of that knowledge which is falsely so named;

已经有人自称有这学问，就偏离了真道。愿恩惠常与你们同在。
Through which some, who gave their minds to it, have been turned away from the faith. Grace be with you.

