歌罗西书 Colossians


奉神旨意，作基督耶稣使徒的保罗，和兄弟提摩太，
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the purpose of God, and Timothy our brother,

写信给歌罗西的圣徒，在基督里有忠心的弟兄。愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父，归与你们。
To the saints and true brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.

我们感谢神我们主耶稣基督的父，常常为你们祷告。
We give praise to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, making prayer for you at all times,

因听见你们在基督耶稣里的信心，并向众圣徒的爱心。
After hearing of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which you have for all the saints,

是为那给你们存在天上的盼望。这盼望就是你们从前在福音真理的道上所听见的。
Through the hope which is in store for you in heaven; knowledge of which was given to you before in the true word of the good news,

这福音传到你们那里，也传到普天之下，并且结果增长，如同在你们中间，自从你们听见福音，真知道神恩惠的日子一样。
Which has come to you; and which in all the world is giving fruit and increase, as it has done in you from the day when it came to your ears and you had true knowledge of the grace of God;

正如你们从我们所亲爱，一同作仆人的以巴弗所学的。他为我们（有古卷作你们）作了基督忠心的执事。
As it was given to you by Epaphras, our well-loved helper, who is a true servant of Christ for us,

也把你们因圣灵所存的爱心告诉了我们。
And who, himself, made clear to us your love in the Spirit.

因此，我们自从听见的日子，也就为你们不住地祷告祈求，愿你们在一切属灵的智慧悟性上，满心知道神的旨意。
For this reason, we, from the day when we had word of it, keep on in prayer for you, that you may be full of the knowledge of his purpose, with all wisdom and experience of the Spirit,

好叫你们行事为人对得起主，凡事蒙他喜悦，在一切善事上结果子，渐渐地多知道神。
Living uprightly in the approval of the Lord, giving fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;

照他荣耀的权能，得以在各样的力上加力，好叫你们凡事欢欢喜喜地忍耐宽容。
Full of strength in the measure of the great power of his glory, so that you may undergo all troubles with joy;

又感谢父，叫我们能与众圣徒在光明中同得基业。
Giving praise to the Father who has given us a part in the heritage of the saints in light;

他救了我们脱离黑暗的权势，把我们迁到他爱子的国里。
Who has made us free from the power of evil and given us a place in the kingdom of the Son of his love;

我们在爱子里得蒙救赎，罪过得以赦免。
In whom we have our salvation, the forgiveness of sins:

爱子是那不能看见之神的像，是首生的，在一切被造的以先。
Who is the image of the unseen God coming into existence before all living things;

因为万有都是靠他造的，无论是天上的，地上的，能看见的，不能看见的，或是有位的，主治的，执政的，掌权的，一概都是借着他造的，又是为他造的。
For by him all things were made, in heaven and on earth, things seen and things unseen, authorities, lords, rulers, and powers; all things were made by him and for him;

他在万有之先，万有也靠他而立。
He is before all things, and in him all things have being.

他也是教会全体之首。他是元始，是从死里首先复生的，使他可以在凡事上居首位。
And he is the head of the body, the church: the starting point of all things, the first to come again from the dead; so that in all things he might have the chief place.

因为父喜欢叫一切的丰盛，在他里面居住。
For God in full measure was pleased to be in him;

既然借着他在十字架上所流的血，成就了和平，便借着他叫万有，无论是地上的，天上的，都与自己和好了。
Through him uniting all things with himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; through him, I say, uniting all things which are on earth or in heaven.

你们从前与神隔绝，因着恶行，心里与他为敌。
And you, who in the past were cut off and at war with God in your minds through evil works, he has now made one

但如今他借着基督的肉身受死，叫你们与自己和好，都成了圣洁，没有瑕疵，无可责备，把你们引到自己面前。
In the body of his flesh through death, so that you might be holy and without sin and free from all evil before him:

只要你们在所信的道上恒心，根基稳固，坚定不移，不至被引动失去原文作离开福音的盼望。这福音就是你们所听过的，也是传与普天下万人听的。万人原文作凡受造的我保罗也作了这福音的执事。
If you keep yourselves safely based in the faith, not moved from the hope of the good news which came to you, and which was given to every living being under heaven; of which I, Paul, was made a servant.

现在我为你们受苦，倒觉欢乐，并且为基督的身体，就是为教会，要在我肉身上补满基督患难的缺欠。
Now I have joy in my pain because of you, and in my flesh I undergo whatever is still needed to make the sorrows of Christ complete, for the salvation of his body, the church;

我照神为你们所赐我的职分，作了教会的执事，要把神的道理传得全备。
Of which I became a servant by the purpose of God which was given to me for you, to give effect to the word of God,

这道理就是历世历代所隐藏的奥秘，但如今向他的圣徒显明了。
The secret which has been kept from all times and generations, but has now been made clear to his saints,

神愿意叫他们知道，这奥秘在外邦人中有何等丰盛的荣耀。就是基督在你们心里成了有荣耀的盼望。
To whom God was pleased to give knowledge of the wealth of the glory of this secret among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory:

我们传扬他，是用诸般的智慧，劝戒各人，教导各人。要把各人在基督里完完全全的引到神面前。
Whom we are preaching; guiding and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that every man may be complete in Christ;

我也为此劳苦，照着他在我里面运用的大能，尽心竭力。
And for this purpose I am working, using all my strength by the help of his power which is working in me strongly.

我愿意你们晓得我为你们和老底嘉人，并一切没有与我亲自见面的人，是何等的尽心竭力。
For it is my desire to give you news of the great fight I am making for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all who have not seen my face in the flesh;

要叫他们的心得安慰，因爱心互相联络，以致丰丰足足在悟性中有充足的信心，使他们真知神的奥秘，就是基督。
So that their hearts may be comforted, and that being joined together in love, they may come to the full wealth of the certain knowledge of the secret of God, even Christ,

所积蓄的一切智慧知识，都在他里面藏着。
In whom are all the secret stores of wisdom and knowledge.

我说这话，免得有人用花言巧语迷惑你们。
I say this so that you may not be turned away by any deceit of words.

我身子虽与你们相离，心却与你们同在，见你们循规蹈矩，信基督的心也坚固，我就欢喜了。
For though I am not present in the flesh, still I am with you in the spirit, seeing with joy your order, and your unchanging faith in Christ.

你们既然接受了主基督耶稣，就当遵他而行。
As, then, you took Christ Jesus the Lord, so go on in him,

在他里面生根建造，信心坚固，正如你们所领的教训，感谢的心也更增长了。
Rooted and based together in him, strong in the faith which the teaching gave you, giving praise to God at all times.

你们要谨慎，恐怕有人用他的理学，和虚空的妄言，不照着基督，乃照人间的遗传，和世上的小学，就把你们掳去。
Take care that no one takes you away by force, through man's wisdom and deceit, going after the beliefs of men and the theories of the world, and not after Christ:

因为神本性一切的丰盛，都有形有体的居住在基督里面。
For in him all the wealth of God's being has a living form,

你们在他里面也得了丰盛。他是各样执政掌权者的元首。
And you are complete in him, who is the head of all rule and authority:

你们在他里面，也受了不是人手所行的割礼，乃是基督使你们脱去肉体情欲的割礼。
In whom you had a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ;

你们既受洗与他一同埋葬，也就在此与他一同复活。都因信那叫他从死里复活神的功用。
Having been put to death with him in baptism, by which you came to life again with him, through faith in the working of God, who made him come back from the dead.

你们从前在过犯，和未受割礼的肉体中死了，神赦免了你们（或作我们）一切过犯，便叫你们与基督一同活过来。
And you, being dead through your sins and the evil condition of your flesh, to you, I say, he gave life together with him, and forgiveness of all our sins;

又涂抹了在律例上所写，攻击我们有碍于我们的字据，把它撤去，钉在十字架上。
Having put an end to the handwriting of the law which was against us, taking it out of the way by nailing it to his cross;

既将一切执政的掌权的掳来，明显给众人看，就仗着十字架夸胜。
Having made himself free from the rule of authorities and powers, he put them openly to shame, glorying over them in it.

所以不拘在饮食上，或节期，月朔，安息日，都不可让人论断你们。
For this reason let no man be your judge in any question of food or drink or feast days or new moons or Sabbaths:

这些原是后事的影儿。那形体却是基督。
For these are an image of the things which are to come; but the body is Christ's.

不可让人因着故意谦虚，和敬拜天使，就夺去你们的奖赏。这等人拘泥在所见过的，（有古卷作这等人窥察所没有见过的）随着自己的欲心，无故地自高自大，
Let no man take your reward from you by consciously making little of himself and giving worship to angels; having his thoughts fixed on the things which he has seen, being foolishly lifted up in his natural mind,

不持定元首，全身既然靠着他，筋节得以相助联络，就因神大得长进。
And not joined to the Head, from whom all the body, being given strength and kept together through its joins and bands, has its growth with the increase of God.

你们若是与基督同死，脱离了世上的小学，为什么仍像在世俗中活着，服从那不可拿，不可尝，不可摸，等类的规条呢？
If you were made free, by your death with Christ, from the rules of the world, why do you put yourselves under the authority of orders


Which say there may be no touching, tasting, or taking in your hands,

这都是照人所吩咐所教导的。说到这一切正用的时候就都败坏了。
(Rules which are all to come to an end with their use) after the orders and teaching of men?

这些规条，使人徒有智慧之名，用私意崇拜，自表谦卑，苦待己身，其实在克制肉体的情欲上，是毫无功效。
These things seem to have a sort of wisdom in self-ordered worship and making little of oneself, and being cruel to the body, not honouring it by giving it its natural use.

所以你们若真与基督一同复活，就当求在上面的事。那里有基督坐在神的右边。
If then you have a new life with Christ, give your attention to the things of heaven, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God.

你们要思念上面的事，不要思念地上的事。
Keep your mind on the higher things, not on the things of earth.

因为你们已经死了，你们的生命与基督一同藏在神里面。
For your life on earth is done, and you have a secret life with Christ in God.

基督是我们的生命，他显现的时候，你们也要与他一同显现在荣耀里。
At the coming of Christ who is our life, you will be seen with him in glory.

所以要治死你们在地上的肢体。就如淫乱，污秽，邪情，恶欲，和贪婪，贪婪就与拜偶像一样。
Then put to death your bodies which are of the earth; wrong use of the flesh, unclean things, passion, evil desires and envy, which is the worship of strange gods;

因这些事，神的忿怒必临到那悖逆之子。
Because of which the wrath of God comes on those who go against his orders;

当你们在这些事中活着的时候，也曾这样行过。
Among whom you were living in the past, when you did such things.

但现在你们要弃绝这一切的事，以及恼恨，忿怒，恶毒，（或作阴毒）毁谤，并口中污秽的言语。
But now it is right for you to put away all these things; wrath, passion, bad feeling, curses, unclean talk;

不要彼此说谎，因你们已经脱去旧人和旧人的行为，
Do not make false statements to one another; because you have put away the old man with all his doings,

穿上了新人。这新人在知识上渐渐更新，正如造他主的形像。
And have put on the new man, which has become new in knowledge after the image of his maker;

在此并不分希利尼人，犹太人，受割礼的，未受割礼的，化外人，西古提人，为奴的，自主的，惟有基督是包括一切，又住在各人之内。
Where there is no Greek or Jew, no one with circumcision or without circumcision, no division between nations, no servant or free man: but Christ is all and in all.

所以你们既是神的选民，圣洁蒙爱的人，就要存（原文作穿下同）怜悯，恩慈，谦虚，温柔，忍耐的心。
As saints of God, then, holy and dearly loved, let your behaviour be marked by pity and mercy, kind feeling, a low opinion of yourselves, gentle ways, and a power of undergoing all things;

倘若这人与那人有嫌隙，总要彼此包容，彼此饶恕。主怎样饶恕了你们，你们也要怎样饶恕人。
Being gentle to one another and having forgiveness for one another, if anyone has done wrong to his brother, even as the Lord had forgiveness for you:

在这一切之外，要存着爱心。爱心就是联络全德的。
And more than all, have love; the only way in which you may be completely joined together.

又要叫基督的平安在你们心里作主。你们也为此蒙召，归为一体。且要存感谢的心。
And let the peace of Christ be ruling in your hearts, as it was the purpose of God for you to be one body; and give praise to God at all times.

当用各样的智慧，把基督的道理，丰丰富富的存在心里，（或作当把基督的道理丰丰富富的存在心里以各样的智慧）用诗章，颂词，灵歌，彼此教导，互相劝戒，心被恩感歌颂神。
Let the word of Christ be in you in all wealth of wisdom; teaching and helping one another with songs of praise and holy words, making melody to God with grace in your hearts.

无论作什么，或说话，或行事，都要奉主耶稣的名，借着他感谢父神。
And whatever you do, in word or in act, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving praise to God the Father through him.

你们作妻子的，当顺服自己的丈夫，这在主里面是相宜的。
Wives, be under the authority of your husbands, as is right in the Lord.

你们作丈夫的，要爱你们的妻子，不可苦待她们。
Husbands, have love for your wives, and be not bitter against them.

你们作儿女的，要凡事听从父母，因为这是主所喜悦的。
Children, do the orders of your fathers and mothers in all things, for this is pleasing to the Lord.

你们作父亲的，不要惹儿女的气，恐怕他们失了志气。
Fathers, do not be hard on your children, so that their spirit may not be broken.

你们作仆人的，要凡事听从你们肉身的主人，不要只在眼前事奉，像是讨人喜欢的，总要存心诚实敬畏主。
Servants, in all things do the orders of your natural masters; not only when their eyes are on you, as pleasers of men, but with all your heart, fearing the Lord:

无论作什么，都要从心里作，像是给主作的，不是给人作的。
Whatever you do, do it readily, as to the Lord and not to men;

因你们知道从主那里，必得着基业为赏赐。你们所事奉的乃是主基督。
Being certain that the Lord will give you the reward of the heritage: for you are the servants of the Lord Christ.

那行不义的，必受不义的报应。主并不偏待人。
For the wrongdoer will have punishment for the wrong he has done, without respect for any man's position.

你们作主人的，要公公平平的待仆人，因为知道你们也有一位主在天上。
Masters, give your servants what is right and equal, conscious that you have a Master in heaven.

你们要恒切祷告，在此儆醒感恩。
Give yourselves to prayer at all times, keeping watch with praise;

也要为我们祷告，求神给我们开传道的门，能以讲基督的奥秘，（我为此被捆锁）。
And making prayer for us, that God may give us an open door for the preaching of the word, the secret of Christ, for which I am now in chains;

叫我按着所该说的话，将这奥秘发明出来。
So that I may make it clear, as it is right for me to do.

你们要爱惜光阴，用智慧与外人交往。
Be wise in your behaviour to those who are outside, making good use of the time.

你们的言语要常常带着和气，好像用盐调和，就可知道该怎样回答各人。
Let your talk be with grace, mixed with salt, so that you may be able to give an answer to everyone.

有我亲爱的兄弟推基古要将我一切的事都告诉你们。他是忠心的执事，和我一同作主的仆人。
Tychicus will give you news of all my business: he is a dear brother and true servant and helper in the word;

我特意打发他到你们那里去，好叫你们知道我们的光景，又叫他安慰你们的心。
And I have sent him to you for this very purpose, so that you may have news of how we are, and so that he may give your hearts comfort;

我又打发一位亲爱忠心的兄弟阿尼西母同去。他也是你们那里的人。他们要把这里一切的事都告诉你们。
And with him I have sent Onesimus, the true and well-loved brother, who is one of you. They will give you word of everything which is taking place here.

与我一同坐监的亚里达古问你们安。巴拿巴的表弟马可也问你们安。（说到这马可，你们已经受了吩咐。他若到了你们那里，你们就接待他。）
Aristarchus, my brother-prisoner, sends his love to you, and Mark, a relation of Barnabas (about whom you have been given orders: if he comes to you, be kind to him),

耶数又称为犹士都，也问你们安。奉割礼的人中，只有这三个人，是为神的国与我一同作工的。也是叫我心里得安慰的。
And Jesus, whose other name is Justus; these are of the circumcision: they are my only brother-workers for the kingdom of God, who have been a comfort to me.

有你们那里的人，作基督耶稣仆人的以巴弗问你们安。他在祷告之间，常为你们竭力地祈求，愿你们在神一切的旨意上，得以完全。信心充足，能站立得稳。
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, sends you his love, ever taking thought for you in his prayers, that you may be complete and fully certain of all the purpose of God.

他为你们和老底嘉并希拉波立的弟兄，多多地劳苦。这是我可以给他作见证的。
For I give witness of him that he has undergone much trouble for you and for those in Laodicea and in Hierapolis.

所亲爱的医生路加，和底马问你们安。
Luke, our well-loved medical friend, and Demas, send you their love.

请问老底嘉的弟兄和宁法，并他家里的教会安。
Give my love to the brothers in Laodicea and to Nymphas and the church in their house.

你们念了这书信，便交给老底嘉的教会，叫他们也念。你们也要念从老底嘉来的书信。
And when this letter has been made public among you, let the same be done in the church of Laodicea; and see that you have the letter from Laodicea.

要对亚基布说，务要谨慎，尽你从主所受的职分。
Say to Archippus, See that you do the work which the Lord has given you to do.

我保罗亲笔问你们安。你们要记念我的捆锁。愿恩惠常与你们同在。
I, Paul, give you this word of love in my handwriting. Keep in memory that I am a prisoner. Grace be with you.

