耶稣基督的仆人，雅各的弟兄犹大，写信给那被召，在父神里蒙爱，为耶稣基督保守的人。
Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and the brother of James, to those of God's selection who have been made holy by God the Father and are kept safe for Jesus Christ:

愿怜恤，平安，慈爱，多多地加给你们。
May mercy and peace and love be increased in you.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我想尽心写信给你们，论我们同得救恩的时候，就不得不写信劝你们，要为从前一次交付圣徒的真道，竭力地争辩。
My loved ones, while my thoughts were full of a letter which I was going to send you about our common salvation, it was necessary for me to send you one requesting you with all my heart to go on fighting strongly for the faith which has been given to the saints once and for ever.

因为有些人偷着进来，就是自古被定受刑罚的，是不虔诚的，将我们神的恩变作放纵情欲的机会，并且不认独一的主宰我们（我们或作和我们）主耶稣基督。
For certain men have come among you secretly, marked out before in the holy Writings for this evil fate, men without the fear of God, turning his grace into an unclean thing, and false to our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

从前主救了他的百姓出埃及地，后来就把那些不信的灭绝了。这一切的事，你们虽然都知道，我却仍要提醒你们。
Now it is my purpose to put you in mind, though you once had knowledge of all these things, of how the Lord, having taken a people safely out of Egypt, later sent destruction on those who had no faith;

又有不守本位，离开自己住处的天使，主用锁链把他们永远拘留在黑暗里，等候大日的审判。
And the angels who did not keep to their kingdom but went out from the place which was theirs, he has put in eternal chains and in dark night till the great day of the judging.

又如所多玛，蛾摩拉，和周围城邑的人，也照他们一味地行淫，随从逆性的情欲，就受永火的刑罚，作为鉴戒。
Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the towns near them, having like these, given themselves up to unclean desires and gone after strange flesh, have been made an example, undergoing the punishment of eternal fire.

这些作梦的人，也像他们污秽身体，轻慢主治的，毁谤在尊位的。
In the same way these dreamers make the flesh unclean, having no respect for authorities, and say evil of rulers.

天使长米迦勒，为摩西的尸首与魔鬼争辩的时候，尚且不敢用毁谤的话罪责他，只说，主责备你吧。
Now when Michael, one of the chief angels, was fighting against the Evil One for the body of Moses, fearing to make use of violent words against him, he only said, May the Lord be your judge.

但这些人毁谤他们所不知道的。他们本性所知道的事与那没有灵性的畜类一样，在这事上竟败坏了自己。
But these men say evil about such things as they have no knowledge of; and the things of which they have natural knowledge, like beasts without reason, are the cause of their destruction.

他们有祸了。因为走了该隐的道路，又为利往巴兰的错谬里直奔，并在可拉的背叛中灭亡了。
A curse on them! They have gone in the way of Cain, running uncontrolled into the error of Balaam for reward, and have come to destruction by saying evil against the Lord, like Korah.

这样的人，在你们的爱席上，与你们同吃的时候，正是礁石。（或作玷污）他们作牧人，只知喂养自己，无所惧怕。是没有雨的云彩，被风飘荡，是秋天没有果子的树，死而又死，连根被拔出来。
These men are unseen rocks at your love-feasts, when they take part in them with you, keepers of sheep who without fear take the food of the sheep; clouds without water rushing before the wind, wasted trees without fruit, twice dead, pulled up by the roots,

是海里的狂浪，涌出自己可耻的沫子来。是流荡的星，有墨黑的幽暗为他们永远存留。
Violent waves of the sea, streaming with their shame, wandering stars for whom the darkest night is kept in store for ever.

亚当的七世孙以诺，曾预言这些人说，看哪，主带着他的千万圣者降临，
The prophet Enoch, who was the seventh after Adam, said of these men, The Lord came with tens of thousands of his saints,

要在众人身上行审判，证实那一切不敬虔的人，所妄行一切不敬虔的事，又证实不敬虔之罪人所说顶撞他的刚愎话。
To be the judge of all, and to give a decision against all those whose lives are unpleasing to him, because of the evil acts which they have done, and because of all the hard things which sinners without fear of God have said against him.

这些人是私下议论，常发怨言的，随从自己的情欲而行，口中说夸大的话，为得便宜谄媚人。
These are the men who make trouble, ever desiring change, going after evil pleasures, using high-sounding words, respecting men's position in the hope of reward.

亲爱的弟兄阿，你们要记念我们主耶稣基督之使徒从前所说的话。
But you, my loved ones, keep in memory the words which were said before by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,

他们曾对你们说过，末世必有好讥诮的人，随从自己不敬虔的私欲而行。
How they said to you, In the last days there will be men who, guided by their evil desires, will make sport of holy things.

这就是那些引人结党，属乎血气，没有圣灵的人。
These are the men who make divisions, natural men, not having the Spirit.

亲爱的弟兄阿，你们却要在至圣的真道上造就自己，在圣灵里祷告，
But you, my loved ones, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, and making prayers in the Holy Spirit,

保守自己常在神的爱中，仰望我们主耶稣基督的怜悯，直到永生。
Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for life eternal through the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.

有些人存疑心，你们要怜悯他们。
And have pity on those who are in doubt;

有些人你们要从火中抢出来搭救他们。有些人你们要存惧怕的心怜悯他们。连那被情欲沾染的衣服也当厌恶。
And to some give salvation, pulling them out of the fire; and on some have mercy with fear, hating even the clothing which is made unclean by the flesh.

那能保守你们不失脚，叫你们无瑕无疵，欢欢喜喜站在他荣耀之前的，我们的救主独一的神。
Now to him who is able to keep you from falling, and to give you a place in his glory, free from all evil, with great joy,

愿荣耀，威严，能力，权柄，因我们的主耶稣基督，归与他，从万古以前，并现今，直到永永远远。阿们。
To the only God our Saviour, through Jesus Christ our Lord, let us give glory and honour and authority and power, before all time and now and for ever. So be it.

