太初有道，道与神同在，道就是神。
From the first he was the Word, and the Word was in relation with God and was God.

这道太初与神同在。
This Word was from the first in relation with God.

万物是借着他造的。凡被造的，没有一样不是借着他造的。
All things came into existence through him, and without him nothing was.

生命在他里头。这生命就是人的光。
What came into existence in him was life, and the life was the light of men.

光照在黑暗里，黑暗却不接受光。
And the light goes on shining in the dark; it is not overcome by the dark.

有一个人，是从神那里差来的，名叫约翰。
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John.

这人来，为要作见证，就是为光作见证，叫众人因他可以信。
He came for witness, to give witness about the light, so that all men might have faith through him.

他不是那光，乃是要为光作见证。
He himself was not the light: he was sent to give witness about the light.

那光是真光，照亮一切生在世上的人。
The true light, which gives light to every man, was then coming into the world.

他在世界，世界也是借着他造的，世界却不认识他。
He was in the world, the world which came into being through him, but the world had no knowledge of him.

他到自己的地方来，自己的人倒不接待他。
He came to the things which were his and his people did not take him to their hearts.

凡接待他的，就是信他名的人，他就赐他们权柄，作神的儿女。
To all those who did so take him, however, he gave the right of becoming children of God--that is, to those who had faith in his name:

这等人不是从血气生的，不是从情欲生的，也不是从人意生的，乃是从神生的。
Whose birth was from God and not from blood, or from an impulse of the flesh and man's desire.

道成了肉身住在我们中间，充充满满的有恩典有真理。我们也见过他的荣光，正是父独生子的荣光。
And so the Word became flesh and took a place among us for a time; and we saw his glory--such glory as is given to an only son by his father--saw it to be true and full of grace.

约翰为他作见证，喊着说，这就是我曾说，那在我以后来的，反成了在我以前的。因他本来在我以前。
John gave witness about him, crying, This is he of whom I said, He who is coming after me is put over me because he was in existence before me.

从他丰满的恩典里我们都领受了，而且恩上加恩。
From his full measure we have all been given grace on grace.

律法本是借着摩西传的，恩典和真理，都是由耶稣基督来的。
For the law was given through Moses; grace and the true way of life are ours through Jesus Christ.

从来没有人看见神。只有在父怀里的独生子将他表明出来。
No man has seen God at any time; the only Son, who is on the breast of the Father, he has made clear what God is.

约翰所作的见证，记在下面。犹太人从耶路撒冷差祭司和利未人到约翰那里，问他说，你是谁。
And this is the witness of John when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him with the question, Who are you?

他就明说，并不隐瞒。明说，我不是基督。
He said quite openly and straightforwardly, I am not the Christ.

他们又问他说，这样你是谁呢？是以利亚吗？他说，我不是。是那先知吗？他回答说，不是。
And they said to him, What then? Are you Elijah? And he said, I am not. Are you the prophet? And his answer was, I am not.

于是他们说，你到底是谁？叫我们好回覆差我们来的人。你自己说，你是谁。
So they said to him, Who are you then? We have to give some answer to those who sent us. What have you to say about yourself?

他说，我就是那在旷野有人声喊着说，修直主的道路，正如先知以赛亚所说的。
He said, I am the voice of one crying in the waste land, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the prophet.

那些人是法利赛人差来的。（或作那差来的是法利赛人）
Those who had been sent came from the Pharisees.

他们就问他说，你既不是基督，不是以利亚，也不是那先知，为什么施洗呢？
And they put this question to him, saying, Why then are you giving baptism if you are not the Christ, or Elijah, or the prophet?

约翰回答说，我是用水施洗，但有一位站在你们中间，是你们不认识的，
John's answer was: I give baptism with water; but there is one among you of whom you have no knowledge;

就是那在我以后来的，我给他解鞋带，也不配。
It is he who is coming after me; I am not good enough to undo his shoes.

这是在约但河外，伯大尼，（有古卷作伯大巴喇）约翰施洗的地方作的见证。
These things took place at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was giving baptism.

次日，约翰看见耶稣来到他那里，就说，看哪，神的羔羊，除去（或作背负）世人罪孽的。
The day after, John sees Jesus coming to him and says, See, here is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!

这就是我曾说，有一位在我以后来，反成了在我以前的。因他本来在我以前。
This is he of whom I said, One is coming after me who is put over me because he was in existence before me.

我先前不认识他，如今我来用水施洗，为要叫他显明给以色列人。
I myself had no knowledge of him, but I came giving baptism with water so that he might be seen openly by Israel.

约翰又作见证说，我曾看见圣灵，仿佛鸽子从天降下，住在他的身上。
And John gave this witness, saying, I saw the Spirit coming down from heaven like a dove and resting on him.

我先前不认识他。只是那差我来用水施洗的，对我说，你看见圣灵降下来，住在谁的身上，谁就是用圣灵施洗的。
I had no knowledge who he was, but he who sent me to give baptism with water said to me, The one on whom you see the Spirit coming down and resting, it is he who gives baptism with the Holy Spirit.

我看见了，就证明这是神的儿子。
This I saw myself and my witness is that he is the Son of God.

再次日，约翰同两个门徒站在那里。
The day after, John was there again with two of his disciples;

他见耶稣行走，就说，看哪，这是神的羔羊。
And looking at Jesus while he was walking he said, See, there is the Lamb of God!

两个门徒听见他的话，就跟从了耶稣。
Hearing what he said, the two disciples went after Jesus.

耶稣转过身来，看见他们跟着，就问他们说，你们要什么？他们说，拉比，在哪里住？（拉比翻出来，就是夫子）
And Jesus, turning round, saw them coming after him and said to them, What are you looking for? They said to him, Rabbi (which is to say, Master), where are you living?

耶稣说，你们来看。他们就去看他在哪里住，这一天便与他同住，那时约有申正了。
He said to them, Come and see. They went with him then and saw where he was living; and they were with him all that day: it was then about the tenth hour of the day.

听见约翰的话，跟从耶稣的那两个人，一个是西门彼得的兄弟安得烈。
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two men who, hearing what John said, went after Jesus.

他先找着自己的哥哥西门，对他说，我们遇见弥赛亚了，（弥赛亚翻出来，就是基督）
Early in the morning he came across his brother and said to him, We have made discovery! It is the Messiah! (which is to say, the Christ).

于是领他去见耶稣。耶稣看着他说，你是约翰的儿子西门，（约翰马太十六章十七节称约拿）你要称为矶法。（矶法翻出来，就是彼得）
And he took him to Jesus. Looking at him fixedly Jesus said, You are Simon, the son of John; your name will be Cephas (which is to say, Peter).

又次日，耶稣想要往加利利去，遇见腓力，就对他说，来跟从我吧。
The day after this, Jesus had a desire to go into Galilee. He came across Philip and said to him, Come and be my disciple.

这腓力是伯赛大人，和安得烈、彼得同城。
Now Philip's town was Beth-saida, where Andrew and Peter came from.

腓力找着拿但业，对他说，摩西在律法上所写的，和众先知所记的那一位，我们遇见了，就是约瑟的儿子拿撒勒人耶稣。
Philip came across Nathanael and said to him, We have made a discovery! It is he of whom Moses, in the law, and the prophets were writing, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

拿但业对他说，拿撒勒还能出什么好的吗？腓力说，你来看。
Nazareth! said Nathanael, Is it possible for any good to come out of Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.

耶稣看见拿但业来，就指着他说，看哪，这是个真以色列人，他心里是没有诡诈的。
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and said of him, See, here is a true son of Israel in whom there is nothing false.

拿但业对耶稣说，你从哪里知道我呢？耶稣回答说，腓力还没有招呼你，你在无花果树底下，我就看见你了。
Nathanael said to him, Where did you get knowledge of me? In answer Jesus said, Before Philip was talking with you, while you were still under the fig-tree, I saw you.

拿但业说，拉比，你是神的儿子，你是以色列的王。
Nathanael said to him, Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel!

耶稣对他说，因为我说在无花果树底下看见你，你就信吗？你将要看见比这更大的事。
In answer Jesus said to him, You have faith because I said to you, I saw you under the fig-tree. You will see greater things than these.

又说，我实实在在地告诉你们，你们将要看见天开了，神的使者上去下来在人子身上。
And he said to him, Truly I say to you all, You will see heaven opening and God's angels going up and coming down on the Son of man.

第三日，在加利利的迦拿有娶亲的筵席。耶稣的母亲在那里。
On the third day two people were going to be married at Cana in Galilee. The mother of Jesus was there:

耶稣和他的门徒也被请去赴席。
And Jesus with his disciples came as guests.

酒用尽了，耶稣的母亲对他说，他们没有酒了。
When they had not enough wine, the mother of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.

耶稣说，母亲，（原文作妇人）我与你有什么相干。我的时候还没有到。
Jesus said to her, Woman, this is not your business; my time is still to come.

他母亲对用人说，他告诉你们什么，你们就作什么。
His mother said to the servants, Whatever he says to you, do it.

照犹太人洁净的规矩，有六口石缸摆在那里，每口可以盛两三桶水。
Now six pots of stone, every one taking two or three firkins of water, were placed there for the purpose of washing, as is the way of the Jews.

耶稣对用人说，把缸倒满了水。他们就倒满了，直到缸口。
Jesus said to the servants, Make the pots full of water. And they made them full to the top.

耶稣又说，现在可以舀出来，送给管筵席的。他们就送了去。
Then he said to them, Now take some, and give it to the master of the feast. So they took it to him.

管筵席的尝了那水变的酒，并不知道是哪里来的，只有舀水的用人知道。管筵席的便叫新郎来。
After tasting the water which had now become wine, the master of the feast (having no idea where it came from, though it was clear to the servants who took the water out) sent for the newly-married man,

对他说，人都是先摆上好酒。等客喝足了，才摆上次的。你倒把好酒留到如今。
And said to him, Every man first puts out his best wine and when all have had enough he puts out what is not so good; but you have kept the good wine till now.

这是耶稣所行的头一件神迹，是在加利利的迦拿行的，显出他的荣耀来。他的门徒就信他了。
This, the first of his signs, Jesus did at Cana in Galilee and let his glory be seen openly; and his disciples put their faith in him.

这事以后，耶稣与他的母亲弟兄和门徒，都下迦百农去。在那里住了不多几日。
After this he went down to Capernaum, with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they were there not more than two or three days.

犹太人的逾越节近了，耶稣就上耶路撒冷去。
The time of the Passover of the Jews was near and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

看见殿里有卖牛羊鸽子的，并有兑换银钱的人，坐在那里。
And there in the Temple he saw men trading in oxen and sheep and doves, and he saw the changers of money in their seats:

耶稣就拿绳子作成鞭子，把牛羊都赶出殿去。倒出兑换银钱之人的银钱，推翻他们的桌子。
And he made a whip of small cords and put them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen, sending in all directions the small money of the changers and overturning their tables;

又对卖鸽子的说，把这些东西拿去。不要将我父的殿，当作买卖的地方。
And to those who were trading in doves he said, Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a market.

他的门徒就想起经上记着说，我为你的殿，心里焦急，如同火烧。
And it came to the minds of the disciples that the Writings say, I am on fire with passion for your house.

因此，犹太人问他说，你既作这些事，还显什么神迹给我们看呢？
Then the Jews put this question to him: What sign of authority have you to give us, seeing that you do these things?

耶稣回答说，你们拆毁这殿，我三日内要再建立起来。
And Jesus said to them, Send destruction on this Temple and I will put it up again in three days.

犹太人便说，这殿是四十六年才造成的，你三日内就再建立起来吗？
The Jews said, The building of this Temple took forty-six years; and you will put it up in three days!

但耶稣这话，是以他的身体为殿。
But his words were about that holy building which was his body.

所以到他从死里复活以后，门徒就想起他说过这话，便信了圣经和耶稣所说的。
So when he had come back again from the dead, the memory of these words came back to the disciples, and they had faith in the holy Writings and in the word which Jesus had said.

当耶稣在耶路撒冷过逾越节的时候，有许多人看见他所行的神迹，就信了他的名。
Now while he was in Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover, a great number of people came to have faith in his name, after seeing the signs which he did.

耶稣却不将自己交托他们，因为他知道万人。
But Jesus did not have faith in them, because he had knowledge of them all.

也用不着谁见证人怎样。因他知道人心里所存的。
He had no need for any witness about man; for he himself had knowledge of what was in man.

有一个法利赛人，名叫尼哥底母，是犹太人的官。
Now there was among the Pharisees a man named Nicodemus, who was one of the rulers of the Jews.

这人夜里来见耶稣，说，拉比，我们知道你是由神那里来作师傅的。因为你所行的神迹，若没有神同在，无人能行。
He came to Jesus by night and said to him, Rabbi, we are certain that you have come from God as a teacher, because no man would be able to do these signs which you do if God was not with him.

耶稣回答说，我实实在在地告诉你，人若不重生，就不能见神的国。
Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you, Without a new birth no man is able to see the kingdom of God.

尼哥底母说，人已经老了，如何能重生呢？岂能再进母腹生出来吗？
Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for a man to be given birth when he is old? Is he able to go into his mother's body a second time and come to birth again?

耶稣说，我实实在在地告诉你，人若不是从水和圣灵生的，就不能进神的国。
Jesus said in answer, Truly, I say to you, If a man's birth is not from water and from the Spirit, it is not possible for him to go into the kingdom of God.

从肉身生的，就是肉身。从灵生的，就是灵。
That which has birth from the flesh is flesh, and that which has birth from the Spirit is spirit.

我说，你们必须重生，你不要以为希奇。
Do not be surprised that I say to you, It is necessary for you to have a second birth.

风随着意思吹，你听见风的响声，却不晓得从哪里来，往哪里去。凡从圣灵生的，也是如此。
The wind goes where its pleasure takes it, and the sound of it comes to your ears, but you are unable to say where it comes from and where it goes: so it is with everyone whose birth is from the Spirit.

尼哥底母问他说，怎能有这事呢？
And Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible for these things to be?

耶稣回答说，你是以色列人的先生，还不明白这事吗？
And Jesus, answering, said, Are you the teacher of Israel and have no knowledge of these things?

我实实在在地告诉你，我们所说的，是我们知道的，我们所见证的，是我们见过的。你们却不领受我们的见证。
Truly, I say to you, We say that of which we have knowledge; we give witness of what we have seen; and you do not take our witness to be true.

我对你们说地上的事，你们尚且不信，若说天上的事，如何能信呢？
If you have no belief when my words are about the things of earth, how will you have belief if my words are about the things of heaven?

除了从天降下仍旧在天的人子，没有人升过天。
And no one has ever gone up to heaven but he who came down from heaven, the Son of man.

摩西在旷野怎样举蛇，人子也必照样被举起来。
As the snake was lifted up by Moses in the waste land, even so it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up:

叫一切信他的都得永生。（或作叫一切信的人在他里面得永生）
So that whoever has faith may have in him eternal life.

神爱世人，甚至将他的独生子赐给他们，叫一切信他的，不至灭亡，反得永生。
For God had such love for the world that he gave his only Son, so that whoever has faith in him may not come to destruction but have eternal life.

因为神差他的儿子降世，不是要定世人的罪，（或作审判世人下同）乃是要叫世人因他得救。
God did not send his Son into the world to be judge of the world; he sent him so that the world might have salvation through him.

信他的人，不被定罪。不信的人，罪已经定了，因为他不信神独生子的名。
The man who has faith in him does not come up to be judged; but he who has no faith in him has been judged even now, because he has no faith in the name of the only Son of God.

光来到世间，世人因自己的行为是恶的，不爱光倒爱黑暗，定他们的罪就是在此。
And this is the test by which men are judged: the light has come into the world and men have more love for the dark than for the light, because their acts are evil.

凡作恶的便恨光，并不来就光，恐怕他的行为受责备。
The light is hated by everyone whose acts are evil and he does not come to the light for fear that his acts will be seen.

但行真理的必来就光，要显明他所行的是靠神而行。
But he whose life is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his acts have been done by the help of God.

这事以后，耶稣和门徒到了犹太地，在那里居住施洗。
After these things Jesus and his disciples went into the land of Judaea, and there he was with them for some time, giving baptism.

约翰在靠近撒冷的哀嫩也施洗，因为那里水多。众人都去受洗。
Now John was then giving baptism at Aenon near Salim, because there was much water there; and people came and were given baptism.

那时约翰还没有下在监里。
For at this time John had not been put into prison.

约翰的门徒，和一个犹太人辩论洁净的礼。
Then a question came up between John's disciples and a Jew about washing.

就来见约翰说，拉比，从前同你在约但河外，你所见证的那位，现在施洗，众人都往他那里去了。
And they went to John and said to him, Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, the man to whom you gave witness, is now giving baptism, and everyone is going to him.

约翰说，若不是从天上赐的，人就不能得什么。
And this was John's answer: A man is unable to have anything if it is not given to him from heaven.

我曾说，我不是基督，是奉差遣在他前面的，你们自己可以给我作见证。
You yourselves give witness that I said, I am not the Christ. What I said was, I am sent before the Christ.

娶新妇的，就是新郎。新郎的朋友站着听见新郎的声音就甚喜乐。故此我这喜乐满足了。
He who has the bride is the husband: but the husband's friend, whose place is by his side and whose ears are open to him, is full of joy because of the husband's voice: such is my joy, and it is complete.

他必兴旺，我必衰微。
He has to become greater while I become less.

从天上来的，是在万有之上。从地上来的，是属乎地，他所说的，也是属乎地从天上来的，是在万有之上。
He who comes from heaven is greater than all others: he who comes from earth is of the earth, and of the earth are his words: he who comes from heaven is over all.

他将所见所闻的见证出来，只是没有人领受他的见证。
He gives witness of what he has seen and of what has come to his ears; and no man takes his witness as true.

那领受他见证的，就印上印，证明神是真的。
He who so takes his witness has made clear his faith that God is true.

神所差来的，就说神的话。因为神赐圣灵给他，是没有限量的。
For he whom God has sent says God's words; and God does not give him the Spirit by measure.

父爱子，已将万有交在他手里。
The Father has love for the Son and has put all things into his hands.

信子的人有永生。不信子的人得不着永生，（原文作不得见永生）神的震怒常在他身上。
He who has faith in the Son has eternal life; but he who has not faith in the Son will not see life; God's wrath is resting on him.

主知道法利赛人听见他收门徒施洗比约翰还多，
Now when it was clear to the Lord that word had come to the ears of the Pharisees that Jesus was making more disciples than John and was giving them baptism

（其实不是耶稣亲自施洗，乃是他的门徒施洗）
(Though, in fact, it was his disciples who gave baptism, not Jesus himself),

他就离了犹太，又往加利利去。
He went out of Judaea into Galilee again.

必须经过撒玛利亚。
And it was necessary for him to go through Samaria.

于是到了撒玛利亚的一座城，名叫叙加，靠近雅各给他儿子约瑟的那块地。
So he came to a town of Samaria which was named Sychar, near to the bit of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph:

在那里有雅各井。耶稣因走路困乏，就坐在井旁。那时约有午正。
Now Jacob's fountain was there. Jesus, being tired after his journey, was resting by the fountain. It was about the sixth hour.

有一个撒玛利亚的妇人来打水。耶稣对她说，请你给我水喝。
A woman of Samaria came to get water, and Jesus said to her, Give me some water.

那时门徒进城买食物去了。
For his disciples had gone to the town to get food.

撒玛利亚的妇人对他说，你既是犹太人，怎么向我一个撒玛利亚妇人要水喝呢？原来犹太人和撒玛利亚人没有来往。
The woman of Samaria said to him, Why do you, a Jew, make a request for water to me, a woman of Samaria? She said this because Jews have nothing to do with the people of Samaria.

耶稣回答说，你若知道神的恩赐，和对你说给我水喝的是谁，你必早求他，他也必早给了你活水。
In answer Jesus said, If you had knowledge of what God gives freely and who it is who says to you, Give me water, you would make your prayer to him, and he would give you living water.

妇人说，先生没有打水的器具，井又深，你从哪里得活水呢？
The woman said to him, Sir, you have no vessel and the fountain is deep; from where will you get the living water?

我们的祖宗雅各，将这井留给我们。他自己和儿子并牲畜，也都喝这井里的水，难道你比他还大吗？
Are you greater than our father Jacob who gave us the fountain and took the water of it himself, with his children and his cattle?

耶稣回答说，凡喝这水的，还要再渴。
Jesus said to her, Everyone who takes this water will be in need of it again:

人若喝我所赐的水就永远不渴。我所赐的水，要在他里头成为泉源，直涌到永生。
But whoever takes the water I give him will never be in need of drink again; for the water I give him will become in him a fountain of eternal life.

妇人说，先生，请把这水赐给我，叫我不渴，也不用来这么远打水。
The woman said to him, Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be in need again of drink and will not have to come all this way for it.

耶稣说，你去叫你丈夫也到这里来。
Jesus said to her, Go, get your husband and come back here with him.

妇人说，我没有丈夫。耶稣说，你说没有丈夫，是不错的。
In answer, the woman said, I have no husband. Jesus said to her, You have said rightly, I have no husband:

你已经有五个丈夫。你现在有的，并不是你的丈夫。你这话是真的。
You have had five husbands, and the man you have now is not your husband: that was truly said.

妇人说，先生，我看出你是先知。
The woman said to him, Sir, I see that you are a prophet.

我们的祖宗在这山上礼拜。你们倒说，应当礼拜的地方是在耶路撒冷。
Our fathers gave worship on this mountain, but you Jews say that the right place for worship is in Jerusalem.

耶稣说，妇人，你当信我，时候将到，你们拜父，也不在这山上，也不在耶路撒冷。
Jesus said to her, Woman, take my word for this; the time is coming when you will not give worship to the Father on this mountain or in Jerusalem.

你们所拜的，你们不知道。我们所拜的，我们知道。因为救恩是从犹太人出来的。
You give worship, but without knowledge of what you are worshipping: we give worship to what we have knowledge of: for salvation comes from the Jews.

时候将到，如今就是了，那真正拜父的，要用心灵和诚实拜他，因为父要这样的人拜他。
But the time is coming, and is even now here, when the true worshippers will give worship to the Father in the true way of the spirit, for these are the worshippers desired by the Father.

神是个灵（或无个字）所以拜他的，必须用心灵和诚实拜他。
God is Spirit: then let his worshippers give him worship in the true way of the spirit.

妇人说，我知道弥赛亚，（就是那称为基督的）要来。他来了，必将一切的事都告诉我们。
The woman said to him, I am certain that the Messiah, who is named Christ, is coming; when he comes he will make all things clear to us.

耶稣说，这和你说话的就是他。
Jesus said to her, I, who am talking to you, am he.

当下门徒回来，就希奇耶稣和一个妇人说话。只是没有人说，你是要什么？或说，你为什么和她说话？
At that point the disciples came back, and they were surprised to see him talking to a woman; but not one of them said to him, What is your purpose? or, Why are you talking to her?

那妇人就留下水罐子，往城里去，对众人说，
Then the woman put down her water-pot and went into the town, and said to the people,

你们来看，有一个人将我素来所行的一切事，都给我说出来了，莫非这就是基督吗？
Come and see a man who has been talking to me of everything I ever did! Is it possible that this is the Christ?

众人就出城往耶稣那里去。
So they went out of the town and came to him.

这其间，门徒对耶稣说，拉比请吃。
While this was taking place, the disciples were saying to Jesus, Master, take some food.

耶稣说，我有食物吃，是你们不知道的。
But he said to them, I have food of which you have no knowledge.

门徒就彼此对问说，莫非有人拿什么给他吃吗？
So the disciples said one to another, Did anyone give him food?

耶稣说，我的食物，就是遵行差我来者的旨意，作成他的工。
Jesus said, My food is to do the pleasure of him who sent me and to make his work complete.

你们岂不说，到收割的时候，还有四个月吗？我告诉你们，举目向田观看，庄稼已经熟了，（原文作发白）可以收割了。
You would say, Four months from now is the time of the grain-cutting. Take a look, I say to you, at the fields; they are even now white for cutting.

收割的人得工价，积蓄五谷到永生。叫撒种的和收割的一同快乐。
He who does the cutting now has his reward; he is getting together fruit for eternal life, so that he who did the planting and he who gets in the grain may have joy together.

俗语说，那人撒种，这人收割，这话可见是真的。
In this the saying is a true one, One does the planting, and another gets in the grain.

我差你们去收你们所没有劳苦的。别人劳苦，你们享受他们所劳苦的。
I sent you to get in grain which you had no hand in planting: other men did that work, and you take the reward.

那城里有好些撒玛利亚人信了耶稣，因为那妇人作见证说，他将我素来所行的一切事，都给我说出来了。
Now a number of the people of that town had faith in him because of the woman's witness: He has been talking to me of everything I ever did.

于是撒玛利亚人来见耶稣，求他在他们那里住下。他便在那里住了两天。
So when the people came to him they made request to him to be among them for a time, and he was there two days.

因耶稣的话，信的人就更多了。
And a great number more of them came to have faith in him because of what he himself said.

便对妇人说，现在我们信，不是因为你的话，是我们亲自听见了，知道这真是救世主。
And they said to the woman, Now we have faith, but not because of your story: we ourselves have given ear to his words, and we are certain that he is truly the Saviour of the world.

过了那两天，耶稣离了那地方，往加利利去。
And after the two days he went on from there into Galilee.

因为耶稣自己作过见证说，先知在本地是没有人尊敬的。
For Jesus himself said that a prophet has no honour in the country of his birth.

到了加利利，加利利人既然看见他在耶路撒冷过节所行的一切事，就接待他。因为他们也是上去过节。
So when he came into Galilee, the Galilaeans took him to their hearts because of the things which they had seen him do in Jerusalem at the feast--they themselves having been there at the feast.

耶稣又到了加利利的迦拿，就是他从前变水为酒的地方。有一个大臣，他的儿子在迦百农患病。
So he came to Cana in Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was a certain man of high position whose son was ill at Capernaum.

他听见耶稣从犹太到了加利利，就来见他，求他下去医治他的儿子。因为他儿子快要死了。
When it came to his ears that Jesus had come from Judaea into Galilee, he went to him and made a request that he would come down to his son, who was near to death, and make him well.

耶稣就对他说，若不看见神迹奇事，你们总是不信。
Then Jesus said to him, You will not have faith if you do not see signs and wonders.

那大臣说，先生，求你趁着我的孩子还没有死，就下去。
The man said, Sir, come down before my boy is dead.

耶稣对他说，回去吧。你的儿子活了。那人信耶稣所说的话，就回去了。
And Jesus said, Go in peace; your son is living. The man had faith in the word which Jesus said to him and went away.

正下去的时候，他的仆人迎见他，说，他的儿子活了。
And while he was going down, his servants came to him and said, Your boy is living.

他就问什么时候见好的。他们说，昨日未时热就退了。
So he put a question to them as to the hour when he became better; and they said to him, The disease went from him yesterday at the seventh hour.

他便知道这正是耶稣对他说，你儿子活了的时候，他自己和全家就都信了。
It was clear then to the father that this was the very time at which Jesus said to him, Your son is living. And he had faith in Jesus, he and all his family.

这是耶稣在加利利行的第二件神迹，是他从犹太回去以后行的。
Now this is the second sign which Jesus did after he had come out of Judaea into Galilee.

这事以后，到了犹太人的一个节期。耶稣就上耶路撒冷去。
After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

在耶路撒冷，靠近羊门，有一个池子，希伯来话叫作毕士大，旁边有五个廊子。
Now in Jerusalem near the sheep-market there is a public bath which in Hebrew is named Beth-zatha. It has five doorways.

里面躺着瞎眼的，瘸腿的，血气枯干的，许多病人。（有古卷在此有等候水动
In these doorways there were a great number of people with different diseases: some unable to see, some without the power of walking, some with wasted bodies.

因为有天使按时下池子搅动那水，水动之后，谁先下去，无论害什么病，就痊愈了）。
[]

在那里有一个人，病了三十八年。
One man was there who had been ill for thirty-eight years.

耶稣看见他躺着，知道他病了许久，就问他说，你要痊愈吗？
When Jesus saw him there on the floor it was clear to him that he had been now a long time in that condition, and so he said to the man, Is it your desire to get well?

病人回答说，先生，水动的时候，没有人把我放在池子里。我正去的时候，就有别人比我先下去。
The ill man said in answer, Sir, I have nobody to put me into the bath when the water is moving; and while I am on the way down some other person gets in before me.

耶稣对他说，起来，拿你的褥子走吧。
Jesus said to him, Get up, take your bed and go.

那人立刻痊愈，就拿起褥子来走了。
And the man became well straight away, and took up his bed and went. Now that day was the Sabbath.

那天是安息日，所以犹太人对那医好的人说，今天是安息日，你拿褥子是不可的。
So the Jews said to the man who had been made well, It is the Sabbath; and it is against the law for you to take up your bed.

他却回答说，那使我痊愈的，对我说，拿你的褥子走吧。
He said to them, But he who made me well, said to me, Take up your bed and go.

他们问他说，对你说拿褥子走的，是什么人？
Then they put to him the question: Who is the man who said to you, Take it up and go?

那医好的人不知道是谁。因为那里的人多，耶稣已经躲开了。
Now he who had been made well had no knowledge who it was, Jesus having gone away because of the number of people who were in that place.

后来耶稣在殿里遇见他，对他说，你已经痊愈了。不要再犯罪。恐怕你遭遇的更加利害。
After a time Jesus came across him in the Temple and said to him, See, you are well and strong; do no more sin for fear a worse thing comes to you.

那人就去告诉犹太人，使他痊愈的是耶稣。
The man went away and said to the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.

所以犹太人逼迫耶稣，因为他在安息日作了这事。
And for this reason the Jews were turned against Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.

耶稣就对他们说，我父作事直到如今，我也作事。
But his answer was: My Father is still working even now, and so I am working.

所以犹太人越发想要杀他。因他不但犯了安息日，并且称神为他的父，将自己和神当作平等。
For this cause the Jews had an even greater desire to put Jesus to death, because not only did he not keep the Sabbath but he said God was his Father, so making himself equal with God.

耶稣对他们说，我实实在在地告诉你们，子凭着自己不能作什么，惟有看见父所作的，子才能作。父所作的事，子也照样作。
So Jesus made answer and said, Truly I say to you, The Son is not able to do anything himself; he is able to do only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does the Son does it in the same way.

父爱子，将自己所作的一切事指给他看。还要将比这更大的事指给他看，叫你们希奇。
For the Father has love for the Son and lets him see everything which he does: and he will let him see greater works than these so that you may be full of wonder.

父怎样叫死人起来，使他们活着，子也照样随自己的意思使人活着。
In the same way, as the Father gives life to the dead, even so the Son gives life to those to whom he is pleased to give it.

父不审判什么人，乃将审判的事全交与子。
The Father is not the judge of men, but he has given all decisions into the hands of the Son;

叫人都尊敬子，如同尊敬父一样。不尊敬子的，就是不尊敬差子来的父。
So that all men may give honour to the Son even as they give honour to the Father. He who gives no honour to the Son gives no honour to the Father who sent him.

我实实在在地告诉你们，那听我话，又信差我来者的，就有永生，不至于定罪，是已经出死入生了。
Truly I say to you, The man whose ears are open to my word and who has faith in him who sent me, has eternal life; he will not be judged, but has come from death into life.

我实实在在地告诉你们，时候将到，现在就是了，死人要听见神儿子的声音。听见的人就要活了。
Truly I say to you, The time is coming, it has even now come, when the voice of the Son of God will come to the ears of the dead, and those hearing it will have life.

因为父怎样在自己有生命，就赐给他儿子也照样在自己有生命。
For even as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself.

并且因为他是人子，就赐给他行审判的权柄。
And he has given him authority to be judge because he is the Son of man.

你们不要把这事看作希奇。时候要到，凡在坟墓里的，都要听见他的声音，就出来。
Do not be surprised at this: for the time is coming when his voice will come to all who are in the place of the dead,

行善的复活得生，作恶的复活定罪。
And they will come out; those who have done good, into the new life; and those who have done evil, to be judged.

我凭着自己不能作什么。我怎么听见，就怎么审判。我的审判也是公平的。因为我不求自己的意思，只求那差我来者的意思。
Of myself I am unable to do anything: as the voice comes to me so I give a decision: and my decision is right because I have no desire to do what is pleasing to myself, but only what is pleasing to him who sent me.

我若为自己作见证，我的见证就不真。
If I gave witness about myself, my witness would not be true.

另有一位给我作见证。我也知道他给我作的见证是真的。
There is another who gives witness about me and I am certain that the witness he gives about me is true.

你们曾差人到约翰那里，他为真理作过见证。
You sent to John and he gave true witness.

其实我所受的见证，不是从人来的。然而我说这些话，为要叫你们得救。
But I have no need of a man's witness: I only say these things so that you may have salvation.

约翰是点着的明灯。你们情愿暂时喜欢他的光。
He was a burning and shining light, and for a time you were ready to be happy in his light.

但我有比约翰更大的见证。因为父交给我要我成就的事，就是我所作的事，这便见证我是父所差来的。
But the witness which I have is greater than that of John: the work which the Father has given me to do, the very work which I am now doing, is a witness that the Father has sent me.

差我来的父，也为我作过见证。你们从来没有听见他的声音，也没有看见他的形像。
And the Father himself who sent me has given witness about me. Not one of you has ever given ear to his voice; his form you have not seen.

你们并没有他的道存在心里。因为他所差来的，你们不信。
And you have not kept his word in your hearts, because you have not faith in him whom he has sent.

你们查考圣经。（或作应当查考圣经）因你们以为内中有永生。给我作见证的就是这经。
You make search in the holy Writings, in the belief that through them you get eternal life; and it is those Writings which give witness about me.

然而你们不肯到我这里来得生命。
And still you have no desire to come to me so that you may have life.

我不受从人来的荣耀。
I do not take honour from men;

但我知道你们心里，没有神的爱。
But I have knowledge of you that you have no love for God in your hearts.

我奉我父的名来，你们并不接待我。若有别人奉自己的名来，你们倒要接待他。
I have come in my Father's name, and your hearts are not open to me. If another comes with no other authority but himself, you will give him your approval.

你们互相受荣耀，却不求从独一之神来的荣耀，怎能信我呢？
How is it possible for you to have faith while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour which comes from the only God?

不要想我在父面前要告你们。有一位告你们的，就是你们所仰赖的摩西。
Put out of your minds the thought that I will say things against you to the Father: the one who says things against you is Moses, on whom you put your hopes.

你们如果信摩西，也必信我。因为他书上有指着我写的话。
If you had belief in Moses you would have belief in me; for his writings are about me.

你们若不信他的书，怎能信我的话呢？
If you have no belief in his writings, how will you have belief in my words?

这事以后，耶稣渡过加利利海，就是提比哩亚海。
After these things Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee--that is, the sea of Tiberias.

有许多人，因为看见他在病人身上所行的神迹，就跟随他。
And a great number of people went after him because they saw the signs which he did on those who were ill.

耶稣上了山，和门徒一同坐在那里。
Then Jesus went up the mountain and was seated there with his disciples.

那时犹太人的逾越节近了。
Now the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was near.

耶稣举目看见许多人来，就对腓力说，我们从哪里买饼叫这些人吃呢？
Lifting up his eyes, Jesus saw a great number of people coming to where he was, and he said to Philip, Where may we get bread for all these people?

他说这话，是要试验腓力。他自己原知道要怎样行。
This he said, testing him: for he had no doubt what he himself would do.

腓力回答说，就是二十两银子的饼，叫他们各人吃一点，也是不够的。
Philip made answer, Bread to the value of two hundred pence would not be enough even to give everyone a little.

有一个门徒，就是西门彼得的兄弟安得烈，对耶稣说，
One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to Jesus,

在这里有一个孩童，带着五个大麦饼，两条鱼。只是分给这许多人，还算什么呢？
There is a boy here with five barley cakes and two fishes: but what is that among such a number?

耶稣说，你们叫众人坐下。原来那地方的草多，众人就坐下。数目约有五千。
Jesus said, Let the people be seated. Now there was much grass in that place. And those seated on the grass were about five thousand.

耶稣拿起饼来，祝谢了，就分给那坐着的人。分鱼也是这样，都随着他们所要的。
Then Jesus took the cakes and having given praise to God, he gave them to the people who were seated, and the fishes in the same way, as much as they had need of.

他们吃饱了，耶稣对门徒说，把剩下的零碎，收拾起来，免得有糟蹋的。
And when they had had enough, Jesus said to his disciples, Take up the broken bits which are over, so that nothing may be wasted.

他们便将那五个大麦饼的零碎，就是众人吃了剩下的，收拾起来，装满了十二个篮子。
So they took them up: twelve baskets full of broken bits of the five cakes which were over after the people had had enough.

众人看见耶稣所行的神迹。就说，这真是那要到世间来的先知。
And when the people saw the sign which he had done, they said, Truly, this is the prophet who is to come into the world.

耶稣既知道众人要来强逼他作王，就独自又退到山上去了。
Now when Jesus saw that the people were about to come and take him by force to make him a king, he went away again up the mountain by himself.

到了晚上，他的门徒下海边去，
When evening came the disciples went down to the sea;

上了船，要过海往迦百农去。天已经黑了，耶稣还没有来到他们那里。
And they took a boat and went across the sea in the direction of Capernaum. By then it was dark and still Jesus had not come to them.

忽然狂风大作，海就翻腾起来。
The sea was getting rough because of a strong wind which was blowing.

门徒摇橹约行了十里多路，看见耶稣在海面上走，渐渐近了船，他们就害怕。
After they had gone three or four miles they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near to the boat; and they had great fear.

耶稣对他们说，是我。不要怕。
But he said to them, It is I, have no fear.

门徒就喜欢接他上船，船立时到了他们所要去的地方。
Then they readily took him into the boat: and straight away the boat was at the land to which they were going.

第二日，站在海那边的众人，知道那里没有别的船，只有一只小船，又知道耶稣没有同他的门徒上船，乃是门徒自己去的。
The day after, the people who were on the other side of the sea saw that only one small boat had been there, that Jesus had not gone in that boat with the disciples, but that the disciples had gone away by themselves.

然而有几只小船从提比哩亚来，靠近主祝谢后分饼给人吃的地方。
Some other boats, however, came from Tiberias near to the place where they had taken the bread after the Lord had given praise.

众人见耶稣和门徒，都不在那里，就上了船，往迦百农去找耶稣。
So when the people saw that Jesus was not there, or his disciples, they got into those boats and went over to Capernaum looking for Jesus.

既在海那边找着了，就对他说，拉比，是几时到这里来的。
And when they came across him on the other side of the sea they said, Rabbi, when did you come here?

耶稣回答说，我实实在在地告诉你们，你们找我，并不是因见了神迹，乃是因吃饼得饱。
Jesus, answering them, said, Truly I say to you, You come after me, not because you saw signs, but because you were given the bread and had enough.

不要为那必坏的食物劳力，要为那存到永生的食物劳力，就是人子要赐给你们的。因为人子是父神所印证的。
Let your work not be for the food which comes to an end, but for the food which goes on for eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you, for on him has God the Father put his mark.

众人问他说，我们当行什么，才算作神的工呢？
Then they said to him, How may we do the works of God?

耶稣回答说，信神所差来的，这就是作神的工。
Jesus, answering, said to them, This is to do the work of God: to have faith in him whom God has sent.

他们又说，你行什么神迹，叫我们看见就信你。你到底作什么事呢？
So they said, What sign do you give us, so that we may see and have faith in you? What do you do?

我们的祖宗在旷野吃过吗哪，如经上写着说，他从天上赐下粮来给他们吃。
Our fathers had the manna in the waste land, as the Writings say, He gave them bread from heaven.

耶稣说，我实实在在地告诉你们，那从天上来的粮，不是摩西赐给你们的，乃是我父将天上来的真粮赐给你们。
Jesus then said to them, Truly I say to you, What Moses gave you was not the bread from heaven; it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven.

因为神的粮，就是那从天上降下来赐生命给世界的。
The bread of God is the bread which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world.

他们说，主阿，常将这粮赐给我们。
Ah, Lord, they said, give us that bread for ever!

耶稣说，我就是生命的粮。到我这里来的，必定不饿。信我的，永远不渴。
And this was the answer of Jesus: I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never be in need of food, and he who has faith in me will never be in need of drink.

只是我对你们说过，你们已经看见我，还是不信。
But it is as I said to you: you have seen me, and still you have no faith.

凡父所赐给我的人，必到我这里来。到我这里来的，我总不丢弃他。
Whatever the Father gives to me will come to me; and I will not send away anyone who comes to me.

因为我从天上降下来，不是要按自己的意思行，乃是要按那差我来者的意思行。
For I have come down from heaven, not to do my pleasure, but the pleasure of him who sent me.

差我来者的意思，就是他所赐给我的，叫我一个也不失落，在末日却叫他复活。
And this is the pleasure of him who sent me, that I am not to let out of my hands anything which he has given me, but I am to give it new life on the last day.

因为我父的意思，是叫一切见子而信的人得永生。并且在末日我要叫他复活。
This, I say, is my Father's pleasure, that everyone who sees the Son and has faith in him may have eternal life: and I will take him up on the last day.

犹太人因为耶稣说，我是从天上降下来的粮，就私下议论他。
Now the Jews said bitter things about Jesus because of his words, I am the bread which came down from heaven.

说，这不是约瑟的儿子耶稣吗？他的父母我们岂不认得吗？他如今怎么说，我是从天上降下来的呢？
And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we have seen? How is it then that he now says, I have come down from heaven?

耶稣回答说，你们不要大家议论。
Jesus made answer and said, Do not say things against me, one to another.

若不是差我来的父吸引人，就没有能到我这里来的。到我这里来的，在末日我要叫他复活。
No man is able to come to me if the Father who sent me does not give him the desire to come: and I will take him up from the dead on the last day.

在先知书上写着说，他们都要蒙神的教训。凡听见父之教训又学习的，就到我这里来。
The writings of the prophets say, And they will all have teaching from God. Everyone whose ears have been open to the teaching of the Father comes to me.

这不是说，有人看见过父，惟独从神来的，他看见过父。
Not that anyone has ever seen the Father; only he who is from God, he has seen the Father.

我实实在在地告诉你们，信的人有永生。
Truly I say to you, He who has faith in me has eternal life.

我就是生命的粮。
I am the bread of life.

你们的祖宗在旷野吃过吗哪，还是死了。
Your fathers took the manna in the waste land--and they are dead.

这是从天上降下来的粮，叫人吃了就不死。
The bread which comes from heaven is such bread that a man may take it for food and never see death.

我是从天上降下来生命的粮。人若吃这粮，就必永远活着。我所要赐的粮，就是我的肉，为世人之生命所赐的。
I am the living bread which has come from heaven: if any man takes this bread for food he will have life for ever: and more than this, the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world.

因此，犹太人彼此争论说，这个人怎能把他的肉，给我们吃呢？
Then the Jews had an angry discussion among themselves, saying, How is it possible for this man to give us his flesh for food?

耶稣说，我实实在在地告诉你们，你们若不吃人子的肉，不喝人子的血，就没有生命在你们里面。
Then Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, If you do not take the flesh of the Son of man for food, and if you do not take his blood for drink, you have no life in you.

吃我肉，喝我血的人就有永生。在末日我要叫他复活。
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink has eternal life: and I will take him up from the dead at the last day.

我的肉真是可吃的，我的血真是可喝的。
My flesh is true food and my blood is true drink.

吃我肉喝我血的人，常在我里面，我也常在他里面。
He who takes my flesh for food and my blood for drink is in me and I in him.

永活的父怎样差我来，我又因父活着，照样，吃我肉的人，也要因我活着。
As the living Father has sent me, and I have life because of the Father, even so he who takes me for his food will have life because of me.

这就是从天上降下来的粮。吃这粮的人，就永远活着，不象你们的祖宗吃过吗哪，还是死了。
This is the bread which has come down from heaven. It is not like the food which your fathers had: they took of the manna, and are dead; but he who takes this bread for food will have life for ever.

这些话是耶稣在迦百农会堂里教训人说的。
Jesus said these things in the Synagogue while he was teaching at Capernaum.

他的门徒中有好些人听见了，就说，这话甚难，谁能听呢？
Then, hearing this, a number of his disciples said, This is a hard saying; who is able to take in such teaching?

耶稣心里知道门徒为这话议论，就对他们说，这话是叫你们厌弃吗？（厌弃原文作跌倒）
When Jesus became conscious that his disciples were protesting about what he said, he said to them, Does this give you trouble?

倘或你们看见人子升到他原来所在之处，怎么样呢？
What then will you say if you see the Son of man going up to where he was before?

叫人活着的乃是灵，肉体是无益的。我对你们所说的话，就是灵，就是生命。
The spirit is the life giver; the flesh is of no value: the words which I have said to you are spirit and they are life.

只是你们中间有不信的人。耶稣从起头就知道，谁不信他，谁要卖他。
But still some of you have no faith. For it was clear to Jesus from the first who they were who had no faith, and who it was who would be false to him.

耶稣又说，所以我对你们说过，若不是蒙我父的恩赐，没有人能到我这里来。
And he said, This is why I said to you, No man is able to come to me if he is not given the power to do so by the Father.

从此他门徒中多有退去的，不再和他同行。
Because of what he said, a number of the disciples went back and would no longer go with him.

耶稣就对那十二个门徒说，你们也要去吗？
So Jesus said to the twelve, Have you a desire to go away?

西门彼得回答说，主阿，你有永生之道，我们还归从谁呢？
Then Simon Peter gave this answer: Lord, to whom are we to go? you have the words of eternal life;

我们已经信了，又知道你是神的圣者。
And we have faith and are certain that you are the Holy One of God.

耶稣说，我不是拣选了你们十二个门徒吗？但你们中间有一个是魔鬼。
Then Jesus said, Did I not make a selection of you, the twelve, and one of you is a son of the Evil One?

耶稣这话是指着加略人西门的儿子犹大说的。他本是十二个门徒里的一个，后来要卖耶稣的。
He was talking of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. It was he who was to be false to Jesus--one of the twelve.

这事以后，耶稣在加利利游行，不愿在犹太游行。因为犹太人想要杀他。
After this, Jesus went from place to place in Galilee. He did not go about in Judaea, because the Jews were looking for a chance to put him to death.

当时犹太人的住棚节近了。
But the feast of the Jews, the feast of tents, was near.

耶稣的弟兄就对他说，你离开这里上犹太去吧，叫你的门徒也看见你所行的事。
So his brothers said to him, Go away from here into Judaea so that your disciples may see the works which you do.

人要显扬名声，没有在暗处行事的。你如果行这些事，就当将自己显明给世人看。
Because no man does things secretly if he has a desire that men may have knowledge of him. If you do these things, let yourself be seen by all men.

因为连他的弟兄说这话，是因为不信他。
For even his brothers had no belief in him.

耶稣就对他们说，我的时候还没有到。你们的时候常是方便的。
Jesus said to them, My time is still to come, but any time is good for you.

世人不能恨你们，却是恨我。因为我指证他们所作的事是恶的。
It is not possible for you to be hated by the world; but I am hated by it, because I give witness that what it does is evil.

你们上去过节吧。我现在不上去过这节。因为我的时候还没有满。
Go you up to the feast: I am not going up now to the feast because my time has not fully come.

耶稣说了这话，仍旧住在加利利。
Having said these things to them, he still kept in Galilee.

但他弟兄上去以后，他也上去过节，不是明去，似乎是暗去的。
But after his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he went up, not publicly, but in secret.

正在节期，犹太人寻找耶稣说，他在那里。
At the feast the Jews were looking for him and saying, Where is he?

众人为他纷纷议论。有的说，他是好人。有的说，不然，他是迷惑众人的。
And there was much discussion about him among the mass of the people. Some said, He is a good man; but others said, No, he is giving people false ideas.

只是没有人明明地讲论他，因为怕犹太人。
But no man said anything about him openly for fear of the Jews.

到了节期，耶稣上殿里去教训人。
Now in the middle of the feast Jesus went up to the Temple and was teaching.

犹太人就希奇说，这个人没有学过，怎么明白书呢？
Then the Jews were surprised and said, How has this man got knowledge of books? He has never been to school.

耶稣说，我的教训不是我自己的，乃是那差我来者的。
Jesus gave them this answer: It is not my teaching, but his who sent me.

人若立志遵着他的旨意行，就必晓得这教训或是出于神，或是我凭着自己说的。
If any man is ready to do God's pleasure he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it comes from--from God or from myself.

人凭着自己说，是求自己的荣耀。惟有求那差他来者的荣耀，这人是真的，在他心里没有不义。
The man whose words come from himself is looking for glory for himself, but he who is looking for the glory of him who sent him--that man is true and there is no evil in him.

摩西岂不是传律法给你们吗？你们却没有一个人守律法。为什么想要杀我呢？
Did not Moses give you the law? Even so, not one of you keeps the law. Why have you a desire to put me to death?

众人回答说，你是被鬼附着了。谁想要杀你。
The people said in answer, You have an evil spirit: who has any desire to put you to death?

耶稣说，我作了一件事，你们都以为希奇。
This was the answer of Jesus: I have done one work and you are all surprised at it.

摩西传割礼给你们，（其实不是从摩西起的，乃是从祖先起的）因此你们也在安息日给人行割礼。
Moses gave you circumcision--not that it comes from Moses, but from the fathers--and even on the Sabbath you give a child circumcision.

人若在安息日受割礼，免得违背摩西的律法。我在安息日叫一个人全然好了，你们就向我生气吗？
If a child is given circumcision on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?

不可按外貌断定是非，总要按公平断定是非。
Let not your decisions be based on what you see, but on righteousness.

耶路撒冷人中有的说，这不是他们想要杀的人吗？
Then some of the people of Jerusalem said, Is not this the man whose death is desired?

你看他还明明地讲道，他们也不向他说什么。难道官长真知道这是基督吗？
And here he is talking openly and they say nothing to him! Is it possible that the rulers have knowledge that this is truly the Christ?

然而我们知道这个人从哪里来。只是基督来的时候，没有人知道他从哪里来。
However, it is clear to us where this man comes from: but when the Christ comes no one will have knowledge where he comes from.

那时耶稣在殿里教训人，大声说，你们也知道我，也知道我从哪里来。我来并不是由于自己，但那差我来的是真的。你们不认识他。
Then, when he was teaching in the Temple, Jesus said with a loud voice, You have knowledge of me and you have knowledge of where I come from; and I have not come of myself; but there is One who has sent me; he is true, but you have no knowledge of him.

我却认识他。因为我是从他来的，他也是差了我来。
I have knowledge of him because I came from him and he sent me.

他们就想要捉拿耶稣。只是没有人下手，因为他的时候还没有到。
Then they had a desire to take him: but no man put hands on him because his hour was still to come.

但众人中间有好些信他的，说，基督来的时候，他所行的神迹，岂能比这人所行的更多吗？
And numbers of the people had belief in him, and they said, When the Christ comes will he do more signs than this man has done?

法利赛人听见众人为耶稣这样纷纷议论，祭司长和法利赛人，就打发差役去捉拿他。
This discussion of the people came to the ears of the Pharisees; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent servants to take him.

于是耶稣说，我还有不多的时候和你们同在，以后就回到差我来的那里去。
Then Jesus said, I will be with you a little longer and then I go to him who sent me.

你们要找我，却找不着。我所在的地方你们不能到。
You will be looking for me, and you will not see me: and where I am you may not come.

犹太人就彼此对问说，这人要往哪里去，叫我们找不着呢？难道他要往散住希利尼中的犹太人那里去教训希利尼人吗？
So the Jews said among themselves, To what place is he going where we will not see him? will he go to the Jews living among the Greeks and become the teacher of the Greeks?

他说，你们要找我，却找不着，我所在的地方，你们不能到。这话是什么意思呢？
What is this saying of his, You will be looking for me and will not see me, and where I am you may not come?

节期的末日，就是最大之日，耶稣站着高声说，人若渴了，可以到我这里来喝。
On the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus got up and said in a loud voice, If any man is in need of drink let him come to me and I will give it to him.

信我的人，就如经上所说，从他腹中要流出活水的江河来。
He who has faith in me, out of his body, as the Writings have said, will come rivers of living water.

耶稣这话是指着信他之人，要受圣灵说的，那时还没有赐下圣灵来，因为耶稣尚未得着荣耀。
This he said of the Spirit which would be given to those who had faith in him: the Spirit had not been given then, because the glory of Jesus was still to come.

众人听见这话，有的说，这真是那先知。
When these words came to their ears, some of the people said, This is certainly the prophet.

有的说，这是基督。但也有的说，基督岂是从加利利出来的吗？
Others said, This is the Christ. But others said, Not so; will the Christ come from Galilee?

经上岂不是说，基督是大卫的后裔，从大卫本乡伯利恒出来的吗？
Do not the Writings say that the Christ comes of the seed of David and from Beth-lehem, the little town where David was?

于是众人因着耶稣起了分争。
So there was a division among the people because of him.

其中有人要捉拿他。只是无人下手。
And some of them had a desire to take him; but no man put hands on him.

差役回到祭司长和法利赛人那里。他们对差役说，你们为什么没有带他来呢？
Then the servants went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, who said to them, Why have you not got him with you?

差役回答说，从来没有像他这样说话的。
The servants made answer, No man ever said things like this man.

法利赛人说，你们也受了迷惑吗？
Then the Pharisees said to them, Have you, like the others, been given false ideas?

官长或是法利赛人，岂有信他的呢？
Have any of the rulers belief in him, or any one of the Pharisees?

但这些不明白律法的百姓，是被咒诅的。
But these people who have no knowledge of the law are cursed.

内中有尼哥底母，就是从前去见耶稣的，对他们说，
Nicodemus--he who had come to Jesus before, being himself one of them--said to them,

不先听本人的口供，不知道他所作的事，难道我们的律法还定他的罪吗？
Is a man judged by our law before it has given him a hearing and has knowledge of what he has done?

他们回答说，你也是出于加利利吗？你且去查考，就可知道，加利利没有出过先知。
This was their answer: And do you come from Galilee? Make search and you will see that no prophet comes out of Galilee.

于是各人都回家去了。耶稣却往橄榄山去。
But Jesus went to the Mountain of Olives.

清早又回到殿里。众百姓都到他那里去，他就坐下教训他们。
And early in the morning he came again into the Temple and all the people came to him and he was seated teaching them.

文士和法利赛人，带着一个行淫时被拿的妇人来，叫他站在当中。
Now the scribes and Pharisees came, with a woman who had been taken in the act of sinning against the married relation;

就对耶稣说，夫子，这妇人是正行淫之时被拿的。
And putting her forward, they said to him, Master, this woman has been taken in the very act of sinning against the married relation.

摩西在律法上吩咐我们，把这样的妇人用石头打死。你说该把她怎么样呢？
Now in the law Moses gave directions that such women were to be stoned; what do you say about it?

他们说这话，乃试探耶稣，要得着告他的把柄。耶稣却弯着腰用指头在地上画字。
They said this, testing him, so that they might have something against him. But Jesus, with his head bent down, made letters on the floor with his finger.

他们还是不住地问他，耶稣就直起腰来，对他们说，你们中间谁是没有罪的，谁就可以先拿石头打她。
But when they went on with their questions, he got up and said to them, Let him among you who is without sin be the first to send a stone at her.

于是又弯着腰用指头在地上画字。
And again, with bent head, he made letters on the floor.

他们听见这话，就从老到少一个一个地都出去了。只剩下耶稣一人。还有那妇人仍然站在当中。
And when his words came to their ears, they went out one by one, starting with the oldest even to the last, because they were conscious of what was in their hearts: and Jesus was there by himself with the woman before him.

耶稣就直起腰来，对她说，妇人，那些人在哪里呢？没有人定你的罪吗？
Then Jesus got up, and seeing nobody but the woman, he said to her, Where are the men who said things against you? did no one give a decision against you?

她说，主阿，没有。耶稣说，我也不定你的罪。去吧。从此不要再犯罪了。
And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said, And I do not give a decision against you: go, and never do wrong again.]

耶稣又对众人说，我是世界的光。跟从我的，就不在黑暗里走，必要得着生命的光。
Then again Jesus said to them, I am the light of the world; he who comes with me will not be walking in the dark but will have the light of life.

法利赛人对他说，你是为自己作见证。你的见证不真。
So the Pharisees said to him, The witness you give is about yourself: your witness is not true.

耶稣说，我虽然为自己作见证，我的见证还是真的。因我知道我从哪里来，往哪里去。你们却不知道我从哪里来，往哪里去。
Jesus said in answer, Even if I give witness about myself, my witness is true, because I have knowledge of where I came from and where I am going; but you have no knowledge of where I come from or of where I am going.

你们是以外貌（原文作凭肉身）判断人。我却不判断人。
You are judging from what you see; I am judging no man.

就是判断人，我的判断也是真的。因为不是我独自在这里，还有差我来的父与我同在。
Even if I am judging, my decision is right, because I am not by myself--with me is the Father who sent me.

你们的律法上也记着说，两个人的见证是真的。
Even in your law it is said that the witness of two men is true.

我是为自己作见证，还有差我来的父，也是为我作见证。
I give witness about myself and the Father who sent me gives witness about me.

他们就问他说，你的父在哪里？耶稣回答说，你们不认识我，也不认识我的父。若是认识我，也就认识我的父。
Then they said to him, Where is your Father? Jesus said in answer, You have no knowledge of me or of my Father: if you had knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my Father.

这些话是耶稣在殿里的库房，教训人时所说的。也没有人拿他。因为他的时候还没有到。
Jesus said these words in the place where the offerings were stored, while he was teaching in the Temple: but no man took him because his time was still to come.

耶稣又对他们说，我要去了，你们要找我，并且你们要死在罪中。我所去的地方，你们不能到。
Then he said to them again, I am going away and you will be looking for me, but death will overtake you in your sins. It is not possible for you to come where I am going.

犹太人说，他说我所去的地方，你们不能到，难道他要自尽吗？
So the Jews said, Will he take his life? Is that why he says, Where I go it is not possible for you to come?

耶稣对他们说，你们是从下头来的，我是从上头来的。你们是属这世界的，我不是属这世界的。
And he said to them, You are of the earth; I am from heaven: you are of this world; I am not of this world.

所以我对你们说，你们要死在罪中，你们若不信我是基督，必要死在罪中。
For this reason I said to you that death will overtake you in your sins: for if you have not faith that I am he, death will come to you while you are in your sins.

他们就问他说，你是谁？耶稣对他们说，就是我从起初所告诉你们的。
Then they said to him, Who are you? Jesus said, What I said to you from the first.

我有许多事讲论你们，判断你们，但那差我来的是真的。我在他那里所听见的，我就传给世人。
I have much to say about you and against you: but he who sent me is true and what he has said to me I say to the world.

他们不明白耶稣是指着父说的。
They did not see that his words were about the Father.

所以耶稣说，你们举起人子以后，必知道我是基督，并且知道我没有一件事，是凭着自己作的。我说这些话，乃是照着父所教训我的。
So Jesus said, When the Son of man has been lifted up by you, then it will be clear to you who I am, and that I do nothing of myself, but say as the Father gave me teaching.

那差我来的，是与我同在。他没有撇下我独自在这里，因为我常作他所喜悦的事。
He who sent me is with me; he has not gone from me, because at all times I do the things which are pleasing to him.

耶稣说这话的时候，就有许多人信他。
When he said this a number came to have faith in him.

耶稣对信他的犹太人说，你们若常常遵守我的道，就真是我的门徒。
Then Jesus said to the Jews who had faith in him, If you keep my word, then you are truly my disciples;

你们必晓得真理，真理必叫你们得以自由。
And you will have knowledge of what is true, and that will make you free.

他们回答说，我们是亚伯拉罕的后裔，从来没有作过谁的奴仆。你怎么说，你们必得自由呢？
They said to him in answer, We are Abraham's seed and have never been any man's servant: why do you say, You will become free?

耶稣回答说，我实实在在地告诉你们。所有犯罪的，就是罪的奴仆。
And this was the answer Jesus gave them: Truly I say to you, Everyone who does evil is the servant of sin.

奴仆不能永远住在家里，儿子是永远住在家里。
Now the servant does not go on living in the house for ever, but the son does.

所以天父的儿子若叫你们自由，你们就真自由了。
If then the son makes you free, you will be truly free.

我知道你们是亚伯拉罕的子孙，你们却想要杀我。因为你们心里容不下我的道。
I am conscious that you are Abraham's seed; but you have a desire to put me to death because my word has no place in you.

我所说的，是在我父那里看见的。你们所行的，是在你们的父那里听见的。
I say the things which I have seen in my Father's house: and you do the things which come to you from your father's house.

他们说，我们的父就是亚伯拉罕。耶稣说，你们若是亚伯拉罕的儿子，就必行亚伯拉罕所行的事。
In answer they said to him, Our father is Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were Abraham's children you would do what Abraham did.

我将在神那里所听见的真理，告诉了你们，现在你们却想要杀我。这不是亚伯拉罕所行的事。
But now you have a desire to put me to death, a man who has said to you what is true, as I had it from God: Abraham did not do that.

你们是行你们父所行的事。他们说，我们不是从淫乱生的。我们只有一位父就是神。
You are doing the works of your father. They said to him, We are true sons of Abraham; we have one Father, who is God.

耶稣说，倘若神是你们的父，你们就必爱我。因为我本是出于神，也是从神而来，并不是由着自己来，乃是他差我来。
Jesus said to them, If God was your Father you would have love for me, because it was from God I came and am here. I did not come of myself, but he sent me.

你们为什么不明白我的话呢？无非是因你们不能听我的道。
Why are my words not clear to you? It is because your ears are shut to my teaching.

你们是出于你们的父魔鬼，你们父的私欲，你们偏要行，他从起初是杀人的，不守真理。因他心里没有真理，他说谎是出于自己，因他本来是说谎的，也是说谎之人的父。
You are the children of your father the Evil One and it is your pleasure to do his desires. From the first he was a taker of life; and he did not go in the true way because there is no true thing in him. When he says what is false, it is natural to him, for he is false and the father of what is false.

我将真理告诉你们，你们就因此不信我。
But because I say what is true, you have no belief in me.

你们中间谁能指证我有罪呢？我既然将真理告诉你们，为什么不信我呢？
Which of you is able truly to say that I am a sinner? If I say what is true, why have you no belief in me?

出于神的，必听神的话。你们不听，因为你们不是出于神。
He who is a child of God gives ear to the words of God: your ears are not open to them because you are not from God.

犹太人回答说，我们说，你是撒玛利亚人，并且是鬼附着的，这话岂不正对吗？
The Jews said to him in answer, Are we not right in saying that you are of Samaria and have an evil spirit?

耶稣说，我不是鬼附着的。我尊敬我的父，你们倒轻慢我。
And this was the answer of Jesus: I have not an evil spirit; but I give honour to my Father and you do not give honour to me.

我不求自己的荣耀。有一位为我求荣耀定是非的。
I, however, am not in search of glory for myself: there is One who is searching for it and he is judge.

我实实在在地告诉你们，人若遵守我的道，就永远不见死。
Truly I say to you, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.

犹太人对他说，现在我们知道你是鬼附着的。亚伯拉罕死了，众先知也死了。你还说，人若遵守我的道，就永远不尝死味。
The Jews said to him, Now we are certain that you have an evil spirit. Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead; and you say, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.

难道你比我们的祖宗亚伯拉罕还大吗？他死了，众先知也死了。你将自己当作什么人呢？
Are you greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? and the prophets are dead: who do you say that you are?

耶稣回答说，我若荣耀自己，我的荣耀就算不得什么。荣耀我的乃是我的父，就是你们所说是你们的神。
Jesus said in answer, If I take glory for myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who gives me glory, of whom you say that he is your God.

你们未曾认识他。我却认识他。我若说不认识他，我就是说谎的，象你们一样，但我认识他，也遵守他的道。
You have no knowledge of him, but I have knowledge of him; and if I said I have no knowledge of him I would be talking falsely like you: but I have full knowledge of him, and I keep his word.

你们的祖宗亚伯拉罕欢欢喜喜地仰望我的日子。既看见了，就快乐。
Your father Abraham was full of joy at the hope of seeing my day: he saw it and was glad.

犹太人说，你还没有五十岁，岂见过亚伯拉罕呢？
Then the Jews said to him, You are not fifty years old; have you seen Abraham?

耶稣说，我实实在在地告诉你们，还没有亚伯拉罕，就有了我。
Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, Before Abraham came into being, I am.

于是他们拿石头要打他。耶稣却躲藏，从殿里出去了。
So they took up stones to send at him: but Jesus got secretly out of their way and went out of the Temple.

耶稣过去的时候，看见一个人生来是瞎眼的。
And when he went on his way, he saw a man blind from birth.

门徒问耶稣说，拉比，这人生来是瞎眼的，是谁犯了罪？是这人呢？是他父母呢？
And his disciples put a question to him, saying, Master, was it because of this man's sin, or the sin of his father and mother, that he has been blind from birth?

耶稣回答说，也不是这人犯了罪，也不是他父母犯了罪，是要在他身上显出神的作为来。
Jesus said in answer, It was not because of his sin, or because of his father's or mother's; it was so that the works of God might be seen openly in him.

趁着白日，我们必须作那差我来者的工。黑夜将到，就没有人能作工了。
While it is day we have to do the works of him who sent me: the night comes when no work may be done.

我在世上的时候，是世上的光。
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

耶稣说了这话，就吐唾沫在地上，用唾沫和泥抹在瞎子的眼睛上，
Having said these words, he put earth, mixed with water from his mouth, on the man's eyes,

对他说，你往西罗亚池子里去洗，（西罗亚翻出来，就是奉差遣）他去一洗，回头就看见了。
And said to him, Go and make yourself clean in the bath of Siloam (the sense of the name is, Sent). So he went away and, after washing, came back able to see.

他的邻舍，和那素常见他是讨饭的，就说，这不是那从前坐着讨饭的人吗？
Then the neighbours and others who had seen him before in the street, with his hand out for money, said, Is not this the man who got money from people?

有人说，是他。又有人说，不是，却是像他。他自己说，是我。
Some said, It is he: others said, No, but he is like him. He said, I am he.

他们对他说，你的眼睛是怎么开的呢？
So they said to him, How then were your eyes made open?

他回答说，有一个人名叫耶稣。他和泥抹我的眼睛，对我说，你往西罗亚池子去洗。我去一洗，就看见了。
His answer was: The man who is named Jesus put earth mixed with water on my eyes, and said to me, Go and make yourself clean in Siloam: so I went away and, after washing, am now able to see.

他们说，那个人在哪里？他说，我不知道。
And they said to him, Where is he? His answer was: I have no knowledge.

他们把从前瞎眼的人，带到法利赛人那里。
They took him before the Pharisees--this man who had been blind.

耶稣和泥开他眼睛的日子是安息日。
Now the day on which the earth was mixed by Jesus and the man's eyes were made open was the Sabbath.

法利赛人也问他是怎么得看见的。瞎子对他们说，他把泥抹在我的眼睛上，我去一洗，就看见了。
So the Pharisees put more questions to him about how his eyes had been made open. And he said to them, He put earth on my eyes, and I had a wash and am able to see.

法利赛人中有的说，这个人不是从神来的，因为他不守安息日。又有人说，一个罪人怎能行这样的神迹呢？他们就起了纷争。
Then some of the Pharisees said, That man has not come from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath. Others said, How is it possible for a sinner to do such signs? So there was a division among them.

他们又对瞎子说，他既然开了你的眼睛，你说他是怎样的人呢？他说，是个先知。
Again they said to the blind man, What have you to say about him for opening your eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.

犹太人不信他从前是瞎眼，后来能看见的，等到叫了他的父母来，
Now the Jews had no belief in the statement that he had been blind and was now able to see, till they sent for the father and mother of the man whose eyes had been made open,

问他们说，这是你们的儿子吗？你们说他生来是瞎眼的，如今怎么能看见了呢？
And put the question to them, saying, Is this your son, of whom you say that he was blind at birth? how is it then that he is now able to see?

他父母回答说，他是我们的儿子，生来就瞎眼，这是我们知道的。
In answer his father and mother said, We are certain that this is our son and that he was blind at birth:

至于他如今怎么能看见，我们却不知道。是谁开了他的眼睛，我们也不知道。他已经成了人，你们问他吧。他自己必能说。
But how it is he is now able to see, or who made his eyes open, we are not able to say: put the question to him; he is old enough to give an answer for himself.

他父母说这话，是怕犹太人，因为犹太人已经商议定了，若有认耶稣是基督的，要把他赶出会堂。
They said this because of their fear of the Jews: for the Jews had come to an agreement that if any man said that Jesus was the Christ he would be put out of the Synagogue.

因此他父母说，他已经成了人，你们问他吧。
That was the reason why they said, He is old enough; put the question to him.

所以法利赛人第二次叫了那从前瞎眼的人来，对他说，你该将荣耀归给神。我们知道这人是个罪人。
So they sent a second time for the man who had been blind and they said to him, Give glory to God: it is clear to us that this man is a sinner.

他说，他是个罪人不是，我不知道。有一件事我知道，从前我是眼瞎的，如今能看见了。
He said in answer, I have no knowledge if he is a sinner or not, but one thing I am certain about; I was blind, and now I see.

他们就问他说，他向你作什么？是怎么开了你的眼睛呢？
Then they said to him, What did he do to you? how did he give you the use of your eyes?

他回答说，我方才告诉你们，你们不听。为什么又要听呢？莫非你们也要作他的门徒吗？
His answer was: I have said it before, but your ears were shut: why would you have me say it again? is it your desire to become his disciples?

他们就骂他说，你是他的门徒。我们是摩西的门徒。
And they were angry with him and said, You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.

神对摩西说话，是我们知道的。只是这个人，我们不知道他从哪里来。
We are certain that God gave his word to Moses: but as for this man, we have no knowledge where he comes from.

那人回答说，他开了我的眼睛，你们竟不知道他从哪里来，这真是奇怪。
The man said in answer, Why, here is a strange thing! You have no knowledge where he comes from though he gave me the use of my eyes.

我们知道神不听罪人。惟有敬奉神，遵行他旨意的，神才听他。
We have knowledge that God does not give ear to sinners, but if any man is a worshipper of God and does his pleasure, to him God's ears are open.

从创世以来，未曾听见有人把生来是瞎子的眼睛开了。
In all the years nobody has ever before seen the eyes of a man blind from birth made open.

这人若不是从神来的，什么也不能作。
If this man did not come from God he would be unable to do anything.

他们回答说，你全然生在罪孽中，还要教训我们吗？于是把他赶出去了。
Their answer was: You came to birth through sin; do you make yourself our teacher? And they put him out of the Synagogue.

耶稣听说他们把他赶出去。后来遇见他，就说，你信神的儿子吗？
It came to the ears of Jesus that they had put him out, and meeting him he said, Have you faith in the Son of man?

他回答说，主阿，谁是神的儿子，叫我信他呢？
He said in answer, And who is he, Lord? Say, so that I may have faith in him.

耶稣说，你已经看见他，现在和你说话的就是他。
Jesus said to him, You have seen him; it is he who is talking to you.

他说，主阿，我信。就拜耶稣。
And he said, Lord, I have faith. And he gave him worship.

耶稣说，我为审判到这世上来，叫不能看见的，可以看见。能看见的，反瞎了眼。
And Jesus said, I came into this world to be a judge, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.

同他在那里的法利赛人，听见这话，就说，难道我们也瞎了眼吗？
These words came to the ears of the Pharisees who were with him and they said to him, Are we, then, blind?

耶稣对他们说，你们若瞎了眼，就没有罪了。但如今你们说，我们能看见，所以你们的罪还在。
Jesus said to them, If you were blind you would have no sin: but now that you say, We see; your sin is there still.

我实实在在地告诉你们，人进羊圈，不从门进去，倒从别处爬进去，那人就是贼，就是强盗。
Truly I say to you, He who does not go through the door into the place where the sheep are kept, but gets in by some other way, is a thief and an outlaw.

从门进去的，才是羊的牧人。
He who goes in by the door is the keeper of the sheep.

看门的就给他开门。羊也听他的声音。他按着名叫自己的羊，把羊领出来。
The porter lets him in; and the sheep give ear to his voice; he says over the names of the sheep, and takes them out.

既放出自己的羊来，就在前头走，羊也跟着他，因为认得他的声音。
When he has got them all out, he goes before them, and the sheep go after him, for they have knowledge of his voice.

羊不跟着生人，因为不认得他的声音。必要逃跑。
They will not go after another who is not their keeper, but will go from him in flight, because his voice is strange to them.

耶稣将这比喻告诉他们。但他们不明白所说的是什么意思。
In this Jesus was teaching them in the form of a story: but what he said was not clear to them.

所以耶稣又对他们说，我实实在在地告诉你们，我就是羊的门，
So Jesus said again, Truly I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.

凡在我以先来的，都是贼，是强盗。羊却不听他们。
All who came before me are thieves and outlaws: but the sheep did not give ear to them.

我就是门。凡从我进来的，必然得救，并且出入得草吃。
I am the door: if any man goes in through me he will have salvation, and will go in and go out, and will get food.

盗贼来，无非要偷窃，杀害，毁坏。我来了，是要叫羊（或作人）得生命，并且得的更丰盛。
The thief comes only to take the sheep and to put them to death: he comes for their destruction: I have come so that they may have life and have it in greater measure.

我是好牧人，好牧人为羊舍命。
I am the good keeper of sheep: the good keeper gives his life for the sheep.

若是雇工，不是牧人，羊也不是他自己的，他看见狼来，就撇下羊逃走。狼抓住羊，赶散了羊群。
He who is a servant, and not the keeper or the owner of the sheep, sees the wolf coming and goes in flight, away from the sheep; and the wolf comes down on them and sends them in all directions:

雇工逃走，因他是雇工，并不顾念羊。
Because he is a servant he has no interest in the sheep.

我是好牧人。我认识我的羊，我的羊也认识我。
I am the good keeper; I have knowledge of my sheep, and they have knowledge of me,

正如父认识我，我也认识父一样。并且我为羊舍命。
Even as the Father has knowledge of me and I of the Father; and I am giving my life for the sheep.

我另外有羊，不是这圈里的。我必须领他们来，他们也要听我的声音。并且要合成一群，归一个牧人了。
And I have other sheep which are not of this field: I will be their guide in the same way, and they will give ear to my voice, so there will be one flock and one keeper.

我父爱我，因我将命舍去，好再取回来。
For this reason am I loved by the Father, because I give up my life so that I may take it again.

没有人夺我的命去，是我自己舍的。我有权柄舍了，也有权柄取回来。这是我从我父所受的命令。
No one takes it away from me; I give it up of myself. I have power to give it up, and I have power to take it again. These orders I have from my Father.

犹太人为这些话，又起了纷争。
There was a division again among the Jews because of these words.

内中有好些人说，他是被鬼附着，而且疯了。为什么听他呢？
And a number of them said, He has an evil spirit and is out of his mind; why do you give ear to him?

又有人说，这不是鬼附之人所说的话。鬼岂能叫瞎子的眼睛开了呢？
Others said, These are not the words of one who has an evil spirit. Is it possible for an evil spirit to make blind people see?

在耶路撒冷有修殿节。是冬天的时候。
Then came the feast of the opening of the Temple in Jerusalem: it was winter;

耶稣在殿里所罗门的廊下行走。
And Jesus was walking in the Temple, in Solomon's covered way.

犹太人围着他，说，你叫我们犹疑不定到几时呢？你若是基督，就明明地告诉我们。
Then the Jews came round him, saying, how long are you going to keep us in doubt? If you are the Christ, say so clearly.

耶稣回答说，我已经告诉你们，你们不信。我奉我父之名所行的事，可以为我作见证。
Jesus said in answer, I have said it and you have no belief: the works which I do in my Father's name, these give witness about me.

只是你们不信，因为你们不是我的羊。
But you have no belief because you are not of my sheep.

我的羊听我的声音，我也认识他们，他们也跟着我。
My sheep give ear to my voice, and I have knowledge of them, and they come after me:

我又赐给他们永生。他们永不灭亡，谁也不能从我手里把他们夺去。
And I give them eternal life; they will never come to destruction, and no one will ever take them out of my hand.

我父把羊赐给我，他比万有都大。谁也不能从我父手里把他们夺去。
That which my Father has given to me has more value than all; and no one is able to take anything out of the Father's hand.

我与父原为一。
I and my Father are one.

犹太人又拿起石头来要打他。
Then the Jews took up stones again to send at him.

耶稣对他们说，我从父显出许多善事给你们看，你们是为哪一件拿石头打我呢？
Jesus said to them in answer, I have let you see a number of good works from the Father; for which of those works are you stoning me?

犹太人回答说，我们不是为善事拿石头打你，是为你说僭妄的话。又为你是个人，反将自己当作神。
This was their answer: We are not stoning you for a good work but for evil words; because being a man you make yourself God.

耶稣说，你们的律法上岂不是写着，我曾说你们是神吗？
In answer, Jesus said, Is there not a saying in your law, I said, You are gods?

经上的话是不能废的。若那些承受神道的人，尚且称为神，
If he said they were gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Writings may not be broken),

父所分别为圣，又差到世间来的，他自称是神的儿子，你们还向他说，你说僭妄的话吗？
Do you say of him whom the Father made holy and sent into the world, Your words are evil; because I said, I am God's Son?

我若不行我父的事，你们就不必信我。
If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not have belief in me;

我若行了，你们纵然不信我，也当信这些事。叫你们又知道，又明白，父在我里面，我也在父里面。
But if I am doing them, then have belief in the works even if you have no belief in me; so that you may see clearly and be certain that the Father is in me and I am in the Father.

他们又要拿他。他却逃出他们的手走了。
Then again they made an attempt to take him; but he got away from them.

耶稣又往约但河外去，到了约翰起初施洗的地方，就住在那里。
And he went again to the other side of the Jordan, to the place where John first gave baptism; and he was there for a time.

有许多人来到他那里。他们说约翰一件神迹没有行过。但约翰指着这人所说的一切话都是真的。
And a great number of people came to him, saying, John did no sign: but everything John said of this man was true.

在那里信耶稣的人就多了。
And a number came to have faith in him there.

有一个患病的人，名叫拉撒路，住在伯大尼，就是马利亚和她姐姐马大的村庄。
Now a certain man named Lazarus was ill; he was of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.

这马利亚就是那用香膏抹主，又用头发擦他脚的。患病的拉撒路是她的兄弟。
(The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill, was the Mary who put perfumed oil on the Lord and made his feet dry with her hair.)

她姊妹两个就打发人去见耶稣说，主阿，你所爱的人病了。
So the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord, your dear friend is ill.

耶稣听见就说，这病不至于死，乃是为神的荣耀，叫神的儿子因此得荣耀。
When this came to his ears, Jesus said, The end of this disease is not death, but the glory of God, so that the Son of God may have glory because of it.

耶稣素来爱马大，和她妹子，并拉撒路。
Now Jesus had love in his heart for Martha and her sister and Lazarus.

听见拉撒路病了，就在所居之地，仍住了两天。
So when the news came to him that Lazarus was ill, he did not go from the place where he was for two days.

然后对门徒说，我们再往犹太去吧。
Then after that time he said to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again.

门徒说，拉比，犹太人近来要拿石头打你，你还往那里去吗？
The disciples said to him, Master, the Jews were attempting only the other day to have you stoned, and are you going back there again?

耶稣回答说，白日不是有十二小时吗？人在白日走路，就不至跌倒，因为看见这世上的光。
Then Jesus said in answer, Are there not twelve hours in the day? A man may go about in the day without falling, because he sees the light of this world.

若在黑夜走路，就必跌倒，因为他没有光。
But if a man goes about in the night, he may have a fall because the light is not in him.

耶稣说了这话，随后对他们说，我们的朋友拉撒路睡了，我去叫醒他。
These things said he: and after that he said to them, Lazarus our friend is at rest; but I go so that I may make him come out of his sleep.

门徒说，主阿，他若睡了，就必好了。
Then his disciples said to him, Lord, if he is resting he will get well.

耶稣这话是指着他死说的。他们却以为是说照常睡了。
Jesus, however, was talking of his death: but they had the idea that he was talking about taking rest in sleep.

耶稣就明明地告诉他们说，拉撒路死了。
Then Jesus said to them clearly, Lazarus is dead.

我没有在那里就欢喜，这是为你们的缘故，好叫你们相信。如今我们可以往他那里去吧。
And because of you I am glad I was not there, so that you may have faith; but let us go to him.

多马，又称为低土马，就对那同作门徒的说，我们也去和他同死吧。
Then Thomas, who was named Didymus, said to the other disciples, Let us go so that we may be with him in death.

耶稣到了，就知道拉撒路在坟墓里，已经四天了。
Now when Jesus came, he made the discovery that Lazarus had been put into the earth four days before.

伯大尼离耶路撒冷不远，约有六里路。
Now Bethany was near to Jerusalem, about two miles away;

有好些犹太人来看马大和马利亚，要为她们的兄弟安慰她们。
And a number of Jews had come to Martha and Mary to give them comfort about their brother.

马大听见耶稣来了，就出去迎接他。马利亚却仍然坐在家里。
When Martha had the news that Jesus was on the way, she went out to him, but Mary did not go from the house.

马大对耶稣说，主阿，你若早在这里，我兄弟必不死。
Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.

就是现在，我也知道，你无论向神求什么，神也必赐给你。
But I am certain that, even now, whatever request you make to God, God will give it to you.

耶稣说，你兄弟必然复活。
Jesus said to her, Your brother will come to life again.

马大说，我知道在末日复活的时候，他必复活。
Martha said to him, I am certain that he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last day.

耶稣对他说，复活在我，生命也在我。信我的人，虽然死了，也必复活。
Jesus said to her, I am myself that day and that life; he who has faith in me will have life even if he is dead;

凡活着信我的人，必永远不死。你信这话吗？
And no one who is living and has faith in me will ever see death. Is this your faith?

马大说，主阿，是的，我信你是基督，是神的儿子，就是那要临到世界的。
She said to him, Yes, Lord: my faith is that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.

马大说了这话，就回去暗暗地叫她妹子，马利亚说，夫子来了，叫你。
And having said this, she went away and said secretly to her sister Mary, The Master is here and has sent for you.

马利亚听见了就急忙起来，到耶稣那里去。
And Mary, hearing this, got up quickly and went to him.

那时，耶稣还没有进村子，仍在马大迎接他的地方。
Now Jesus had not at this time come into the town, but was still in the place where Martha had seen him.

那些同马利亚在家里安慰她的犹太人，见她急忙起来出去，就跟着她，以为她要往坟墓那里去哭。
Then the Jews who were with her in the house, comforting her, when they saw Mary get up quickly and go out, went after her in the belief that she was going to the place of the dead and would be weeping there.

马利亚到了耶稣那里，看见他，就俯伏在他脚前，说，主阿，你若早在这里，我兄弟必不死。
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she went down at his feet, saying, Lord, if you had been here my brother would not be dead.

耶稣看见她哭，并看见与她同来的犹太人也哭，就心里悲叹，又甚忧愁。
And when Jesus saw her weeping, and saw the Jews weeping who came with her, his spirit was moved and he was troubled,

便说，你们把他安放在哪里？他们回答说，请主来看。
And said, Where have you put him? They said, Come and see, Lord.

耶稣哭了。
And Jesus himself was weeping.

犹太人就说，你看他爱这人是何等恳切。
So the Jews said, See how dear he was to him!

其中有人说，他既然开了瞎子的眼睛，岂不能叫这人不死吗？
But some of them said, This man, who made open the eyes of the blind man, was he not able to keep his friend from death?

耶稣又心里悲叹，来到坟墓前。那坟墓是个洞，有一块石头挡着。
So Jesus, deeply troubled in heart, came to the place of the dead. It was a hole in the rock, and a stone was over the opening.

耶稣说，你们把石头挪开。那死人的姐姐马大对他说，主阿，他现在必是臭了，因为他死了已经四天了。
Jesus said, Take away the stone. Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said, Lord, by this time the body will be smelling, for he has been dead four days.

耶稣说，我不是对你说过，你若信，就必看见神的荣耀吗？
Jesus said to her, Did I not say to you that if you had faith you would see the glory of God?

他们就把石头挪开。耶稣举目望天说，父阿，我感谢你，因为你已经听我。
So they took away the stone. And Jesus, looking up to heaven, said, Father, I give praise to you for hearing me.

我也知道你常听我，但我说这话，是为周围站着的众人，叫他们信是你差了我来。
I was certain that your ears are at all times open to me, but I said it because of these who are here, so that they may see that you sent me.

说了这话，就大声呼叫说，拉撒路出来。
Then he said in a loud voice, Lazarus, come out!

那死人就出来了，手脚裹着布，脸上包着手巾。耶稣对他们说，解开，叫他走。
And he who was dead came out, with linen bands folded tightly about his hands and feet, and a cloth about his face. Jesus said to them, Make him free and let him go.

那些来看马利亚的犹太人，见了耶稣所作的事，就多有信他的。
Then a number of the Jews who had come to Mary and had seen the things which Jesus did had belief in him.

但其中也有去见法利赛人的，将耶稣所作的事告诉他们。
But some of them went to the Pharisees with the news of what Jesus had done.

祭司长和法利赛人聚集公会，说，这人行好些神迹，我们怎么办呢？
Then the high priests and the Pharisees had a meeting and said, What are we doing? This man is doing a number of signs.

若这样由着他，人人都要信他。罗马人也要来夺我们的地土，和我们的百姓。
If we let him go on in this way, everybody will have belief in him and the Romans will come and take away our place and our nation.

内中有一个人，名叫该亚法，本年作大祭司，对他们说，你们不知道什么。
But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them, You have no knowledge of anything;

独不想一个人替百姓死，免得通国灭亡，就是你们的益处。
You do not see that it is in your interest for one man to be put to death for the people, so that all the nation may not come to destruction.

他这话不是出于自己，是因他本年作大祭司，所以预言耶稣将要替这一国死。
He did not say this of himself, but being the high priest that year he said, as a prophet, that Jesus would be put to death for the nation;

也不但替这一国死，并要将神四散的子民，都聚集归一。
And not for that nation only, but for the purpose of uniting in one body the children of God all over the world.

从那日起，他们就商议要杀耶稣。
And from that day they took thought together how to put him to death.

所以耶稣不再显然行在犹太人中间，就离开那里往靠近旷野的地方去。到了一座城，名叫以法莲，就在那里和门徒同住。
So Jesus no longer went about publicly among the Jews, but went from there into the country near to the waste land, to a town named Ephraim, where he was for some time with the disciples.

犹太人的逾越节近了。有许多人从乡下上耶路撒冷去，要在节前洁净自己。
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and numbers of people went up from the country to Jerusalem to make themselves clean before the Passover.

他们就寻找耶稣，站在殿里彼此说，你们的意思如何，他不来过节吗？
They were looking for Jesus and saying to one another while they were in the Temple, What is your opinion? Will he not come to the feast?

那时，祭司长和法利赛人早已吩咐说，若有人知道耶稣在哪里，就要报明，好去拿他。
Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone had knowledge where he was, he was to give them word, so that they might take him.

逾越节前六日，耶稣来到伯大尼，就是他叫拉撒路从死里复活之处。
Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had made to come back from the dead.

有人在那里给耶稣预备筵席。马大伺候，拉撒路也在那同耶稣坐席的人中。
So they made him a meal there, and he was waited on by Martha, and Lazarus was among those who were seated with him at table.

马利亚就拿着一斤极贵的真哪哒香膏，抹耶稣的脚，又用自己头发去擦。屋里就满了膏的香气。
Then Mary, taking a pound of perfumed oil of great value, put it on the feet of Jesus and made them dry with her hair: and the house became full of the smell of the perfume.

有一个门徒，就是那将要卖耶稣的加略人犹大，
But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot (who was to give him up), said,

说，这香膏为什么不卖三十两银子周济穷人呢？
Why was not this perfume traded for three hundred pence, and the money given to the poor?

他说这话，并不是挂念穷人，乃因他是个贼，又带着钱囊，常取其中所存的。
(He said this, not because he had any love for the poor; but because he was a thief, and, having the money-bag, took for himself what was put into it.)

耶稣说，由她吧，她是为我安葬之日存留的。
Then Jesus said, Let her be. Let her keep what she has for the day of my death.

因为常有穷人和你们同在。只是你们不常有我。
The poor you have ever with you, but me you have not for ever.

有许多犹太人知道耶稣在那里，就来了，不但是为耶稣的缘故，也是要看他从死里所复活的拉撒路。
Then a great number of the Jews had news that he was there: and they came, not only because of Jesus, but so that they might see Lazarus who had been dead and to whom he had given life.

但祭司长商议连拉撒路也要杀了。
Now there was talk among the chief priests of putting Lazarus to death;

因有好些犹太人，为拉撒路的缘故，回去信了耶稣。
For because of him a great number of the Jews went away and had belief in Jesus.

第二天，有许多上来过节的人，听见耶稣将到耶路撒冷，
The day after, a great number of people who were there for the feast, when they had the news that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

就拿着棕树枝，出去迎接他，喊着说，和散那，奉主名来的以色列王，是应当称颂的。
Took branches of palm-trees and went out to him, crying, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!

耶稣得了一个驴驹，就骑上。如经上所记的说，
And Jesus saw a young ass and took his seat on it; as the Writings say,

锡安的民哪，（民原文作女子）不要惧怕，你的王骑着驴驹来了。
Have no fear, daughter of Zion: see your King is coming, seated on a young ass.

这些事门徒起先不明白。等到耶稣得了荣耀以后，才想起这话是指着他写的，并且众人果然向他这样行了。
(These things were not clear to his disciples at first: but when Jesus had been lifted up into his glory, then it came to their minds that these things in the Writings were about him and that they had been done to him.)

当耶稣呼唤拉撒路叫他从死复活出坟墓的时候，同耶稣在那里的众人，就作见证。
Now the people who were with him when his voice came to Lazarus in the place of the dead, and gave him life again, had been talking about it.

众人因听见耶稣行了这神迹，就去迎接他。
And that was the reason the people went out to him, because it had come to their ears that he had done this sign.

法利赛人彼此说，看哪，你们是徒劳无益，世人都随从他去了。
Then the Pharisees said one to another, You see, you are unable to do anything: the world has gone after him.

那时，上来过节礼拜的人中，有几个希利尼人。
Now there were some Greeks among the people who had come up to give worship at the feast:

他们来见加利利伯赛大的腓力，求他说，先生，我们愿意见耶稣。
They came to Philip, who was of Beth-saida in Galilee, and made a request, saying, Sir, we have a desire to see Jesus.

腓力去告诉安得烈，安得烈同腓力去告诉耶稣。
Philip went and gave word of it to Andrew; and Andrew went with Philip to Jesus.

耶稣说，人子得荣耀的时候到了。
And Jesus said to them in answer, The hour of the glory of the Son of man has come.

我实实在在地告诉你们，一粒麦子不落在地里死了，仍旧是一粒。若是死了，就结出许多子粒来。
Truly I say to you, If a seed of grain does not go into the earth and come to an end, it is still a seed and no more; but through its death it gives much fruit.

爱惜自己生命的，就失丧生命。在这世上恨恶自己生命的，就要保守生命到永生。
He who is in love with life will have it taken from him; and he who has no care for his life in this world will keep it for ever and ever.

若有人服事我，就当跟从我。我在哪里，服事我的人，也要在哪里。若有人服事我，我父必尊重他。
If any man is my servant, let him come after me; and where I am, there will my servant be. If any man becomes my servant, my Father will give him honour.

我现在心里忧愁，我说什么才好呢？父阿，救我脱离这时候。但我原是为这时候来的。
Now is my soul troubled; and what am I to say? Father, keep me from this hour. No: for this purpose have I come to this hour.

父阿，愿你荣耀你的名。当时就有声音从天上来说，我已经荣耀了我的名，还要再荣耀。
Father, give glory to your name. Then there came a voice out of heaven, saying, I have given it glory, and I will give it glory again.

站在旁边的众人听见，就说，打雷了。还有人说，有天使对他说话。
Hearing the sound, a number of people who were there said that it was thunder: others said, An angel was talking to him.

耶稣说，这声音不是为我，是为你们来的。
Jesus said in answer, This voice came not for me but for you.

现在这世界受审判。这世界的王要被赶出去。
Now is this world to be judged: now will the ruler of this world be sent out.

我若从地上被举起来，就要吸引万人来归我。
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will make all men come to me.

耶稣这话原是指着自己将要怎样死说的。
(This he said, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)

众人回答说，我们听见律法上有话说，基督是永存的。你怎么说，人子必须被举起来呢？这人子是谁呢？
Then the people in answer said to him, The law says that the Christ will have life without end: how say you then that it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?

耶稣对他们说，光在你们中间，还有不多的时候，应当趁着有光行走，免得黑暗临到你们。那在黑暗里行走的，不知道往何处去。
Jesus said to them, For a little time longer the light will be among you; while you have the light go on walking in it, so that the dark may not overtake you: one walking in the dark has no knowledge of where he is going.

你们应当趁着有光，信从这光，使你们成为光明之子。耶稣说了这话，就离开他们，隐藏了。
In so far as you have the light, put your faith in the light so that you may become sons of light. With these words Jesus went away and for a time was not seen again by them.

他虽然在他们面前行了许多神迹，他们还是不信他。
But though he had done such a number of signs before them, they still had no belief in him:

这是要应验先知以赛亚的话说，主阿，我们所传的，有谁信呢？主的膀臂向谁显露呢？
So that the words of the prophet Isaiah might come true, when he said, Lord, who has any belief in our preaching? and the arm of the Lord, to whom has it been unveiled?

他们所以不能信，因为以赛亚又说，
For this reason they were unable to have belief, because Isaiah said again,

主叫他们瞎了眼，硬了心，免得他们眼睛看见，心里明白，回转过来，我就医治他们。
He has made their eyes blind, and their hearts hard; for fear that they might see with their eyes and get knowledge with their hearts, and be changed, and I might make them well.

以赛亚因为看见他的荣耀，就指着他说这话。
(Isaiah said these words because he saw his glory. His words were about him.)

虽然如此，官长中却有好些信他的。只因法利赛人的缘故，就不承认，恐怕被赶出会堂。
However, a number even of the rulers had belief in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not say so openly for fear that they might be shut out from the Synagogue:

这是因他们爱人的荣耀，过于爱神的荣耀。
For the praise of men was dearer to them than the approval of God.

耶稣大声说，信我的，不是信我，乃是信那差我来的。
Then Jesus said with a loud voice, He who has faith in me, has faith not in me, but in him who sent me.

人看见我，就是看见那差我来的。
And he who sees me, sees him who sent me.

我到世上来，乃是光，叫凡信我的，不住在黑暗里。
I have come as a light into the world, so that no one who has faith in me will go on living in the dark.

若有人听见我的话不遵守，我不审判他。我来本不是要审判世界，乃是要拯救世界。
And if any man gives ear to my words and does not keep them, I am not his judge: I did not come to be judge of the world but to give salvation to the world.

弃绝我不领受我话的人，有审判他的。就是我所讲的道，在末日要审判他。
He who puts me on one side and does not take my words to heart, is not without a judge: the word which I have said will be his judge on the last day.

因为我没有凭着自己讲。惟有差我来的父，已经给我命令，叫我说什么，讲什么。
For I have not said it on my authority, but the Father who sent me gave me orders what to say and how to say it.

我也知道他的命令就是永生。故此我所讲的话，正是照着父对我所说的。
And I have knowledge that his order is eternal life: so that the things which I say, I say them even as the Father says them to me.

逾越节以前，耶稣知道自己离世归父的时候到了。他既然爱世间属自己的人，就爱他们到底。
Now before the feast of the Passover, it was clear to Jesus that the time had come for him to go away from this world to the Father. Having once had love for those in the world who were his, his love for them went on to the end.

吃晚饭的时候，（魔鬼已将卖耶稣的意思，放在西门的儿子加略人犹大心里）。
So while a meal was going on, the Evil One having now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to be false to him,

耶稣知道父已将万有交在他手里，且知道自己是从神出来的，又要归到神那里去，
Jesus, being conscious that the Father had put everything into his hands, and that he came from God and was going to God,

就离席站起来脱了衣服，拿一条手巾束腰。
Got up from table, put off his robe and took a cloth and put it round him.

随后把水倒在盆里，就洗门徒的脚，并用自己所束的手巾擦干。
Then he put water into a basin and was washing the feet of the disciples and drying them with the cloth which was round him.

挨到西门彼得，彼得对他说，主阿，你洗我的脚吗？
So he came to Simon Peter. Peter said, Lord, are my feet to be washed by you?

耶稣回答说，我所作的，你如今不知道，后来必明白。
And Jesus, answering, said to him, What I do is not clear to you now, but it will be clear to you in time to come.

彼得说，你永不可洗我的脚。耶稣说，我若不洗你，你就与我无分了。
Peter said, I will never let my feet be washed by you, never. Jesus said in answer, If I do not make you clean you have no part with me.

西门彼得说，主阿，不但我的脚，连手和头也要洗。
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head.

耶稣说，凡洗过澡的人，只要把脚一洗，全身就干净了。你们是干净的，然而不都是干净的。
Jesus said to him, He who is bathed has need only to have his feet washed and then he is clean all over: and you, my disciples, are clean, but not all of you.

耶稣原知道要卖他的是谁，所以说，你们不都是干净的。
(He had knowledge who was false to him; that is why he said, You are not all clean.)

耶稣洗完了他们的脚，就穿上衣服，又坐下，对他们说，我向你们所作的，你们明白吗？
Then, after washing their feet and putting on his robe again, he took his seat and said to them, Do you see what I have done to you?

你们称呼我夫子，称呼我主，你们说的不错。我本来是。
You give me the name of Master and Lord: and you are right; that is what I am.

我是你们的主，你们的夫子，尚且洗你们的脚，你们也当彼此洗脚。
If then I, the Lord and the Master, have made your feet clean, it is right for you to make one another's feet clean.

我给你们作了榜样，叫你们照着我向你们所作的去作。
I have given you an example, so that you may do what I have done to you.

我实实在在地告诉你们，仆人不能大于主人。差人也不能大于差他的人。
Truly I say to you, A servant is not greater than his lord; and he who is sent is not greater than the one who sent him.

你们既知道这事，若是去行就有福了。
If these things are clear to you, happy are you if you do them.

我这话不是指着你们众人说的。我知道我所拣选的是谁。现在要应验经上的话，说，同我吃饭的人，用脚踢我。
I am not talking of you all: I have knowledge of my true disciples, but things are as they are, so that the Writings may come true, The foot of him who takes bread with me is lifted up against me.

如今事情还没有成就，我要先告诉你们，叫你们到事情成就的时候，可以信我是基督
From this time forward, I give you knowledge of things before they come about, so that when they come about you may have belief that I am he.

我实实在在地告诉你们，有人接待我所差遣的，就是接待我。接待我，就是接待那差遣我的。
Truly I say to you, He who takes to his heart anyone whom I send, takes me to his heart; and he who so takes me, takes him who sent me.

耶稣说了这话，心里忧愁，就明说，我实实在在地告诉你们，你们中间有一个人要卖我了。
When Jesus had said this he was troubled in spirit, and gave witness, saying, Truly I say to you, that one of you will be false to me.

门徒彼此对看，猜不透所说的是谁。
Then the eyes of the disciples were turned on one another, in doubt as to whom he had in mind.

有一个门徒，是耶稣所爱的，侧身挨近耶稣的怀里。
There was at table one of his disciples, the one dear to Jesus, resting his head on Jesus' breast.

西门彼得点头对他说，你告诉我们，主是指着谁说的。
Making a sign to him, Simon Peter said, Who is it he is talking about?

那门徒便就势靠着耶稣的胸膛，问他说，主阿，是谁呢？
He, then, resting his head on Jesus' breast, said to him, Lord, who is it?

耶稣回答说，我蘸一点饼给谁，就是谁。耶稣就蘸了一点饼，递给加略人西门的儿子犹大。
This was the answer Jesus gave: It is the one to whom I will give this bit of bread after I have put it in the vessel. Then he took the bit of bread, put it into the vessel, and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.

他吃了以后，撒但就入了他的心。耶稣便对他说，你所作的快作吧。
And when Judas took the bread Satan went into him. Then Jesus said to him, Do quickly what you have to do.

同席的人，没有一个知道是为什么对他说这话。
Now it was not clear to anyone at table why he said this to him.

有人因犹大带着钱囊，以为耶稣是对他说，你去买我们过节所应用的东西。或是叫他拿什么周济穷人。
Some were of the opinion that because Judas kept the money-bag Jesus said to him, Get the things we have need of for the feast; or, that he was to give something to the poor.

犹大受了那点饼，立刻就出去。那时候是夜间了。
So Judas, having taken the bit of bread, straight away went out: and it was night.

他既出去，耶稣就说，如今人子得了荣耀，神在人子身上也得了荣耀。
Then when he had gone out, Jesus said, Now is glory given to the Son of man, and God is given glory in him.

神要因自己荣耀人子，并且要快快地荣耀他。
If God is given glory in him, God will give him glory in himself, and will give him glory even now.

小子们，我还有不多的时候，与你们同在。后来你们要找我，但我所去的地方，你们不能到。这话我曾对犹太人说过，如今也照样对你们说。
My dear children, I am only to be with you a little longer. Then you will be looking for me: and as I said to the Jews, so now I say to you, Where I am going you may not come.

我赐给你们一条新命令，乃是叫你们彼此相爱。我怎样爱你们，你们也要怎样相爱。
I give you a new law: Have love one for another; even as I have had love for you, so are you to have love one for another.

你们若有彼此相爱的心，众人因此就认出你们是我的门徒了。
By this it will be clear to all men that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another.

西门彼得问耶稣说，主往哪里去。耶稣回答说，我所去的地方，你现在不能跟我去。后来却要跟我去。
Simon Peter said to him, Lord, where are you going? Jesus said in answer, Where I am going you may not come with me now, but you will come later.

彼得说，主阿，我为什么现在不能跟你去？我愿意为你舍命。
Peter said to him, Why may I not come with you even now? I will give up my life for you.

耶稣说，你愿意为我舍命吗？我实实在在地告诉你，鸡叫以先，你要三次不认我。
Jesus said in answer, Will you give up your life for me? Truly I say to you, Before the cry of the cock you will have said three times that you are not my disciple.

你们心里不要忧愁。你们信神，也当信我。
Let not your heart be troubled: have faith in God and have faith in me.

在我父的家里，有许多住处。若是没有，我就早已告诉你们了。我去原是为你们预备地方去。
In my Father's house are rooms enough; if it was not so, would I have said that I am going to make ready a place for you?

我若去为你们预备了地方，就必再来接你们到我那里去，我在哪里，叫你们也在哪里。
And if I go and make ready a place for you, I will come back again and will take you to be with me, so that you may be where I am.

我往哪里去，你们知道。那条路，你们也知道。（有古卷作我往哪里去你们知道那条路）
And you all have knowledge of where I am going, and of the way to it.

多马对他说，主阿，我们不知道你往哪里去，怎么知道那条路呢？
Thomas said, Lord, we have no knowledge of where you are going; how may we have knowledge of the way?

耶稣说，我就是道路，真理，生命。若不借着我。没有人能到父那里去。
Jesus said to him, I am the true and living way: no one comes to the Father but by me.

你们若认识我，也就认识我的父。从今以后，你们认识他，并且已经看见他。
If you had knowledge of me, you would have knowledge of my Father: you have knowledge of him now and have seen him.

腓力对他说，求主将父显给我们看，我们就知足了。
Philip said to him, Lord, let us see the Father, and we have need of nothing more.

耶稣对他说，腓力，我与你们同在这样长久，你还不认识我吗？人看见了我，就是看见了父。你怎么说，将父显给我们看呢？
Jesus said to him, Philip, have I been with you all this time, and still you have no knowledge of me? He who has seen me has seen the Father. Why do you say, Let us see the Father?

我在父里面，父在我里面，你不信吗？我对你们所说的话，不是凭着自己说的，乃是住在我里面的父作他自己的事。
Have you not faith that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words which I say to you, I say not from myself: but the Father who is in me all the time does his works.

你们当信我，我在父里面，父在我里面。即或不信，也当因我所作的事信我。
Have faith that I am in the Father and that the Father is in me: at least, have faith in me because of what I do.

我实实在在地告诉你们，我所作的事，信我的人也要作。并且要作比这更大的事。因为我往父那里去。
Truly I say to you, He who puts his faith in me will do the very works which I do, and he will do greater things than these, because I am going to my Father.

你们奉我的名，无论求什么，我必成就，叫父因儿子得荣耀。
And whatever request you make in my name, that I will do, so that the Father may have glory in the Son.

你们若奉我的名求什么，我必成就。
If you make any request to me in my name, I will do it.

你们若爱我，就必遵守我的命令。
If you have love for me, you will keep my laws.

我要求父，父就另外赐给你们一位保惠师，（或作训慰师下同）叫他永远与你们同在。
And I will make prayer to the Father and he will give you another Helper to be with you for ever,

就是真理的圣灵，乃世人不能接受的。因为不见他，也不认识他。你们却认识他。因他常与你们同在，也要在你们里面。
Even the Spirit of true knowledge. That Spirit the world is not able to take to its heart because it sees him not and has no knowledge of him: but you have knowledge of him, because he is ever with you and will be in you.

我不撇下你们为孤儿，我必到你们这里来。
I will not let you be without a friend: I am coming to you.

还有不多的时候，世人不再看见我。你们却看见我。因为我活着，你们也要活着。
A little time longer, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me; and you will be living because I am living.

到那日，你们就知道我在父里面，你们在我里面，我也在你们里面。
At that time it will be clear to you that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I in you.

有了我的命令又遵守的，这人就是爱我的。爱我的必蒙我父爱他，我也要爱他，并且要向他显现。
He who has my laws and keeps them, he it is who has love for me: and he who has love for me will be loved by my Father, and I will have love for him and will let myself be seen clearly by him.

犹大（不是加略人犹大）问耶稣说，主阿，为什么要向我们显现，不向世人显现呢？
Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, How is it that you will let yourself be seen clearly by us and not by the world?

耶稣回答说，人若爱我，就必遵守我的道。我父也必爱他，并且我们要到他那里去，与他同住。
Jesus said to him in answer, If anyone has love for me, he will keep my words: and he will be dear to my Father; and we will come to him and make our living-place with him.

不爱我的人就不遵守我的道。你们所听见的道不是我的，乃是差我来之父的道。
He who has no love for me does not keep my words; and the word which you are hearing is not my word but the Father's who sent me.

我还与你们同住的时候，已将这些话对你们说了。
I have said all this to you while I am still with you.

但保惠师，就是父因我的名所要差来的圣灵，他要将一切的事，指教你们，并且要叫你们想起我对你们所说的一切话。
But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will be your teacher in all things and will put you in mind of everything I have said to you.

我留下平安给你们，我将我的平安赐给你们。我所赐的，不像世人所赐的。你们心里不要忧愁，也不要胆怯。
May peace be with you; my peace I give to you: I give it not as the world gives. Let not your heart be troubled; let it be without fear.

你们听见我对你们说了，我去还要到你们这里来。你们若爱我，因我到父那里去，就必喜乐，因为父是比我大的。
Keep in mind how I said to you, I go away and come to you again. If you had love for me you would be glad, because I am going to the Father: for the Father is greater than I.

现在事情还没有成就，我预先告诉你们，叫你们到事情成就的时候，就可以信。
And now I have given you word of it before it comes, so that, when it comes, you may have faith.

以后我不再和你们多说话，因为这世界的王将到。他在我里面是毫无所有。
After this I will not say much to you, because the ruler of this world comes: and he has no power over me;

但要叫世人知道我爱父，并且父怎样吩咐我，我就怎样行。起来我们走吧。
But he comes so that the world may see that I have love for the Father, and that I am doing as I am ordered by the Father. Get up, and let us go.

我是真葡萄树，我父是栽培的人。
I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener.

凡属我不结果子的枝子，他就剪去。凡结果子的，他就修理干净，使枝子结果子更多。
He takes away every branch in me which has no fruit, and every branch which has fruit he makes clean, so that it may have more fruit.

现在你们因我讲给你们的道，已经干净了。
You are clean, even now, through the teaching which I have given you.

你们要常在我里面，我也常在你们里面。枝子若不常在葡萄树上，自己就不能结果子。你们若不常在我里面，也是这样。
Be in me at all times as I am in you. As the branch is not able to give fruit of itself, if it is not still on the vine, so you are not able to do so if you are not in me.

我是葡萄树，你们是枝子。常在我里面的，我也常在他里面，这人就多结果子。因为离了我，你们就不能作什么。
I am the vine, you are the branches: he who is in me at all times as I am in him, gives much fruit, because without me you are able to do nothing.

人若不常在我里面，就像枝子丢在外面枯干，人拾起来，扔在火里烧了。
If a man does not keep himself in me, he becomes dead and is cut off like a dry branch; such branches are taken up and put in the fire and burned.

你们若常在我里面，我的话也常在你们里面，凡你们所愿意的，祈求就给你们成就。
If you are in me at all times, and my words are in you, then anything for which you make a request will be done for you.

你们多结果子，我父就因此得荣耀，你们也就是我的门徒了。
Here is my Father's glory, in that you give much fruit and so are my true disciples.

我爱你们，正如父爱我一样。你们要常在我的爱里。
Even as the Father has given me his love, so I have given my love to you: be ever in my love.

你们若遵守我的命令，就常在我的爱里。正如我遵守了我父的命令，常在他的爱里。
If you keep my laws, you will be ever in my love, even as I have kept my Father's laws, and am ever in his love.

这些事我已经对你们说了，是要叫我的喜乐，存在你们心里，并叫你们的喜乐可以满足。
I have said these things to you so that I may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete.

你们要彼此相爱，像我爱你们一样，这就是我的命令。
This is the law I give you: Have love one for another, even as I have love for you.

人为朋友舍命，人的爱心没有比这个大的。
Greater love has no man than this, that a man gives up his life for his friends.

你们若遵行我所吩咐的，就是我的朋友了。
You are my friends, if you do what I give you orders to do.

以后我不再称你们为仆人。因仆人不知道主人所作的事。我乃称你们为朋友。因我从我父所听见的。已经都告诉你们了。
No longer do I give you the name of servants; because a servant is without knowledge of what his master is doing: I give you the name of friends, because I have given you knowledge of all the things which my Father has said to me.

不是你们拣选了我，是我拣选了你们，并且分派你们去结果子，叫你们的果子常存。使你们奉我的名，无论向父求什么，他就赐给你们。
You did not take me for yourselves, but I took you for myself; and I gave you the work of going about and producing fruit which will be for ever; so that whatever request you make to the Father in my name he may give it to you.

我这样吩咐你们，是要叫你们彼此相爱。
So this is my law for you: Have love one for another.

世人若恨你们，你们知道（或作该知道）恨你们以先，已经恨我了。
If you are hated by the world, keep in mind that I was hated by the world before you.

你们若属世界，世界必爱属自己的。只因你们不属世界。乃是我从世界中拣选了你们，所以世界就恨你们。
If you were of the world, you would be loved by the world: but because you are not of the world, but I have taken you out of the world, you are hated by the world.

你们要记念我从前对你们所说的话，仆人不能大于主人。他们若逼迫了我，也要逼迫你们。若遵守了我的话，也要遵守你们的话。
Keep in mind the words I said to you, A servant is not greater than his lord. If they were cruel to me, they will be cruel to you; if they kept my words, they will keep yours.

但他们因我的名，要向你们行这一切的事，因为他们不认识那差我来的。
They will do all this to you because of my name--because they have no knowledge of him who sent me.

我若没有来教训他们，他们就没有罪。但如今他们的罪无可推诿了。
If I had not come and been their teacher they would have had no sin: but now they have no reason to give for their sin.

恨我的，也恨我的父。
He who has hate for me has hate for my Father.

我若没有在他们中间行过别人未曾行的事，他们就没有罪。但如今连我与我的父，他们也看见也恨恶了。
If I had not done among them the works which no other man ever did, they would have had no sin: but now they have seen, and they have had hate in their hearts for me and my Father.

这要应验他们律法上所写的话说，他们无故恨我。
This comes about so that the writing in their law may be made true, Their hate for me was without cause.

但我要从父那里差保惠师来，就是从父出来真理的圣灵。他来了，就要为我作见证。
When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father even the Spirit of true knowledge who comes from the Father--he will give witness about me;

你们也要作见证，因为你们从起头就与我同在。
And you, in addition, will give witness because you have been with me from the first.

我已将这些事告诉你们，使你们不至于跌倒。
I have said these things to you so that you may not be in doubt.

人要把你们赶出会堂。并且时候将到，凡杀你们的，就以为是事奉神。
They will put you out of the Synagogues: yes, the time is coming when whoever puts you to death will have the belief that he is doing God's pleasure.

他们这样行，是因未曾认识父，也未曾认识我。
They will do these things to you because they have not had knowledge of the Father or of me.

我将这事告诉你们，是叫你们到了时候，可以想起我对你们说过了。我起先没有将这事告诉你们，因为我与你们同在。
I have said these things to you so that when the time comes, what I have said may come to your mind. I did not say them to you at the first, because then I was still with you.

现今我往差我来的父那里去。你们中间并没有人问我，你往哪里去？
But now I am going to him who sent me; and not one of you says to me, Where are you going?

只因我将这事告诉你们，你们就满心忧愁。
But your hearts are full of sorrow because I have said these things.

然而我将真情告诉你们。我去是与你们有益的。我若不去，保惠师就不到你们这里来。我若去，就差他来。
But what I am saying is true: my going is for your good: for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.

他既来了，就要叫世人为罪，为义，为审判，自己责备自己。
And he, when he comes, will make the world conscious of sin, and of righteousness, and of being judged:

为罪，是因他们不信我。
Of sin, because they have not faith in me;

为义，是因我往父那里去，你们就不再见我。
Of righteousness, because I go to the Father and you will see me no more;

为审判，是因这世界的王受了审判。
Of being judged, because the ruler of this world has been judged.

我还有好些事要告诉你们，但你们现在担当不了（或作不能领会）。
I have still much to say to you, but you are not strong enough for it now.

只等真理的圣灵来了，他要引导你们明白（原文作进入）一切的真理。因为他不是凭自己说的，乃是把他所听见的都说出来。并要把将来的事告诉你们。
However, when he, the Spirit of true knowledge, has come, he will be your guide into all true knowledge: for his words will not come from himself, but whatever has come to his hearing, that he will say: and he will make clear to you the things to come.

他要荣耀我。因为他要将受于我的，告诉你们。
He will give me glory, because he will take of what is mine, and make it clear to you.

凡父所有的，都是我的，所以我说，他要将受于我的，告诉你们。
Everything which the Father has is mine: that is why I say, He will take of what is mine and will make it clear to you.

等不多时，你们就不得见我。再等不多时，你们还要见我。
After a little time you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me.

有几个门徒就彼此说，他对我们说，等不多时，你们就不得见我。再等不多时，你们还要见我。又说，因我往父那里去。这是什么意思呢？
So some of the disciples said one to another, What is this he is saying, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me? and, I am going to the Father?

门徒彼此说，他说等不多时，到底是什么意思呢？我们不明白他所说的话。
So they said again and again, What is this he is saying, A little time? His words are not clear to us.

耶稣看出他们要问他，就说，我说等不多时，你们就不得见我，再等不多时，你们还要见我。你们为这话彼此相问吗？
Jesus saw that they had a desire to put the question to him, so he said to them, Is this what you are questioning one with another, why I said, After a little time, you will see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me?

我实实在在地告诉你们，你们将要痛哭，哀号，世人倒要喜乐。你们将要忧愁，然而你们的忧愁，要变为喜乐。
Truly I say to you, You will be weeping and sorrowing, but the world will be glad: you will be sad, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.

妇人生产的时候，就忧愁，因为她的时候到了。既生了孩子，就不再记念那苦楚，因为欢喜世上生了一个人。
When a woman is about to give birth she has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she has given birth to the child, the pain is put out of her mind by the joy that a man has come into the world.

你们现在也是忧愁。但我要再见你们，你们的心就喜乐了。这喜乐，也没有人能夺去。
So you have sorrow now: but I will see you again, and your hearts will be glad, and no one will take away your joy.

到那日，你们什么也就不问我了。我实实在在地告诉你们，你们若向父求什么，他必因我的名，赐给你们。
And on that day you will put no questions to me. Truly I say to you, Whatever request you make to the Father, he will give it to you in my name.

向来你们没有奉我的名求什么，如今你们求就必得着，叫你们的喜乐可以满足。
Up to now you have made no request in my name: do so, and it will be answered, so that your hearts may be full of joy.

这些事，我是用比喻对你们说的。时候将到，我不再用比喻对你们说，乃要将父明明地告诉你们。
All this I have said to you in veiled language: but the time is coming when I will no longer say things in veiled language but will give you knowledge of the Father clearly.

到那日，你们要奉我的名祈求。我并不对你们说，我要为你们求父。
In that day you will make requests in my name: and I do not say that I will make prayer to the Father for you,

父自己爱你们，因为你们已经爱我，又信我是从父出来的。
For the Father himself gives his love to you, because you have given your love to me and have had faith that I came from God.

我从父出来，到了世界。我又离开世界，往父那里去。
I came out from the Father and have come into the world: again, I go away from the world and go to the Father.

门徒说，如今你是明说，并不用比喻了。
His disciples said, Now you are talking clearly and not in veiled language.

现在我们晓得你凡事都知道，也不用人问你。因此我们信你是从神出来的。
Now we are certain that you have knowledge of all things and have no need for anyone to put questions to you: through this we have faith that you came from God.

耶稣说，现在你们信吗？
Jesus made answer, Have you faith now?

看哪，时候将到，且是已经到了，你们要分散，各归自己的地方去，留下我独自一人。其实我不是独自一人，因为有父与我同在。
See, a time is coming, yes, it is now here, when you will go away in all directions, every man to his house, and I will be by myself: but I am not by myself, because the Father is with me.

我将这些事告诉你们，是要叫你们在我里面有平安。在世上你们有苦难。但你们可以放心，我已经胜了世界。
I have said all these things to you so that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble: but take heart! I have overcome the world.

耶稣说了这话，就举目望天说，父阿，时候到了。愿你荣耀你的儿子，使儿子也荣耀你。
Jesus said these things; then, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said, Father, the time has now come; give glory to your Son, so that the Son may give glory to you:

正如你曾赐给他权柄，管理凡有血气的，叫他将永生赐给你所赐给他的人。
Even as you gave him authority over all flesh, to give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him.

认识你独一的真神，并且认识你所差来的耶稣基督，这就是永生。
And this is eternal life: to have knowledge of you, the only true God, and of him whom you have sent, even Jesus Christ.

我在地上已经荣耀你，你所托付我的事，我已成全了。
I have given you glory on the earth, having done all the work which you gave me to do.

父阿，现在求你使我同你享荣耀，就是未有世界以先，我同你所有的荣耀。
And now, Father, let me have glory with you, even that glory which I had with you before the world was.

你从世上赐给我的人，我已将你的名显明与他们。他们本是你的，你将他们赐给我，他们也遵守了你的道。
I have given knowledge of your name to the men whom you gave me out of the world: yours they were, and you gave them to me, and they have kept your words.

如今他们知道，凡你所赐给我的，都是从你那里来的。
Now it is clear to them that whatever you have given to me comes from you:

因为你所赐给我的道，我已经赐给他们。他们也领受了，又确实知道，我是从你出来的，并且信你差了我来。
Because I have given them the words which you gave to me; and they have taken them to heart, and have certain knowledge that I came from you, and they have faith that you sent me.

我为他们祈求。不为世人祈求，却为你所赐给我的人祈求，因他们本是你的。
My prayer is for them: my prayer is not for the world, but for those whom you have given to me, because they are yours

凡是我的都是你的，你的也是我的。并且我因他们得了荣耀。
(All mine are yours, and yours are mine) and I have glory in them.

从今以后，我不在世上，他们却在世上，我往你那里去。圣父阿，求你因你所赐给我的名保守他们，叫他们合而为一，像我们一样。
And now I will be no longer in the world, but they are in the world and I come to you. Holy Father, keep them in your name which you have given to me, so that they may be one even as we are one.

我与他们同在的时候，因你所赐给我的名，保守了他们，我也护卫了他们，其中除了那灭亡之子，没有一个灭亡的。好叫经上的话得应验。
While I was with them I kept them safe in your name which you have given to me: I took care of them and not one of them has come to destruction, but only the son of destruction, so that the Writings might come true.

现在我往你那里去。我还在世上说这话，是叫他们心里充满我的喜乐。
And now I come to you; and these things I say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them.

我已将你的道赐给他们。世界又恨他们，因为他们不属世界，正如我不属世界一样。
I have given your word to them; and they are hated by the world, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

我不求你叫他们离开世界，只求你保守他们脱离那恶者。（或作脱离罪恶）
My prayer is not that you will take them out of the world, but that you will keep them from the Evil One.

他们不属世界，正如我不属世界一样。
They are not of the world any more than I am of the world.

求你用真理使他们成圣。你的道就是真理。
Make them holy by the true word: your word is the true word.

你怎样差我到世上，我也照样差他们到世上。
Even as you have sent me into the world, so I have sent them into the world.

我为他们的缘故，自己分别为圣，叫他们也因真理成圣。
And for them I make myself holy, so that they may be made truly holy.

我不但为这些人祈求，也为那些因他们的话信我的人祈求。
My prayer is not for them only, but for all who will have faith in me through their word;

使他们都合而为一。正如你父在我里面，我在你里面，使他们也在我们里面。叫世人可以信你差了我来。
May they all be one! Even as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, so let them be in us, so that all men may come to have faith that you sent me.

你所赐给我的荣耀，我已赐给他们，使他们合而为一，像我们合而为一。
And the glory which you have given to me I have given to them, so that they may be one even as we are one;

我在他们里面，你在我里面，使他们完完全全的合而为一。叫世人知道你差了我来，也知道你爱他们如同爱我一样。
I in them, and you in me, so that they may be made completely one, and so that it may become clear to all men that you have sent me and that they are loved by you as I am loved by you.

父阿，我在哪里，愿你所赐给我的人也同我在哪里，叫他们看见你所赐给我的荣耀。因为创立世界以前，你已经爱我了。
Father, it is my desire that these whom you have given to me may be by my side where I am, so that they may see my glory which you have given to me, because you had love for me before the world came into being.

公义的父阿，世人未曾认识你，我却认识你。这些人也知道你差了我来。
Father of righteousness, I have knowledge of you, though the world has not; and to these it is clear that you sent me;

我已将你的名指示他们，还要指示他们，使你所爱我的爱在他们里面，我也在他们里面。
And I have given to them knowledge of your name, and will give it, so that the love which you have for me may be in them and I in them.

耶稣说了这话，就同门徒出去，过了汲沦溪，在那里有一个园子，他和门徒进去了。
When Jesus had said these words he went out with his disciples over the stream Kedron to a garden, into which he went with his disciples.

卖耶稣的犹大也知道那地方。因为耶稣和门徒屡次上那里去聚集。
And Judas, who was false to him, had knowledge of the place because Jesus went there frequently with his disciples.

犹大领了一队兵，和祭司长并法利赛人的差役，拿着灯笼，火把，兵器，就来到园里。
So Judas, getting a band of armed men and police from the chief priests and Pharisees, went there with lights and with arms.

耶稣知道将要临到自己的一切事，就出来，对他们说，你们找谁？
Then Jesus, having knowledge of everything which was coming on him, went forward and said to them, Who are you looking for?

他们回答说，找拿撒勒人耶稣。耶稣说，我就是。卖他的犹大也同他们站在那里。
Their answer was, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus said, I am he. And Judas, who was false to him, was there at their side.

耶稣一说我就是，他们就退后倒在地上。
And when he said to them, I am he, they went back, falling to the earth.

他又问他们说，你们找谁？他们说，找拿撒勒人耶稣。
So again he put the question to them, Who are you looking for? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.

耶稣说，我已经告诉你们，我就是。你们若找我，就让这些人去吧。
Jesus made answer, I have said that I am he; if you are looking for me, let these men go away.

这要应验耶稣从前的话，说，你所赐给我的人，我没有失落一个。
(He said this so that his words might come true, I have kept safe all those whom you gave to me.)

西门彼得带着一把刀，就拔出来，将大祭司的仆人砍了一刀，削掉他的右耳。那仆人名叫马勒古。
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, took it out and gave the high priest's servant a blow, cutting off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.

耶稣就对彼得说，收刀入鞘吧。我父所给我的那杯，我岂可不喝呢？
Then Jesus said to Peter, Put back your sword: am I not to take the cup which my Father has given to me?

那队兵和千夫长并犹太人的差役，就拿住耶稣，把他捆绑了。
Then the band and the chief captain and the police took Jesus and put cords round him.

先带到亚那面前。因为亚那是本年作大祭司该亚法的岳父。
They took him first to Annas, because Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was the high priest that year.

这该亚法，就是从前向犹太人发议论说，一个人替百姓死是有益的那位。
It was Caiaphas who had said to the Jews that it was in their interest for one man to be put to death for the people.

西门彼得跟着耶稣，还有一个门徒跟着。那门徒是大祭司所认识的。他就同耶稣进了大祭司的院子。
And Simon Peter went after Jesus with another disciple. Now that disciple was a friend of the high priest and he went in with Jesus into the house of the high priest;

彼得却站在门外。大祭司所认识的那个门徒出来，和看门的使女说了一声，就领彼得进去。
But Peter was kept outside at the door. Then this other disciple, who was a friend of the high priest, came out and had a word with the girl who kept the door, and took Peter in.

那看门的使女对彼得说，你不也是这人的门徒吗？他说，我不是。
Then the girl who was the door-keeper said to Peter, Are you not one of this man's disciples? In answer he said, I am not.

仆人和差役，因为天冷，就生了炭火，站在那里烤火。彼得也同他们站着烤火。
Now the servants and the police had made a fire of coals because it was cold; they were warming themselves in front of it and Peter was there with them, warming himself.

大祭司就以耶稣的门徒和他的教训盘问他。
Then the high priest put questions to Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.

耶稣回答说，我从来是明明地对世人说话。我常在会堂和殿里，就是犹太人聚集的地方，教训人。我在暗地里，并没有说什么。
Jesus made answer, I said things openly to the world at all times; I have given my teaching in the Synagogues and in the Temple to which all the Jews come; and I have said nothing secretly.

你为什么问我呢？可以问那听见的人，我对他们说的是什么。我所说的，他们都知道。
Why are you questioning me? put questions to my hearers about what I have said to them: they have knowledge of what I said.

耶稣说了这话，旁边站着的一个差役，用手掌打他说，你这样回答大祭司吗？
When he said this, one of the police by his side gave him a blow with his open hand, saying, Do you give such an answer to the high priest?

耶稣说，我若说的不是，你可以指证那不是。我若说的是，你为什么打我呢？
Jesus said in answer, If I have said anything evil, give witness to the evil: but if I said what is true, why do you give me blows?

亚那就把耶稣解到大祭司该亚法那里，仍是捆着解去的。
Then Annas sent him chained to Caiaphas, the high priest.

西门彼得正站着烤火，有人对他说，你不也是他的门徒吗？彼得不承认，说，我不是。
But Simon Peter was still there warming himself by the fire. They said to him, Are you not one of his disciples? He said, No, I am not.

有大祭司的一个仆人，是彼得削掉耳朵那人的亲属，说，我不是看见你同他在园子里吗？
One of the servants of the high priest, a relation of him whose ear had been cut off by Peter, said, Did I not see you with him in the garden?

彼得又不承认。立时鸡就叫了。
Then again Peter said, No. And straight away a cock gave its cry.

众人将耶稣从该亚法那里往衙门内解去。那时天还早。他们自己却不进衙门，恐怕染了污秽，不能吃逾越节的筵席。
So they took Jesus from the house of Caiaphas to the Praetorium. It was early. They themselves did not go into the Praetorium, so that they might not become unclean, but might take the Passover.

彼拉多就出来，到他们那里，说，你们告这人是为什么事呢？
So Pilate came out to them and put the question: What have you to say against this man?

他们回答说，这人若不是作恶的，我们就不把他交给你。
They said to him in answer, If the man was not a wrongdoer we would not have given him up to you.

彼拉多说，你们自己带他去，按着你们的律法审问他吧。犹太人说，我们没有杀人的权柄。
Then Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and let him be judged by your law. But the Jews said to him, We have no right to put any man to death.

这要应验耶稣所说，自己将要怎样死的话了。
(That the word of Jesus might come true, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)

彼拉多又进了衙门，叫耶稣来，对他说，你是犹太人的王吗？
Then Pilate went back into the Praetorium and sent for Jesus and said to him, Are you the King of the Jews?

耶稣回答说，这话是你自己说的，还是别人论我对你说的呢？
Jesus made answer, Do you say this of yourself, or did others say it about me?

彼拉多说，我岂是犹太人呢？你本国的人和祭司长，把你交给我。你作了什么事呢？
Pilate said, Am I a Jew? Your nation and the chief priests have given you into my hands: what have you done?

耶稣回答说，我的国不属这世界。我的国若属这世界，我的臣仆必要争战，使我不至于被交给犹太人。只是我的国不属这世界。
Jesus said in answer, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom was of this world, my disciples would have made a good fight to keep me out of the hands of the Jews: but my kingdom is not here.

彼拉多就对他说，这样，你是王吗？耶稣回答说，你说我是王。我为此而生，也为此来到世间，特为给真理作见证。凡属真理的人，就听我的话。
Then Pilate said to him, Are you then a king? Jesus made answer, You say that I am a king. For this purpose was I given birth, and for this purpose I came into the world, that I might give witness to what is true. Every lover of what is true gives ear to my voice.

彼拉多说，真理是什么呢？说了这话，又出来到犹太人那里，对他们说，我查不出他有什么罪来。
Pilate said to him, True? what is true? Having said this he went out again to the Jews and said to them, I see no wrong in him.

但你们有个规矩，在逾越节要我给你们释放一个人，你们要我给你们释放犹太人的王吗？
But every year you make a request to me to let a prisoner go free at the Passover. Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free?

他们又喊着说，不要这人，要巴拉巴。这巴拉巴是个强盗。
Then again they gave a loud cry, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was an outlaw.

当下彼拉多将耶稣鞭打了。
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him whipped with cords.

兵丁用荆棘编作冠冕，戴在他头上，给他穿上紫袍。
And the men of the army made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and they put a purple robe on him.

又挨近他说，恭喜犹太人的王阿。他们就用手掌打他。
And they kept coming and saying, Long life to the King of the Jews! And they gave him blows with their hands.

彼拉多又出来对众人说，我带他出来见你们，叫你们知道我查不出他有什么罪来。
And Pilate went out again and said to them, See, I let him come out to you to make it clear to you that I see no wrong in him.

耶稣出来，戴着荆棘冠冕，穿着紫袍。彼拉多对他们说，你们看这个人。
Then Jesus came out with the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them, Here is the man!

祭司长和差役看见他，就喊着说，钉他十字架，钉他十字架。彼拉多说，你们自己把他钉十字架吧。我查不出他有什么罪来。
So when the chief priests and the police saw him they gave a loud cry, To the cross! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Take him yourselves and put him on the cross: I see no crime in him.

犹太人回答说，我们有律法，按那律法，他是该死的，因他以自己为神的儿子。
And the Jews made answer, We have a law, and by that law it is right for him to be put to death because he said he was the Son of God.

彼拉多听见这话，越发害怕。
When this saying came to Pilate's ears his fear became greater;

又进衙门，对耶稣说，你是哪里来的？耶稣却不回答。
And he went again into the Praetorium and said to Jesus, Where do you come from? But Jesus gave him no answer.

彼拉多说，你不对我说话吗？你岂不知我有权柄释放你，也有权柄把你钉十字架吗？
Then Pilate said to him, You say nothing to me? is it not clear to you that I have power to let you go free and power to put you to death on the cross?

耶稣回答说，若不是从上头赐给你的，你就毫无权柄办我。所以把我交给你的那人，罪更重了。
Jesus gave this answer: You would have no power at all over me if it was not given to you by God; so that he who gave me up to you has the greater sin.

从此彼拉多想要释放耶稣。无奈犹太人喊着说，你若释放这个人，就不是该撒的忠臣。（原文作朋友）凡以自己为王的，就是背叛该撒了。
Hearing this, Pilate had a desire to let him go free, but the Jews said in a loud voice, If you let this man go, you are not Caesar's friend: everyone who makes himself a king goes against Caesar.

彼拉多听见这话，就带耶稣出来，到了一个地方，名叫铺华石处，希伯来话叫厄巴大，就在那里坐堂。
So when these words came to Pilate's ear, he took Jesus out, seating himself in the judge's seat in a place named in Hebrew, Gabbatha, or the Stone Floor.

那日是预备逾越节的日子，约有午正。彼拉多对犹太人说，看哪，这是你们的王。
(It was the day when they made ready for the Passover; and it was about the sixth hour.) And he said to the Jews, There is your King!

他们喊着说，除掉他，除掉他，钉他在十字架上。彼拉多说，我可以把你们的王钉十字架吗？祭司长回答说，除了该撒，我们没有王。
Then they gave a loud cry, Away with him! away with him! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Am I to put your King to death on the cross? The chief priests said in answer, We have no king but Caesar.

于是彼拉多将耶稣交给他们去钉十字架。
So then he gave him up to them to be put to death on the cross. And they took Jesus away;

他们就把耶稣带了去。耶稣背着自己的十字架出来，到了一个地方，名叫髑髅地，希伯来话叫各各他。
And he went out with his cross on him to the place which is named Dead Man's Head (in Hebrew, Golgotha):

他们就在那里钉他在十字架上，还有两个人和他一同钉着，一边一个，耶稣在中间。
Where they put him on the cross with two others, one on this side and one on that, and Jesus in the middle.

彼拉多又用牌子写了一个名号，安在十字架上。写的是犹太人的王，拿撒勒人耶稣。
And Pilate put on the cross a statement in writing. The writing was: JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

有许多犹太人念这名号。因为耶稣被钉十字架的地方，与城相近，并且是用希伯来，罗马，希利尼，三样文字写的。
The writing was seen by a number of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was put to death on the cross was near the town; and the writing was in Hebrew and Latin and Greek.

犹太人的祭司长，就对彼拉多说，不要写犹太人的王。要写他自己说我是犹太人的王。
Then the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not put, The King of the Jews, but, He said, I am the King of the Jews.

彼拉多说，我所写的，我已经写上了。
But Pilate made answer, What I have put in writing will not be changed.

兵丁既然将耶稣钉在十字架上，就拿他的衣服分为四分，每兵一分。又拿他的里衣。这件里衣，原来没有缝儿，是上下一片织成的。
And when Jesus was nailed to the cross, the men of the army took his clothing, and made a division of it into four parts, to every man a part, and they took his coat: now the coat was without a join, made out of one bit of cloth.

他们就彼此说，我们不要撕开，只要拈阄，看谁得着。这要应验经上的话说，他们分了我的外衣，为我的里衣拈阄。兵丁果然作了这事。
So they said among themselves, Let this not be cut up, but let us put it to the decision of chance and see who gets it. (They did this so that the Writings might come true, which say, They made a distribution of my clothing among them, and my coat they put to the decision of chance.) This was what the men of the army did.

站在耶稣十字架旁边的，有他母亲，与他母亲的姊妹，并革罗吧的妻子马利亚，和抹大拉的马利亚。
Now by the side of the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene.

耶稣见母亲和他所爱的那门徒站在旁边，就对他母亲说，母亲（原文作妇人），看你的儿子。
So when Jesus saw his mother and the disciple who was dear to him, he said to his mother, Mother, there is your son!

又对那门徒说，看你的母亲。从此那门徒就接她到自己家里去了。
Then he said to the disciple, There is your mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his house.

这事以后，耶稣知道各样的事已经成了，为要使经上的话应验，就说，我渴了。
After this, being conscious that all things had now been done so that the Writings might come true, Jesus said, Give me water.

有一个器皿盛满了醋，放在那里。他们就拿海绒蘸满了醋，绑在牛膝草上，送到他口。
Now there was a vessel ready, full of bitter wine, and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to his mouth.

耶稣尝（原文作受）了那醋，就说，成了。便低下头，将灵魂交付神了。
So when Jesus had taken the wine he said, All is done. And with his head bent he gave up his spirit.

犹太人因这日是预备日，又因那安息日是个大日，就求彼拉多叫人打断他们的腿，把他们拿去，免得尸首当安息日留在十字架上。
Now it was the day of getting ready for the Passover, and so that the bodies might not be on the cross on the Sabbath (because the day of that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews made a request to Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.

于是兵丁来，把头一个人的腿，并与耶稣同钉第二个人的腿，都打断了。
So the men of the army came, and the legs of the first were broken and then of the other who was put to death on the cross with Jesus:

只是来到耶稣那里，见他已经死了，就不打断他的腿。
But when they came to Jesus, they saw that he was dead by this time, and so his legs were not broken;

惟有一个兵拿枪扎他的肋旁，随即有血和水流出来。
But one of the men made a wound in his side with a spear, and straight away there came out blood and water.

看见这事的那人就作见证，他的见证也是真的，并且他知道自己所说的是真的，叫你们也可以信。
And he who saw it has given witness (and his witness is true; he is certain that what he says is true) so that you may have belief.

这些事成了，为要应验经上的话说，他的骨头，一根也不可折断。
These things came about so that the Writings might be true, No bone of his body will be broken.

经上又有一句说，他们要仰望自己所扎的人。
And again another verse says, They will see him who was wounded by their spears.

这些事以后，有亚利马太人约瑟，是耶稣的门徒，只因怕犹太人，就暗暗地作门徒，他来求彼拉多，要把耶稣的身体领去。彼拉多允准，他就把耶稣的身体领去了。
After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, made a request to Pilate to let him take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate said he might do so. So he went and took away his body.

又有尼哥底母，就是先前夜里去见耶稣的，带着没药，和沉香，约有一百斤前来。
And Nicodemus came (he who had first come to Jesus by night) with a roll of myrrh and aloes mixed, about a hundred pounds.

他们就照犹太人殡葬的规矩，把耶稣的身体，用细麻布加上香料裹好了。
Then they took the body of Jesus, folding linen about it with the spices, as is the way of the Jews when they put the dead to rest.

在耶稣钉十字架的地方，有一个园子。园子里有一座新坟墓，是从来没有葬过人的。
Now there was a garden near the cross, and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man had ever been put.

只因是犹太人的预备日，又因那坟墓近，他们就把耶稣安放在那里。
So they put Jesus there, because it was the Jews' day of getting ready for the Passover, and the place was near.

七日的第一日清早，天还黑的时候，抹大拉的马利亚来到坟墓那里，看见石头从坟墓挪开了。
Now on the first day of the week, very early, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the place and saw that the stone had been taken away from it.

就跑来见西门彼得，和耶稣所爱的那个门徒，对他们说，有人把主从坟墓里挪了去，我们不知道放在哪里。
Then she went running to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple who was loved by Jesus, and said to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the place of the dead and we have no knowledge where they have put him.

彼得和那门徒就出来，往坟墓那里去。
So Peter and the other disciple went out to the place of the dead.

两个人同跑，那门徒比彼得跑得更快，先到了坟墓。
They went running together, and the other disciple got in front of Peter and came first to the hole in the rock;

低头往里看，就见细麻布还放在那里。只是没有进去。
And looking in, he saw the linen bands on the earth; but he did not go in,

西门彼得随后也到了，进坟墓里去，就看见细麻布还放在那里。
Then Simon Peter came after him and went into the hole in the rock; and he saw the linen bands on the earth,

又看见耶稣的裹头巾，没有和细麻布放在一处，是另在一处卷着。
And the cloth, which had been round his head, not with the linen bands but rolled up in a place by itself.

先到坟墓的那门徒也进去，看见就信了。
Then the other disciple who came there first went in; and he saw and belief came to him.

因为他们还不明白圣经的意思，就是耶稣必要从死里复活。
For at that time they had no knowledge that the Writings said that he would have to come again from the dead.

于是两个门徒回自己的住处去了。
So then the disciples went away again to their houses.

马利亚却站在坟墓外面哭。哭的时候，低头往坟墓里看，
But Mary was still there outside the hole in the rock, weeping; and while she was weeping and looking into the hole,

就见两个天使，穿着白衣，在安放耶稣身体的地方坐着，一个在头，一个在脚。
She saw two angels in white seated where the body of Jesus had been, one at the head and the other at the feet.

天使对她说，妇人，你为什么哭？她说，因为有人把我主挪了去，我不知道放在哪里。
They said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? She said to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I have no knowledge where they have put him.

说了这话，就转过身来，看见耶稣站在那里，却不知道是耶稣。
And then looking round, she saw Jesus there, but had no idea that it was Jesus.

耶稣问她说，妇人，为什么哭？你找谁呢？马利亚以为是看园的，就对他说，先生，若是你把他移了去，请告诉我，你把他放在哪里，我便去取他。
Jesus said to her, Woman, why are you weeping? who are you looking for? She, taking him for the gardener, said to him, Sir, if you have taken him away from here, say where you have put him and I will take him away.

耶稣说，马利亚。马利亚就转过来，用希伯来话对他说，拉波尼。（拉波尼就是夫子的意思）
Jesus said to her, Mary! Turning, she said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni! (which is to say, Master).

耶稣说，不要摸我。因我还没有升上去见我的父。你往我弟兄那里去，告诉他们说，我要升上去，见我的父，也是你们的父。见我的神，也是你们的神。
Jesus said to her, Do not put your hand on me, for I have not gone up to the Father: but go to my brothers and say to them, I go up to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.

抹大拉的马利亚就去告诉门徒说，我已经看见了主。她又将主对她说的这话告诉他们。
Mary Magdalene went with the news to the disciples, and said she had seen the Lord and that he had said these things to her.

那日，（就是七日的第一日）晚上，门徒所在的地方，因怕犹太人，门都关了。耶稣来站在当中，对他们说，愿你们平安。
At evening on that day, the first day of the week, when, for fear of the Jews, the doors were shut where the disciples were, Jesus came among them and said to them, May peace be with you!

说了这话，就把手和肋旁，指给他们看。门徒看见主，就喜乐了。
And when he had said this, he let them see his hands and his side. Then the disciples were glad when they saw the Lord.

耶稣又对他们说，愿你们平安。父怎样差遣了我，我也照样差遣你们。
And Jesus said to them again, May peace be with you! As the Father sent me, even so I now send you.

说了这话，就向他们吹一口气，说，你们受圣灵。
And when he had said this, breathing on them, he said to them, Let the Holy Spirit come on you:

你们赦免谁的罪，谁的罪就赦免了。你们留下谁的罪，谁的罪就留下了。
Any to whom you give forgiveness, will be made free from their sins; and any from whom you keep back forgiveness, will still be in their sins.

那十二个门徒中，有称为低土马的多马。耶稣来的时候，他没有和他们同在。
Now Thomas, one of the twelve, named Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.

那些门徒就对他说，我们已经看见主了。多马却说，我非看见他手上的钉痕，用指头探入那钉痕，又用手探入他的肋旁，我总不信。
So the other disciples said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, If I do not see in his hands the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of the nails, and if I do not put my hand into his side, I will never have belief.

过了八日，门徒又在屋里，多马也和他们同在，门都关了。耶稣来站在当中说，愿你们平安。
And after eight days, his disciples were again in the house and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were shut, Jesus came, and taking his place in the middle of them, he said, May peace be with you!

就对多马说，伸过你的指头来，摸（摸原文作看）我的手。伸出你的手来，探入我的肋旁。不要疑惑，总要信。
Then he said to Thomas, Put out your finger, and see my hands; and put your hand here into my side: and be no longer in doubt but have belief.

多马说，我的主，我的神。
And Thomas said in answer, My Lord and my God!

耶稣对他说，你因看见了我才信。那没有看见就信的，有福了。
Jesus said to him, Because you have seen me you have belief: a blessing will be on those who have belief though they have not seen me!

耶稣在门徒面前，另外行了许多神迹，没有记在这书上。
A number of other signs Jesus did before his disciples which are not recorded in this book:

但记这些事，要叫你们信耶稣是基督，是神的儿子。并且叫你们信了他，就可以因他的名得生命。
But these are recorded, so that you may have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and so that, having this faith you may have life in his name.

这些事以后，耶稣在提比哩亚海边，又向门徒显现。他怎样显现记在下面。
After these things Jesus let himself be seen again by the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and it came about in this way.

有西门彼得，和称为低土马的多马，并加利利的迦拿人拿但业，还有西庇太的两个儿子，又有两个门徒，都在一处。
Simon Peter, Thomas named Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were all together.

西门彼得对他们说，我打鱼去。他们说，我们也和你同去。他们就出去，上了船，那一夜并没有打着什么。
Simon Peter said to them, I am going fishing. They said to him, And we will come with you. They went out and got into the boat; but that night they took no fish.

天将亮的时候，耶稣站在岸上。门徒却不知道是耶稣。
Now very early in the morning Jesus was there by the edge of the sea (though the disciples were not conscious that it was Jesus).

耶稣就对他们说，小子，你们有吃的没有。他们回答说，没有。
So Jesus said to them, Children, have you taken any fish? They made answer, No.

耶稣说，你们把网撒在船的右边，就必得着。他们便撒下网去，竟拉不上来了，因为鱼甚多。
And he said to them, Let down the net on the right side of the boat and you will get some. So they put it in the water and now they were not able to get it up again because of the great number of fish.

耶稣所爱的那门徒对彼得说，是主。那时西门彼得赤着身子，一听见是主，就束上一件外衣，跳在海里。
So the disciple who was dear to Jesus said to Peter, It is the Lord! Hearing that it was the Lord, Peter put his coat round him (because he was not clothed) and went into the sea.

其余的门徒（离岸不远，约有二百肘，（古时以肘为尺，一肘约有今时尺半）就在小船上把那网鱼拉过来。
And the other disciples came in the little boat (they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits off) pulling the net full of fish.

他们上了岸，就看见那里有炭火，上面有鱼，又有饼。
When they got to land, they saw a fire of coals there, with fish cooking on it, and bread.

耶稣对他们说，把刚才打的鱼，拿几条来。
Jesus said to them, Get some of the fish which you have now taken.

西门彼得就去，（或作上船）把网拉到岸上，那网满了大鱼，共一百五十三条。鱼虽这样多，网却没有破。
So Peter went to the boat and came back pulling the net to land, full of great fish, a hundred and fifty-three; and though there was such a number the net was not broken.

耶稣说，你们来吃早饭。门徒中没有一个敢问他，你是谁？因为知道是主。
Jesus said to them, Come and take some food. And all the disciples were in fear of putting the question, Who are you? being conscious that it was the Lord.

耶稣就来拿饼和鱼给他们。
Then Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish in the same way.

耶稣从死里复活以后，向门徒显现，这是第三次。
Now this was the third time that Jesus let himself be seen by the disciples after he had come back from the dead.

他们吃完了早饭，耶稣对西门彼得说，约翰的儿子西门，（约翰马太十六章十七节称约拿）你爱我比这些更深吗？彼得说，主阿，是的。你知道我爱你。耶稣对他说，你喂养我的小羊。
Then when they had taken food, Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, is your love for me greater than the love of these others? He said to him, Yes, Lord; you are certain of my love for you. He said to him, Then give my lambs food.

耶稣第二次又对他说，约翰的儿子西门，你爱我吗？彼得说，主阿，是的。你知道我爱你。耶稣说，你牧养我的羊。
Again, a second time, he said to him, Simon, son of John, have you any love for me? Yes, Lord, he said, you are certain of my love for you. Then take care of my sheep, said Jesus.

第三次对他说，约翰的儿子西门，你爱我吗？彼得因为耶稣第三次对他说，你爱我吗？就忧愁，对耶稣说，主阿，你是无所不知的，你知道我爱你。耶稣说，你喂养我的羊。
He said to him a third time, Simon, son of John, am I dear to you? Now Peter was troubled in his heart because he put the question a third time, Am I dear to you? And he said to him, Lord, you have knowledge of all things; you see that you are dear to me. Jesus said to him, Then give my sheep food.

我实实在在地告诉你，你年少的时候，自己束上带子，随意往来，但年老的时候，你要伸出手来，别人要把你束上，带你到不愿意去的地方。
Truly I say to you, When you were young, you made yourself ready and went wherever you had a desire to go: but when you are old, you will put out your hands and another will make you ready, and you will be taken where you have no desire to go.

耶稣说这话，是指着彼得要怎样死荣耀神。说了这话，就对他说，你跟从我吧。
Now this he said, pointing out the sort of death by which he would give God glory. And after saying this, he said to him, Come after me.

彼得转过来，看见耶稣所爱的那门徒跟着，就是在晚饭的时候，靠着耶稣胸膛，说，主阿，卖你的是谁？的那门徒。
Then Peter, turning round, saw the disciple who was dear to Jesus coming after them--the disciple who was resting on his breast at the last meal, and said, Lord, who is it who will be false to you?

彼得看见他，就问耶稣说，主阿，这人将来如何？
Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, What about this man?

耶稣对他说，我若要他等到我来的时候，与你何干？你跟从我吧。
Jesus said to him, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you? come yourself after me.

于是这话传在弟兄中间，说那门徒不死。其实耶稣不是说他不死。乃是说我若要他等到我来的时候，与你何干？
So this saying went about among the brothers that this disciple would not undergo death: Jesus, however, did not say that he would not undergo death, but, If it is my desire for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you?

为这些事作见证，并且记载这些事的，就是这门徒。我们也知道他的见证是真的。
This is the disciple who gives witness about these things and who put them in writing: and we have knowledge that his witness is true.

耶稣所行的事，还有许多，若是一一的都写出来，我想所写的书，就是世界也容不下了。
And Jesus did such a number of other things that, if every one was recorded, it is my opinion that even the world itself is not great enough for the books there would be.

