论到从起初原有的生命之道，就是我们所听见所看见，亲眼看过，亲手摸过的。
That which was from the first, which has come to our ears, and which we have seen with our eyes, looking on it and touching it with our hands, about the Word of life

（这生命已经显现出来，我们也看见过，现在又作见证，将原与父同在，且显现与我们那永远的生命，传给你们）。
(And the life was made clear to us, and we have seen it and are witnessing to it and giving you word of that eternal life which was with the Father and was seen by us);

我们将所看见，所听见的，传给你们，使你们与我们相交。我们乃是与父并他儿子耶稣基督相交的。
We give you word of all we have seen and everything which has come to our ears, so that you may be united with us; and we are united with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ:

我们将这些话写给你们，使你们（有古卷作我们）的喜乐充足。
And we are writing these things to you so that our joy may be made complete.

神就是光，在他毫无黑暗。这是我们从主所听见，又报给你们的信息。
This is the word which came to us from him and which we give to you, that God is light and in him there is nothing dark.

我们若说是与神相交，却仍在黑暗里行，就是说谎话，不行真理了。
If we say we are joined to him, and are walking still in the dark, our words are false and our acts are untrue:

我们若在光明中行，如同神在光明中，就彼此相交，他儿子耶稣的血也洗净我们一切的罪。
But if we are walking in the light, as he is in the light, we are all united with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son makes us clean from all sin.

我们若说自己无罪，便是自欺，真理不在我们心里了。
If we say that we have no sin, we are false to ourselves and there is nothing true in us.

我们若认自己的罪，神是信实的，是公义的，必要赦免我们的罪，洗净我们一切的不义。
If we say openly that we have done wrong, he is upright and true to his word, giving us forgiveness of sins and making us clean from all evil.

我们若说自己没有犯过罪，便是以神为说谎的。他的道也不在我们心里了。
If we say that we have no sin, we make him false and his word is not in us.

我小子们哪，我将这些话写给你们，是要叫你们不犯罪。若有人犯罪，在父那里我们有一位中保，就是那义者耶稣基督。
My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may be without sin. And if any man is a sinner, we have a friend and helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, the upright one:

他为我们的罪作了挽回祭。不是单为我们的罪，也是为普天下人的罪。
He is the offering for our sins; and not for ours only, but for all the world.

我们若遵守他的诫命，就晓得是认识他。
And by this we may be certain that we have knowledge of him, if we keep his laws.

人若说我认识他，却不遵守他的诫命，便是说谎话的。真理也不在他心里了。
The man who says, I have knowledge of him, and does not keep his laws, is false, and there is nothing true in him:

凡遵守主道的，爱神的心在他里面实在是完全的，从此我们知道我们是在主里面。
But in every man who keeps his word, the love of God is made complete. By this we may be certain that we are in him:

人若说他住在主里面，就该自己照主所行的去行。
He who says that he is living in him, will do as he did.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我写给你们的，不是一条新命令，乃是你们从起初所受的旧命令。这旧命令就是你们所听见的道。
My loved ones, I do not give you a new law, but an old law which you had from the first; this old law is the word which came to your ears.

再者，我写给你们的，是一条新命令，在主是真的，在你们也是真的。因为黑暗渐渐过去，真光已经照耀。
Again, I give you a new law, which is true in him and in you; for the night is near its end and the true light is even now shining out.

人若说自己在光明中。却恨他的弟兄，他到如今还是在黑暗里。
He who says that he is in the light, and has hate in his heart for his brother, is still in the dark.

爱弟兄的就是住在光明中，在他并没有绊跌的缘由。
He who has love for his brother is in the light, and there is no cause of error in him.

惟独恨弟兄的是在黑暗里，且在黑暗里行，也不知道往哪里去，因为黑暗叫他眼睛瞎了。
But he who has hate for his brother is in the dark, walking in the dark with no knowledge of where he is going, unable to see because of the dark.

小子们哪，我写信给你们，因为你们的罪借着主名得了赦免。
I am writing to you, my children, because you have forgiveness of sins through his name.

父老阿，我写信给你们，因为你们认识那从起初原有的。少年人哪，我写信给你们，因为你们胜了那恶者。小子们哪，我曾写信给你们，因为你们认识父。
I am writing to you, fathers, because you have knowledge of him who was from the first. I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the Evil One. I have sent a letter to you, children, because you have knowledge of the Father.

父老阿，我曾写信给你们，因为你们认识那从起初原有的。少年人哪，我曾写信给你们，因为你们刚强，神的道常存在你们心里，你们也胜了那恶者。
I have sent a letter to you, fathers, because you have knowledge of him who was from the first. I have sent a letter to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God is in you, and because you have overcome the Evil One.

不要爱世界，和世界上的事。人若爱世界，爱父的心就不在他里面了。
Have no love for the world or for the things which are in the world. If any man has love for the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

因为凡世界上的事，就像肉体的情欲，眼目的情欲，并今生的骄傲，都不是从父来的，乃是从世界来的。
Because everything in the world, the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but of the world.

这世界，和其上的情欲，都要过去。惟独遵行神旨意的，是永远常存。
And the world and its desires is coming to an end: but he who does God's pleasure is living for ever.

小子们哪，如今是末时了。你们曾听见说，那敌基督的要来现在已经有好些敌基督的出来了。从此我们就知道如今是末时了。
Little children, it is the last hour; and as you were given word that the Antichrist would come, so now a number of Antichrists have come to you; and by this we are certain that it is the last hour.

他们从我们中间出去，却不是属我们的。若是属我们的，就必仍旧与我们同在。他们出去，显明都不是属我们的。
They went out from us but they were not of us; if they had been of us they would still be with us: but they went out from us so that it might be made clear that they were not of us.

你们从那圣者受了恩膏，并且知道这一切的事。（或作都有知识）
And you have the Spirit from the Holy One and you all have knowledge.

我写信给你们，不是因你们不知道真理，正是因你们知道，并且知道没有虚谎是从真理出来的。
I have not sent you this letter because you have no knowledge of what is true, but because you have knowledge, and because that which is false has nothing in common with that which is true.

谁是说谎话的呢？不是那不认耶稣为基督的吗？不认父与子的，这就是敌基督的。
Who is false but he who says that Jesus is not the Christ? He is the Antichrist who has no belief in the Father or the Son.

凡不认子的就没有父。认子的连父也有了。
He who has no belief in the Son has not the Father: he who makes clear his belief in the Son has the Father.

论到你们，务要将那从起初所听见的常存在心里。若将从起初所听见的存在心里，你们就必住在子里面，也必住在父里面。
But as for you, keep in your hearts the things which were made clear to you from the first. If you keep these things in your hearts you will be kept in the Father and the Son.

主所应许我们的就是永生。
And this is the hope which he gave you, even eternal life.

我将这些话写给你们，是指着那引诱你们的人说的。
I am writing these things to you about those whose purpose is that you may be turned out of the true way.

你们从主所受的恩膏，常存在你们心里，并不用人教训你们。自有主的恩膏在凡事上教训你们。这恩膏是真的，不是假的。你们要按这恩膏的教训，住在主里面。
As for you, the Spirit which he gave you is still in you, and you have no need of any teacher; but as his Spirit gives you teaching about all things, and is true and not false, so keep your hearts in him, through the teaching which he has given you.

小子们哪，你们要住在主里面。这样，他若显现，我们就可以坦然无惧。当他来的时候，在他面前也不至于惭愧。
And now, my children, keep your hearts in him; so that at his revelation, we may have no fear or shame before him at his coming.

你们若知道他是公义的，就知道凡行公义之人都是他所生的。
If you have knowledge that he is upright, it is clear to you that everyone who does righteousness is his offspring.

你看父赐给我们是何等的慈爱，使我们得称为神的儿女。我们也真是他的儿女。世人所以不认识我们，是因未曾认识他。
See what great love the Father has given us in naming us the children of God; and such we are. For this reason the world does not see who we are, because it did not see who he was.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我们现在是神的儿女，将来如何，还未显明。但我们知道主若显现，我们必要像他。因为必得见他的真体。
My loved ones, now we are children of God, and at present it is not clear what we are to be. We are certain that at his revelation we will be like him; for we will see him as he is.

凡向他有这指望的，就洁净自己，像他洁净一样。
And everyone who has this hope in him makes himself holy, even as he is holy.

凡犯罪的，就是违背律法。违背律法就是罪。
Everyone who is a sinner goes against the law, for sin is going against the law.

你们知道主曾显现，是要除掉人的罪。在他并没有罪。
And you have knowledge that he came to take away sin: and in him there is no sin.

凡住在他里面的，就不犯罪。凡犯罪的，是未曾看见他，也未曾认识他。
Anyone who is in him does no sin; anyone who is a sinner has not seen him and has no knowledge of him.

小子们哪，不要被人诱惑，行义的才是义人。正如主是义的一样。
My little children, let no man take you out of the true way: he who does righteousness is upright, even as he is upright;

犯罪的是属魔鬼，因为魔鬼从起初就犯罪。神的儿子显现出来，为要除灭魔鬼的作为。
The sinner is a child of the Evil One; for the Evil One has been a sinner from the first. And the Son of God was seen on earth so that he might put an end to the works of the Evil One.

凡从神生的就不犯罪，因神的道（原文作种）存在他心里。他也不能犯罪，因为他是由神生的。
Anyone who is a child of God does no sin, because he still has God's seed in him; he is not able to be a sinner, because God is his Father.

从此就显出谁是神的儿女，谁是魔鬼的儿女。凡不行义的，就不属神。不爱弟兄的也是如此。
In this way it is clear who are the children of God and who are the children of the Evil One; anyone who does not do righteousness or who has no love for his brother, is not a child of God.

我们应当彼此相爱。这就是你们从起初所听见的命令。
Because this is the word which was given to you from the first, that we are to have love for one another;

不可像该隐。他是属那恶者，杀了他的兄弟。为什么杀了他呢？因自己的行为是恶的，兄弟的行为是善的。
Not being of the Evil One like Cain, who put his brother to death. And why did he put him to death? Because his works were evil and his brother's works were good.

弟兄们，世人若恨你们，不要以为希奇。
Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world has no love for you.

我们因为爱弟兄，就晓得是已经出死入生了。没有爱心的，仍住在死中。
We are conscious that we have come out of death into life because of our love for the brothers. He who has no love is still in death.

凡恨他弟兄的，就是杀人的。你们晓得凡杀人的，没有永生存在他里面。
Anyone who has hate for his brother is a taker of life, and you may be certain that no taker of life has eternal life in him.

主为我们舍命，我们从此就知道何为爱。我们也当为弟兄舍命。
In this we see what love is, because he gave his life for us; and it is right for us to give our lives for the brothers.

凡有世上财物的，看见弟兄穷乏，却塞住怜恤的心，爱神的心怎能存在他里面呢？
But if a man has this world's goods, and sees that his brother is in need, and keeps his heart shut against his brother, how is it possible for the love of God to be in him?

小子们哪，我们相爱，不要只在言语和舌头上。总要在行为和诚实上。
My little children, do not let our love be in word and in tongue, but let it be in act and in good faith.

从此就知道我们是属真理的，并且我们的心在神面前可以安稳。
In this way we may be certain that we are true, and may give our heart comfort before him,

我们的心若责备我们，神比我们的心大，一切事没有不知道的。
When our heart says that we have done wrong; because God is greater than our heart, and has knowledge of all things.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我们的心若不责备我们，就可以向神坦然无惧了。
My loved ones, if our heart does not say that we have done wrong, we have no fear before him;

并且我们一切所求的，就从他得着。因为我们遵守他的命令，行他所喜悦的事。
And he gives us all our requests, because we keep his laws and do the things which are pleasing in his eyes.

神的命令就是叫我们信他儿子耶稣基督的名，且照他所赐给我们的命令彼此相爱。
And this is his law, that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love for one another, even as he said to us.

遵守神命令的，就住在神里面。神也住在他里面。我们所以知道神住在我们里面，是因他所赐给我们的圣灵。
He who keeps his laws is in God and God is in him. And the Spirit which he gave us is our witness that he is in us.

亲爱的弟兄阿，一切的灵，你们不可都信。总要试验那些灵是出于神的不是。因为世上有许多假先知已经出来了。
My loved ones, do not put your faith in every spirit, but put them to the test, to see if they are from God: because a great number of false prophets have gone out into the world.

凡灵认耶稣基督是成了肉身来的，就是出于神的。从此你们可以认出神的灵来。
By this you may have knowledge of the Spirit of God: every spirit which says that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God:

凡灵不认耶稣，就不是出于神。这是那敌基督者的灵。你们从前听见他要来。现在已经在世上了。
And every spirit which does not say this is not from God: this is the spirit of Antichrist, of which you have had word; and it is in the world even now.

小子们哪，你们是属神的，并且胜了他们。因为那在你们里面的，比那在世界上的更大。
You are of God, my little children, and you have overcome them because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the world.

他们是属世界的。所以论世界的事，世人也听从他们。
They are of the world, so their talk is the world's talk, and the world gives ear to them.

我们是属神的。认识神的就听从我们。不属神的就不听从我们。从此我们可以认出真理的灵，和谬妄的灵来。
We are of God: he who has the knowledge of God gives ear to us; he who is not of God does not give ear to us. By this we may see which is the true spirit, and which is the spirit of error.

亲爱的弟兄阿，我们应当彼此相爱。因为爱是从神来的。凡有爱心的，都是由神而生，并且认识神。
My loved ones, let us have love for one another: because love is of God, and everyone who has love is a child of God and has knowledge of God.

没有爱心的，就不认识神。因为神就是爱。
He who has no love has no knowledge of God, because God is love.

神差他独生子到世间来，使我们借着他得生，神爱我们的心，在此就显明了。
And the love of God was made clear to us when he sent his only Son into the world so that we might have life through him.

不是我们爱神，乃是神爱我们，差他的儿子，为我们的罪作了挽回祭，这就是爱了。
And this is love, not that we had love for God, but that he had love for us, and sent his Son to be an offering for our sins.

亲爱的弟兄阿，神既是这样爱我们，我们也当彼此相爱。
My loved ones, if God had such love for us, it is right for us to have love for one another.

从来没有人见过神。我们若彼此相爱，神就住在我们里面，爱他的心在我们里面得以完全了。
No man has ever seen God: if we have love for one another, God is in us and his love is made complete in us:

神将他的灵赐给我们，从此就知道我们是住在他里面，他也住在我们里面。
And his Spirit which he has given us is the witness that we are in him and he is in us.

父差子作世人的救主，这是我们所看见且作见证的。
And we have seen and give witness that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.

凡认耶稣为神儿子的，神就住在他里面，他也住在神里面。
Everyone who says openly that Jesus is the Son of God, has God in him and is in God.

神爱我们的心，我们也知道也信。神就是爱。住在爱里面的，就是住在神里面，神也住在他里面。
And we have seen and had faith in the love which God has for us. God is love, and everyone who has love is in God, and God is in him.

这样爱在我们里面得以完全，我们就可以在审判的日子，坦然无惧。因为他如何，我们在这世上也如何。
In this way love is made complete in us, so that we may be without fear on the day of judging, because as he is, so are we in this world.

爱里没有惧怕。爱既完全，就把惧怕除去。因为惧怕里含着刑罚。惧怕的人在爱里未得完全。
There is no fear in love: true love has no room for fear, because where fear is, there is pain; and he who is not free from fear is not complete in love.

我们爱，因为神先爱我们。
We have the power of loving, because he first had love for us.

人若说，我爱神，却恨他的弟兄，就是说谎话的。不爱他所看见的弟兄，就不能爱没有看见的神。（有古卷作怎能爱没有看见的神呢）。
If a man says, I have love for God, and has hate for his brother, his words are false: for how is the man who has no love for his brother whom he has seen, able to have love for God whom he has not seen?

爱神的，也当爱弟兄，这是我们从神所受的命令。
And this is the word which we have from him, that he who has love for God is to have the same love for his brother.

凡信耶稣是基督的，都是从神而生。凡爱生他之神的，也必爱从神生的。
Everyone who has faith that Jesus is the Christ is a child of God: and everyone who has love for the Father has love for his child.

我们若爱神，又遵守他的诫命，从此就知道我们爱神的儿女。
In this way, we are certain that we have love for the children of God, when we have love for God and keep his laws.

我们遵守神的诫命，这就是爱他了。并且他的诫命不是难守的。
For loving God is keeping his laws: and his laws are not hard.

因为凡从神生的，就胜过世界。使我们胜了世界的，就是我们的信心。
Anything which comes from God is able to overcome the world: and the power by which we have overcome the world is our faith.

胜过世界的是谁呢？不是那信耶稣是神儿子的吗？
Who is able to overcome the world but the man who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?

这借着水和血而来的就是耶稣基督。不是单用水，乃是用水又用血。
This is he who came by water and by blood, Jesus Christ; not by water only but by water and by blood.

并且有圣灵作见证，因为圣灵就是真理。
And the Spirit is the witness, because the Spirit is true.

作见证的原来有三，就是圣灵，水，与血。这三样也都归于一。
There are three witnesses, the Spirit, the water, and the blood: and all three are in agreement.

我们既领受人的见证，神的见证更该领受了。（该领受原文作大）。因神的见证，是为他儿子作的。
If we take the witness of men to be true, the witness of God is greater: because this is the witness which God has given about his Son.

信神儿子的，就有这见证在他心里。不信神的，就是将神当作说谎的。因不信神为他儿子作的见证。
He who has faith in the Son of God has the witness in himself: he who has not faith in God makes him false, because he has not faith in the witness which God has given about his Son.

这见证，就是神赐给我们永生，这永生也是在他儿子里面。
And his witness is this, that God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

人有了神的儿子就有生命。没有神的儿子就没有生命。
He who has the Son has the life; he who has not the Son of God has not the life.

我将这些话写给你们信奉神儿子之名的人，要叫你们知道自己有永生。
I have put these things in writing for you who have faith in the name of the Son of God, so that you may be certain that you have eternal life.

我们若照他的旨意求什么，他就听我们。这是我们向他所存坦然无惧的心。
And we are certain that if we make any request to him which is right in his eyes, he will give ear to us:

既然知道他听我们一切所求的，就知道我们所求于他的无不得着。
And if we are certain that he gives ear to all our requests, we are equally certain that we will get our requests.

人若看见弟兄犯了不至于死的罪，就当为他祈求，神必将生命赐给他。有至于死的罪，我不说当为这罪祈求。
If a man sees his brother doing a sin which is not bad enough for death, let him make a prayer to God, and God will give life to him whose sin was not bad enough for death. There is a sin whose punishment is death: I do not say that he may make such a request then.

凡不义的事都是罪。也有不至于死的罪。
All evil-doing is sin: but death is not the punishment for every sort of sin.

我们知道凡从神生的必不犯罪。从神生的必保守自己，（有古卷作那从神生的必保护他），那恶者也就无法害他。
We are certain that one who is a child of God will do no sin, but the Son of God keeps him so that he is not touched by the Evil One.

我们知道我们是属神的，全世界都卧在那恶者手下。
We are certain that we are of God, but all the world is in the power of the Evil One.

我们也知道神的儿子已经来到，且将智慧赐给我们，使我们认识那位真实的，我们也在那位真实的里面，就是在他儿子耶稣基督里面。这是真神，也是永生。
And we are certain that the Son of God has come, and has given us a clear vision, so that we may see him who is true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.

小子们哪，你们要自守，远避偶像。
My little children, keep yourselves from false gods.

