作长老的写信给蒙拣选的太太，（太太或作教会下同），和她的儿女，就是我诚心所爱的。不但我爱，也是一切知道真理之人所爱的。
I, a ruler in the church, send word to the noble sister who is of God's selection, and to her children, for whom I have true love; and not only I, but all who have knowledge of what is true;

爱你们是为真理的缘故，这真理存在我们里面，也必永远与我们同在。
Because of this true knowledge which is in us, and will be with us for ever:

恩惠，怜悯，平安，从父神和他儿子耶稣基督，在真理和爱心上，必常与我们同在。
May grace, mercy, and peace be with us from God the Father, and from Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in all true love.

我见你的儿女，有照我们从父所受之命令遵行真理的，就甚欢喜。
It gave me great joy to see some of your children walking in the true way, even as we were ordered to do by the Father.

太太阿，我现在劝你，我们大家要彼此相爱。这并不是我写一条新命令给你，乃是我们从起初所受的命令。
And now, my sister, I make a request to you, not sending you a new law, but the law which we had from the first, that we have love for one another.

我们若照他的命令行，这就是爱。你们从起初所听见当行的，就是这命令。
And love is the keeping of his laws. This is the law which was given to you from the first, so that you might keep it.

因为世上有许多迷惑人的出来，他们不认耶稣基督是成了肉身来的。这就是那迷惑人，敌基督的。
Because a number of false teachers have gone out into the world, who do not give witness that Jesus Christ came in the flesh. Such a one is a false teacher and Antichrist.

你们要小心，不要失去你们（有古卷作我们）所作的工，乃要得着满足的赏赐。
Keep watch over yourselves, so that you do not make our work of no effect, but may get your full reward.

凡越过基督的教训，不常守着的，就没有神。常守这教训的，就有父又有子。
Anyone who goes on and does not keep to the teaching of Christ, has not God: he who keeps to the teaching has the Father and the Son.

若有人到你们那里，不是传这教训，不要接他到家里，也不要问他的安。
If anyone comes to you not having this teaching, do not take him into your house or give him words of love:

因为问他安的，就在他的恶行上有分。
For he who gives him words of love has a part in his evil works.

我还有许多事要写给你们，却不愿意用纸墨写出来。但盼望到你们那里，与你们当面谈论，使你们的喜乐满足。
Having much to say to you, it is not my purpose to put it all down with paper and ink: but I am hoping to come to you, and to have talk with you face to face, so that your joy may be full.

你那蒙拣选之姊妹的儿女都问你安。
The children of your noble sister, who is of God's selection, send you their love.

