耶稣基督的仆人保罗，奉召为使徒，特派传神的福音。
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, an Apostle by the selection of God, given authority as a preacher of the good news,

这福音是神从前借众先知，在圣经上所应许的。
Of which God had given word before by his prophets in the holy Writings,

论到他儿子，我主耶稣基督。按肉体说，是从大卫后裔生的。
About his Son who, in the flesh, came from the family of David,

按圣善的灵说，因从死里复活，以大能显明是神的儿子。
But was marked out as Son of God in power by the Holy Spirit through the coming to life again of the dead; Jesus Christ our Lord,

我们从他受了恩惠，并使徒的职分，在万国之中叫人为他的名信服真道。
Through whom grace has been given to us, sending us out to make disciples to the faith among all nations, for his name:

其中也有你们这蒙召属耶稣基督的人。
Among whom you in the same way have been marked out to be disciples of Jesus Christ:

我写信给你们在罗马为神所爱，奉召作圣徒的众人。愿恩惠平安，从我们的父神，并主耶稣基督，归与你们。
To all those who are in Rome, loved by God, marked out as saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

第一，我靠着耶稣基督，为你们众人感谢我的神。因你们的信德传遍了天下。
First of all, I give praise to my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because news of your faith has gone into all the world.

我在他儿子福音上，用心灵所事奉的神，可以见证我怎样不住地提到你们，
For God is my witness, whose servant I am in spirit in the good news of his Son, that you are at all times in my memory and in my prayers,

在祷告之间，常常恳求，或者照神的旨意，终能得平坦的道路往你们那里去。
And that I am ever making prayers that God will give me a good journey to you.

因为我切切地想见你们，要把些属灵的恩赐分给你们，使你们可以坚固。
For I have a strong desire to see you, and to give you some grace of the spirit, so that you may be made strong;

这样我在你们中间，因你与我彼此的信心，就可以同得安慰。
That is to say, that all of us may be comforted together by the faith which is in you and in me.

弟兄们，我不愿意你们不知道，我屡次定意往你们那里去，要在你们中间得些果子，如同在其余的外邦人中一样。只是到如今仍有阻隔。
You may be certain, my brothers, that it has frequently been in my mind to come to you (but till now I was kept from it), so that I might have some fruit from you in the same way as I have had it from the other nations.

无论是希利尼人，化外人，聪明人，愚拙人，我都欠他们的债。
I have a debt to Greeks and to the nations outside; to the wise and to those who have no learning.

所以情愿尽我的力量，将福音也传给你们在罗马的人。
For which reason I have the desire, as far as I am able, to give the knowledge of the good news to you who are in Rome.

我不以福音为耻。这福音本是神的大能，要救一切相信的，先是犹太人，后是希利尼人。
For I have no feeling of shame about the good news, because it is the power of God giving salvation to everyone who has faith, to the Jew first, and then to the Greek.

因为神的义，正在这福音上显明出来。这义是本于信以致于信。如经上所记，义人必因信得生。
For in it there is the revelation of the righteousness of God from faith to faith: as it is said in the holy Writings, The man who does righteousness will be living by his faith.

原来神的忿怒，从天上显明在一切不虔不义的人身上，就是那些行不义阻挡真理的人。
For there is a revelation of the wrath of God from heaven against all the wrongdoing and evil thoughts of men who keep down what is true by wrongdoing;

神的事情，人所能知道的，原显明在人心里。因为神已经给他们显明。
Because the knowledge of God may be seen in them, God having made it clear to them.

自从造天地以来，神的永能和神性是明明可知的，虽是眼不能见，但借着所造之物，就可以晓得，叫人无可推诿。
For from the first making of the world, those things of God which the eye is unable to see, that is, his eternal power and existence, are fully made clear, he having given the knowledge of them through the things which he has made, so that men have no reason for wrongdoing:

因为他们虽然知道神，却不当作神荣耀他，也不感谢他。他们的思念变为虚妄，无知的心就昏暗了。
Because, having the knowledge of God, they did not give glory to God as God, and did not give praise, but their minds were full of foolish things, and their hearts, being without sense, were made dark.

自称为聪明，反成了愚拙，
Seeming to be wise, they were in fact foolish,

将不能朽坏之神的荣耀变为偶像，仿佛必朽坏的人，和飞禽走兽昆虫的样式。
And by them the glory of the eternal God was changed and made into the image of man who is not eternal, and of birds and beasts and things which go on the earth.

所以神任凭他们，逞着心里的情欲行污秽的事，以致彼此玷辱自己的身体。
For this reason God gave them up to the evil desires of their hearts, working shame in their bodies with one another:

他们将神的真实变为虚谎，去敬拜事奉受造之物，不敬奉那造物的主。主乃是可称颂的，直到永远。阿们。
Because by them the true word of God was changed into that which is false, and they gave worship and honour to the thing which is made, and not to him who made it, to whom be blessing for ever. So be it.

因此神任凭他们放纵可羞耻的情欲。他们的女人，把顺性的用处，变为逆性的用处。
For this reason God gave them up to evil passions, and their women were changing the natural use into one which is unnatural:

男人也是如此，弃了女人顺性的用处，欲火攻心，彼此贪恋，男和男行可羞耻的事，就在自己身上受这妄为当得的报应。
And in the same way the men gave up the natural use of the woman and were burning in their desire for one another, men doing shame with men, and getting in their bodies the right reward of their evil-doing.

他们既然故意不认识神，神就任凭他们存邪僻的心行那些不合理的事，
And because they had not the mind to keep God in their knowledge, God gave them up to an evil mind, to do those things which are not right;

装满了各样不义，邪恶，贪婪，恶毒（或作阴毒）。满心是嫉妒，凶杀，争竞，诡诈，毒恨。
Being full of all wrongdoing, evil, desire for the goods of others, hate, envy, putting to death, fighting, deceit, cruel ways, evil talk, and false statements about others;

又是谗毁的，背后说人的，怨恨神的（或作被神所憎恶的），侮慢人的，狂傲的，自夸的，捏造恶事的，违背父母的，
Hated by God, full of pride, without respect, full of loud talk, given to evil inventions, not honouring father or mother,

无知的，背约的，无亲情的，不怜悯人的。
Without knowledge, not true to their undertakings, unkind, having no mercy:

他们虽知道神判定，行这样事的人是当死的，然而他们不但自己去行，还喜欢别人去行。
Who, though they have knowledge of the law of God, that the fate of those who do these things is death, not only go on doing these things themselves, but give approval to those who do them.

你这论断人的，无论你是谁，也无可推诿，你在什么事上论断人，就在什么事上定自己的罪。因你这论断人的，自己所行却和别人一样。
So you have no reason, whoever you are, for judging: for in judging another you are judging yourself, for you do the same things.

我们知道这样行的人，神必照真理审判他。
And we are conscious that God is a true judge against those who do such things.

你这人哪，你论断行这样事的人，自己所行的却和别人一样，你以为能逃脱神的审判吗？
But you who are judging another for doing what you do yourself, are you hoping that God's decision will not take effect against you?

还是你藐视他丰富的恩慈，宽容，忍耐，不晓得他的恩慈是领你悔改呢？
Or is it nothing to you that God had pity on you, waiting and putting up with you for so long, not seeing that in his pity God's desire is to give you a change of heart?

你竟任着你刚硬不悔改的心，为自己积蓄忿怒，以致神震怒，显他公义审判的日子来到。
But by your hard and unchanged heart you are storing up wrath for yourself in the day of the revelation of God's judging in righteousness;

他必照各人的行为报应各人。
Who will give to every man his right reward:

凡恒心行善寻求荣耀尊贵，和不能朽坏之福的，就以永生报应他们。
To those who go on with good works in the hope of glory and honour and salvation from death, he will give eternal life:

惟有结党不顺从真理，反顺从不义的，就以忿怒恼恨报应他们。
But to those who, from a love of competition, are not guided by what is true, will come the heat of his wrath,

将患难，困苦，加给一切作恶的人，先是犹太人，后是希利尼人。
Trouble and sorrow on all whose works are evil, to the Jew first and then to the Greek;

却将荣耀，尊贵，平安，加给一切行善的人，先是犹太人，后是希利尼人。
But glory and honour and peace to all whose works are good, to the Jew first and then to the Greek:

因为神不偏待人。
For one man is not different from another before God.

凡没有律法犯了罪的，也必不按律法灭亡。凡在律法以下犯了罪的，也必按律法受审判，
All those who have done wrong without the law will get destruction without the law: and those who have done wrong under the law will have their punishment by the law;

（原来在神面前，不是听律法的为义，乃是行律法的称义。
For it is not the hearers of the law who will be judged as having righteousness before God, but only the doers:

没有律法的外邦人，若顺着本性行律法上的事，他们虽然没有律法，自己就是自己的律法。
For when the Gentiles without the law have a natural desire to do the things in the law, they are a law to themselves;

这是显出律法的功用刻在他们心里，他们是非之心同作见证，并且他们的思念互相较量，或以为是，或以为非。）
Because the work of the law is seen in their hearts, their sense of right and wrong giving witness to it, while their minds are at one time judging them and at another giving them approval;

就在神借耶稣基督审判人隐秘事的日子，照着我的福音所言。
In the day when God will be a judge of the secrets of men, as it says in the good news of which I am a preacher, through Jesus Christ.

你称为犹太人，又倚靠律法，且指着神夸口。
But as for you who have the name of Jew, and are resting on the law, and take pride in God,

既从律法中受了教训，就晓得神的旨意，也能分别是非（或作也喜爱那美好的事）
And have knowledge of his desires, and are a judge of the things which are different, having the learning of the law,

又深信自己是给瞎子领路的，是黑暗中人的光，
In the belief that you are a guide to the blind, a light to those in the dark,

是蠢笨人的师傅，是小孩子的先生，在律法上有知识和真理的模范。
A teacher of the foolish, having in the law the form of knowledge and of what is true;

你既是教导别人，还不教导自己吗？你讲说人不可偷窃，自己还偷窃吗？
You who give teaching to others, do you give it to yourself? you who say that a man may not take what is not his, do you take what is not yours?

你说人不可奸淫，自己还奸淫吗？你厌恶偶像，自己还偷窃庙中之物吗？
You who say that a man may not be untrue to his wife, are you true to yours? you who are a hater of images, do you do wrong to the house of God?

你指着律法夸口，自己倒犯律法，玷辱神吗？
You who take pride in the law, are you doing wrong to the honour of God by behaviour which is against the law?

神的名在外邦人中，因你们受了亵渎，正如经上所记的。
For the name of God is shamed among the Gentiles because of you, as it is said in the holy Writings.

你若是行律法的割礼固然于你有益。若是犯律法的，你的割礼就算不得割礼。
It is true that circumcision is of use if you keep the law, but if you go against the law it is as if you had it not.

所以那未受割礼的，若遵守律法的条例，他虽然未受割礼，岂不算是有割礼吗？
If those who have not circumcision keep the rules of the law, will it not be credited to them as circumcision?

而且那本来未受割礼的，若能全守律法，岂不是要审判你这有仪文和割礼竟犯律法的人吗？
And they, by their keeping of the law without circumcision, will be judges of you, by whom the law is broken though you have the letter of the law and circumcision.

因为外面作犹太人的，不是真犹太人，外面肉身的割礼，也不是真割礼。
The true Jew is not one who is only so publicly, and circumcision is not that which may be seen in the flesh:

惟有里面作的，才是真犹太人。真割礼也是心里的，在乎灵，不在乎仪文。这人的称赞不是从人来的，乃是从神来的。
But he is a Jew who is a secret one, whose circumcision is of the heart, in the spirit and not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.

这样说来，犹太人有什么长处？割礼有什么益处呢？
How then is the Jew better off? or what profit is there in circumcision?

凡事大有好处。第一是神的圣言交托他们。
Much in every way: first of all because the words of God were given to them.

即便有不信的，这有何妨呢？难道他们的不信，就废掉神的信吗？
And if some have no faith, will that make the faith of God without effect?

断乎不能。不如说，神是真实的，人都是虚谎的。如经上所记，你责备人的时候，显为公义。被人议论的时候，可以得胜。
In no way: but let God be true, though every man is seen to be untrue; as it is said in the Writings, That your words may be seen to be true, and you may be seen to be right when you are judged.

我且照着人的常话说，我们的不义，若显出神的义来，我们可以怎么说呢？神降怒，是他不义吗？
But if the righteousness of God is supported by our wrongdoing what is to be said? is it wrong for God to be angry (as men may say)?

断乎不是。若是这样，神怎能审判世界呢？
In no way: because if it is so, how is God able to be the judge of all the world?

若神的真实，因我的虚谎，越发显出他的荣耀，为什么我还受审判，好像罪人呢？
But if, because I am untrue, God being seen to be true gets more glory, why am I to be judged as a sinner?

为什么不说，我们可以作恶以成善呢？这是毁谤我们的人，说我们有这话。这等人定罪，是该当的。
Let us not do evil so that good may come (a statement which we are falsely said by some to have made), because such behaviour will have its right punishment.

这却怎么样呢？我们比他们强吗？决不是的。因我们已经证明，犹太人和希利尼人都在罪恶之下。
What then? are we worse off than they? In no way: because we have before made it clear that Jews as well as Greeks are all under the power of sin;

就如经上所记，没有义人，连一个也没有。
As it is said in the holy Writings, There is not one who does righteousness;

没有明白的，没有寻求神的。
Not one who has the knowledge of what is right, not one who is a searcher after God;

都是偏离正路，一同变为无用。没有行善的，连一个也没有。
They have all gone out of the way, there is no profit in any of them; there is not one who does good, not so much as one:

他们的喉咙是敞开的坟墓。他们用舌头弄诡诈。嘴唇里有虺蛇的毒气。
Their throat is like an open place of death; with their tongues they have said what is not true: the poison of snakes is under their lips:

满口是咒骂苦毒。
Whose mouth is full of curses and bitter words:

杀人流血他们的脚飞跑。
Their feet are quick in running after blood;

所经过的路，便行残害暴虐的事。
Destruction and trouble are in their ways;

平安的路，他们未曾知道。
And of the way of peace they have no knowledge:

他们眼中不怕神。
There is no fear of God before their eyes.

我们晓得律法上的话，都是对律法以下之人说的，好塞住各人的口，叫普世的人都伏在神审判之下。
Now, we have knowledge that what the law says is for those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be stopped, and all men may be judged by God:

所以凡有血气的没有一个，因行律法，能在神面前称义。因为律法本是叫人知罪。
Because by the works of the law no man is able to have righteousness in his eyes, for through the law comes the knowledge of sin.

但如今神的义在律法以外已经显明出来，有律法和先知为证。
But now without the law there is a revelation of the righteousness of God, to which witness is given by the law and the prophets;

就是神的义，因信耶稣基督，加给一切相信的人，并没有分别。
That is, the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ, to all those who have faith; and one man is not different from another,

因为世人都犯了罪，亏缺了神的荣耀。
For all have done wrong and are far from the glory of God;

如今却蒙神的恩典，因基督耶稣的救赎，就白白地称义。
And they may have righteousness put to their credit, freely, by his grace, through the salvation which is in Christ Jesus:

神设立耶稣作挽回祭，是凭着耶稣的血，借着人的信，要显明神的义。因为他用忍耐的心，宽容人先时所犯的罪。
Whom God has put forward as the sign of his mercy, through faith, by his blood, to make clear his righteousness when, in his pity, God let the sins of earlier times go without punishment;

好在今时显明他的义，使人知道他自己为义，也称信耶稣的人为义。
And to make clear his righteousness now, so that he might himself be upright, and give righteousness to him who has faith in Jesus.

既是这样，哪里能夸口呢？没有可夸的了。用何法没有的呢？是用立功之法吗？不是，乃用信主之法。
What reason, then, is there for pride? It is shut out. By what sort of law? of works? No, but by a law of faith.

所以（有古卷作因为）我们看定了，人称义是因着信，不在乎遵行律法。
For this reason, then, a man may get righteousness by faith without the works of the law.

难道神只作犹太人的神吗？不也是作外邦人的神吗？是的，也作外邦人的神。
Or is God the God of Jews only? is he not in the same way the God of Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles:

神既是一位他就要因信称那受割礼的为义，也要因信称那未受割礼的为义。
If God is one; and he will give righteousness because of faith to those who have circumcision, and through faith to those who have not circumcision.

这样，我们因信废了律法吗？断乎不是，更是坚固律法。
Do we, then, through faith make the law of no effect? in no way: but we make it clear that the law is important.

如此说来，我们的祖宗亚伯拉罕，凭着肉体得了什么呢？
What, then, may we say that Abraham, our father after the flesh, has got?

倘若亚伯拉罕是因行为称义，就有可夸的。只是在神面前并无可夸。
For if Abraham got righteousness by works, he has reason for pride; but not before God.

经上说什么呢？说，亚伯拉罕信神，这就算为他的义。
But what does it say in the holy Writings? And Abraham had faith in God, and it was put to his account as righteousness.

作工的得工价，不算恩典，乃是该得的，
Now, the reward is credited to him who does works, not as of grace but as a debt.

惟有不作工的，只信称罪人为义的神，他的信就算为义。
But to him who without working has faith in him who gives righteousness to the evil-doer, his faith is put to his account as righteousness.

正如大卫称那在行为以外，蒙神算为义的人是有福的。
As David says that there is a blessing on the man to whose account God puts righteousness without works, saying,

他说，得赦免其过，遮盖其罪的，这人是有福的。
Happy are those who have forgiveness for their wrongdoing, and whose sins are covered.

主不算为有罪的，这人是有福的。
Happy is the man against whom no sin is recorded by the Lord.

如此看来，这福是单加给那受割礼的人吗？不也是加给那未受割礼的人吗？因我们所说，亚伯拉罕的信，就算为他的义。
Is this blessing, then, for the circumcision only, or in the same way for those who have not circumcision? for we say that the faith of Abraham was put to his account as righteousness.

是怎么算的呢？是在他受割礼的时候呢？是在他未受割礼的时候呢？不是在受割礼的时候，乃是在未受割礼的时候。
How, then, was it judged? when he had circumcision, or when he had it not? Not when he had it, but when he did not have it:

并且他受了割礼的记号，作他未受割礼的时候因信称义的印证，叫他作一切未受割礼而信之人的父，使他们也算为义。
And he was given the sign of circumcision as a witness of the faith which he had before he underwent circumcision: so that he might be the father of all those who have faith, though they have not circumcision, and so that righteousness might be put to their account;

又作受割礼之人的父，就是那些不但受割礼，并且按我们的祖宗亚伯拉罕，未受割礼而信之踪迹去行的人。
And the father of circumcision to those who not only are of the circumcision, but who keep to the way of that faith which our father Abraham had before he underwent circumcision.

因为神应许亚伯拉罕和他后裔，必得承受世界，不是因律法，乃是因信而得的义。
For God's word, that the earth would be his heritage, was given to Abraham, not through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.

若是属乎律法的人，才得为后嗣，信就归于虚空，应许也就废弃了。
For if they who are of the law are the people who get the heritage, then faith is made of no use, and the word of God has no power;

因为律法是惹动忿怒的。（或作叫人受刑的）哪里没有律法，哪里就没有过犯。
For the outcome of the law is wrath; but where there is no law it will not be broken.

所以人得为后嗣是本乎信。因此就属乎恩。叫应许定然归给一切后裔。不但归给那属乎律法的，也归给那效法亚伯拉罕之信的。
For this reason it is of faith, so that it may be through grace; and so that the word of God may be certain to all the seed; not only to that which is of the law, but to that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,

亚伯拉罕所信的，是那叫死人复活使无变为有的神，他在主面前作我们世人的父。如经上所记，我已经立你作多国的父。
(As it is said in the holy Writings, I have made you a father of a number of nations) before him in whom he had faith, that is, God, who gives life to the dead, and to whom the things which are not are as if they were.

他在无可指望的时候，因信仍有指望，就得以作多国的父，正如先前所说，你的后裔将要如此。
Who without reason for hope, in faith went on hoping, so that he became the father of a number of nations, as it had been said, So will your seed be.

他将近百岁的时候，虽然想到自己的身体如同已死，撒拉的生育已经断绝，他的信心还是不软弱。
And not being feeble in faith though his body seemed to him little better than dead (he being about a hundred years old) and Sarah was no longer able to have children:

并且仰望神的应许，总没有因不信，心里起疑惑。反倒因信，心里得坚固，将荣耀归给神。
Still, he did not give up faith in the undertaking of God, but was made strong by faith, giving glory to God,

且满心相信，神所应许的必能作成。
And being certain that God was able to keep his word.

所以这就算为他的义。
For which reason it was put to his account as righteousness.

算为他义的这句话，不是单为他写的，
Now, it was not because of him only that this was said,

也是为我们将来得算为义之人写的。就是我们这信神使我们的主耶稣从死里复活的人。
But for us in addition, to whose account it will be put, if we have faith in him who made Jesus our Lord come back again from the dead,

耶稣被交给人，是为我们的过犯，复活是为叫我们称义。（或作耶稣是为我们的过犯交付了是为我们称义复活了）
Who was put to death for our evil-doing, and came to life again so that we might have righteousness.

我们既因信称义，就借着我们的主耶稣基督，得与神相和。
For which reason, because we have righteousness through faith, let us be at peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;

我们又借着他，因信得进入现在所站的这恩典中，并且欢欢喜喜盼望神的荣耀。
Through whom, in the same way, we have been able by faith to come to this grace in which we now are; and let us have joy in hope of the glory of God.

不但如此，就是在患难中，也是欢欢喜喜的。因为知道患难生忍耐。
And not only so, but let us have joy in our troubles: in the knowledge that trouble gives us the power of waiting;

忍耐生老练。老练生盼望。
And waiting gives experience; and experience, hope:

盼望不至于羞耻，因为所赐给我们的圣灵将神的爱浇灌在我们心里。
And hope does not put to shame; because our hearts are full of the love of God through the Holy Spirit which is given to us.

因我们还软弱的时候，基督就按所定的日期为罪人死。
For when we were still without strength, at the right time Christ gave his life for evil-doers.

为义人死，是少有的，为仁人死，或者有敢作的。
Now it is hard for anyone to give his life even for an upright man, though it might be that for a good man someone would give his life.

惟有基督在我们还作罪人的时候为我们死，神的爱就在此向我们显明了。
But God has made clear his love to us, in that, when we were still sinners, Christ gave his life for us.

现在我们既靠着他的血称义，就更要借着他免去神的忿怒。
Much more, if we now have righteousness by his blood, will salvation from the wrath of God come to us through him.

因为我们作仇敌的时候，且借着神儿子的死，得与神和好，既已和好，就更要因他的生得救了。
For if, when we were haters of God, the death of his Son made us at peace with him, much more, now that we are his friends, will we have salvation through his life;

不但如此，我们既借着我主耶稣基督，得与神和好，也就借着他，以神为乐。
And not only so, but we have joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we are now at peace with God.

这就如罪是从一人入了世界，死又是从罪来的，于是死就临到众人，因为众人都犯了罪。
For this reason, as through one man sin came into the world, and death because of sin, and so death came to all men, because all have done evil:

没有律法之先，罪已经在世上。但没有律法，罪也不算罪。
Because, till the law came, sin was in existence, but sin is not put to the account of anyone when there is no law to be broken.

然而从亚当到摩西，死就作了王，连那些不与亚当犯一样罪过的，也在他的权下。亚当乃是那以后要来之人的预像。
But still death had power from Adam till Moses, even over those who had not done wrong like Adam, who is a picture of him who was to come.

只是过犯不如恩赐。若因一人的过犯，众人都死了，何况神的恩典，与那因耶稣基督一人恩典中的赏赐，岂不更加倍地临到众人吗？
But the free giving of God is not like the wrongdoing of man. For if, by the wrongdoing of one man death came to numbers of men, much more did the grace of God, and the free giving by the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, come to men.

因一人犯罪就定罪，也不如恩赐。原来审判是由一人而定罪，恩赐乃是由许多过犯而称义。
And the free giving has not the same effect as the sin of one: for the effect of one man's sin was punishment by the decision of God, but the free giving had power to give righteousness to wrongdoers in great number.

若因一人的过犯，死就因这一人作了王，何况那些受洪恩又蒙所赐之义的，岂不更要因耶稣基督一人在生命中作王吗？
For, if by the wrongdoing of one, death was ruling through the one, much more will those to whom has come the wealth of grace and the giving of righteousness, be ruling in life through the one, even Jesus Christ.

如此说来，因一次的过犯，众人都被定罪，照样，因一次的义行，众人也就被称义得生命了。
So then, as the effect of one act of wrongdoing was that punishment came on all men, even so the effect of one act of righteousness was righteousness of life for all men.

因一人的悖逆，众人成为罪人，照样，因一人的顺从，众人也成为义了。
Because, as numbers of men became sinners through the wrongdoing of one man, even so will great numbers get righteousness through the keeping of the word of God by one man.

律法本是外添的，叫过犯显多。只是罪在哪里显多，恩典就更显多了。
And the law came in addition, to make wrongdoing worse; but where there was much sin, there was much more grace:

就如罪作王叫人死，照样恩典也借着义作王，叫人因我们的主耶稣基督得永生。
That, as sin had power in death, so grace might have power through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

这样，怎么说呢？我们可以仍在罪中，叫恩典显多吗？
What may we say, then? are we to go on in sin so that there may be more grace?

断乎不可。我们在罪上死了的人，岂可仍在罪中活着呢？
In no way. How may we, who are dead to sin, be living in it any longer?

岂不知我们这受洗归入基督耶稣的人，是受洗归入他的死吗？
Or are you without the knowledge that all we who had baptism into Christ Jesus, had baptism into his death?

所以，我们借着洗礼归入死，和他一同埋葬，原是叫我们一举一动有新生的样式，像基督借着父的荣耀从死里复活一样。
We have been placed with him among the dead through baptism into death: so that as Christ came again from the dead by the glory of the Father, we, in the same way, might be living in new life.

我们若在他死的形状上与他联合，也要在他复活的形状上与他联合。
For, if we have been made like him in his death, we will, in the same way, be like him in his coming to life again;

因为知道我们的旧人和他同钉十字架，使罪身灭绝，叫我们不再作罪的奴仆。
Being conscious that our old man was put to death on the cross with him, so that the body of sin might be put away, and we might no longer be servants to sin.

因为已死的人，是脱离了罪。
Because he who is dead is free from sin.

我们若是与基督同死，就信必与他同活。
But if we are dead with Christ, we have faith that we will be living with him;

因为知道基督既从死里复活，就不再死，死也不再作他的主了。
Having knowledge that because Christ has come back from the dead, he will never again go down to the dead; death has no more power over him.

他死是向罪死了，只有一次。他活是向神活着。
For his death was a death to sin, but his life now is a life which he is living to God.

这样，你们向罪也当看自己是死的。向神在基督耶稣里却当看自己是活的。
Even so see yourselves as dead to sin, but living to God in Christ Jesus.

所以不要容罪在你们必死的身上作王，使你们顺从身子的私欲。
For this cause do not let sin be ruling in your body which is under the power of death, so that you give way to its desires;

也不要将你们的肢体献给罪作不义的器具。倒要像从死里复活的人，将自己献给神。并将肢体作义的器具献给神。
And do not give your bodies to sin as the instruments of wrongdoing, but give yourselves to God, as those who are living from the dead, and your bodies as instruments of righteousness to God.

罪必不能作你们的主。因你们不在律法之下，乃在恩典之下。
For sin may not have rule over you: because you are not under law, but under grace.

这却怎么样呢？我们在恩典之下，不在律法之下，就可以犯罪吗？断乎不可。
What then? are we to go on in sin because we are not under law but under grace? Let it not be so.

岂不晓得你们献上自己作奴仆，顺从谁，就作谁的奴仆吗？或作罪的奴仆，以至于死。或作顺命的奴仆，以至成义。
Are you not conscious that you are the servants of him to whom you give yourselves to do his desire? if to sin, the end being death, or if to do the desire of God, the end being righteousness.

感谢神，因为你们从前虽然作罪的奴仆，现今却从心里顺服了所传给你们道理的模范。
But praise be to God that though you were the servants of sin, you have now given yourselves freely to that form of teaching under which you were placed;

你们既从罪里得了释放，就作了义的奴仆。
And being made free from sin you have been made the servants of righteousness.

我因你们肉体的软弱，就照人的常话对你们说，你们从前怎样将肢体献给不洁不法作奴仆，以至于不法。现今也要照样将肢体献给义作奴仆，以至于成圣。
I am using words in the way of men, because your flesh is feeble: as you gave your bodies as servants to what is unclean, and to evil to do evil, so now give them as servants to righteousness to do what is holy.

因为你们作罪之奴仆的时候，就不被义约束了。
When you were servants of sin you were free from righteousness.

你们现今所看为羞耻的事，当日有什么果子呢？那些事的结局就是死。
What fruit had you at that time in the things which are now a shame to you? for the end of such things is death.

但现今你们既从罪里得了释放，作了神的奴仆，就有成圣的果子，那结局就是永生。
But now, being free from sin, and having been made servants to God, you have your fruit in that which is holy, and the end is eternal life.

因为罪的工价乃是死。惟有神的恩赐，在我们的主基督耶稣里乃是永生。
For the reward of sin is death; but what God freely gives is eternal life in Jesus Christ our Lord.

弟兄们，我现在对明白律法的人说，你们岂不晓得律法管人是在活着的时候吗？
Is it not clear, my brothers (I am using an argument to those who have knowledge of the law), that the law has power over a man as long as he is living?

就如女人有了丈夫，丈夫还活着，就被律法约束。丈夫若死了，就脱离了丈夫的律法。
For the woman who has a husband is placed by the law under the power of her husband as long as he is living; but if her husband is dead, she is free from the law of the husband.

所以丈夫活着，她若归于别人，便叫淫妇。丈夫若死了，她就脱离了丈夫的律法，虽然归于别人，也不是淫妇。
So if, while the husband is living, she is joined to another man, she will get the name of one who is untrue to her husband: but if the husband is dead, she is free from the law, so that she is not untrue, even if she takes another man.

我的弟兄们，这样说来，你们借着基督的身体，在律法上也是死了。叫你们归于别人，就是归于那从死里复活的，叫我们结果子给神。
In the same way, my brothers, you were made dead to the law through the body of Christ, so that you might be joined to another, even to him who came again from the dead, so that we might give fruit to God.

因为我们属肉体的时候，那因律法而生的恶欲，就在我们肢体中发动，以致结成死亡的果子。
For when we were in the flesh, the evil passions which came into being through the law were working in our bodies to give the fruit of death.

但我们既然在捆我们的律法上死了，现今就脱离了律法，叫我们服事主，要按着心灵的新样，不按着仪文的旧样（心灵或作圣灵）。
But now we are free from the law, having been made dead to that which had power over us; so that we are servants in the new way of the spirit, not in the old way of the letter.

这样，我们可说什么呢？律法是罪吗？断乎不是。只是非因律法，我就不知何为罪。非律法说，不可起贪心。我就不知何为贪心。
What then is to be said? is the law sin? in no way. But I would not have had knowledge of sin but for the law: for I would not have been conscious of desire if the law had not said, You may not have a desire for what is another's.

然而罪趁着机会，就借着诫命叫诸般的贪心在我里头发动。因为没有律法罪是死的。
But sin, taking its chance through that which was ordered by the law, was working in me every form of desire: because without the law sin is dead.

我以前没有律法是活着的，但是诫命来到，罪又活了，我就死了。
And there was a time when I was living without the law: but when the law gave its orders, sin came to life and put me to death;

那本来叫人活的诫命，反倒叫我死。
And I made the discovery that the law whose purpose was to give life had become a cause of death:

因为罪趁着机会，就借着诫命引诱我，并且杀了我。
For I was tricked and put to death by sin, which took its chance through the law.

这样看来，律法是圣洁的，诫命也是圣洁，公义，良善的。
But the law is holy, and its orders are holy, upright, and good.

既然如此，那良善的是叫我死吗？断乎不是。叫我死的乃是罪。但罪借着那良善的叫我死，就显出真是罪。叫罪因着诫命更显出是恶极了。
Was then that which is good, death to me? In no way. But the purpose was that sin might be seen to be sin by working death to me through that which is good; so that through the orders of the law sin might seem much more evil.

我们原晓得律法是属乎灵的，但我是属乎肉体的，是已经卖给罪了。
For we are conscious that the law is of the spirit; but I am of the flesh, given into the power of sin.

因为我所作的，我自己不明白。我所愿意的，我并不作。我所恨恶的，我倒去作。
And I have no clear knowledge of what I am doing, for that which I have a mind to do, I do not, but what I have hate for, that I do.

若我所作的，是我所不愿意的，我就应承律法是善的。
But, if I do that which I have no mind to do, I am in agreement with the law that the law is good.

既是这样，就不是我作的，乃是住在我里头的罪作的。
So it is no longer I who do it, but the sin living in me.

我也知道，在我里头，就是我肉体之中，没有良善。因为立志为善由得我，只是行出来由不得我。
For I am conscious that in me, that is, in my flesh, there is nothing good: I have the mind but not the power to do what is right.

故此，我所愿意的善，我反不作。我所不愿意的恶，我倒去作。
For the good which I have a mind to do, I do not: but the evil which I have no mind to do, that I do.

若我去作所不愿意作的，就不是我作的，乃是住在我里头的罪作的。
But if I do what I have no mind to do, it is no longer I who do it, but the sin living in me.

我觉得有个律，就是我愿意为善的时候，便有恶与我同在。
So I see a law that, though I have a mind to do good, evil is present in me.

因为按着我里面的意思。（原文作人）我是喜欢神的律。
In my heart I take pleasure in the law of God,

但我觉得肢体中另有个律，和我心中的律交战，把我掳去叫我附从那肢体中犯罪的律。
But I see another law in my body, working against the law of my mind, and making me the servant of the law of sin which is in my flesh.

我真是苦阿，谁能救我脱离这取死的身体呢？
How unhappy am I! who will make me free from the body of this death?

感谢神，靠着我们的主耶稣基督就能脱离了这样看来，我以内心顺服神的律。我肉体却顺服罪的律了。
I give praise to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So with my mind I am a servant to the law of God, but with my flesh to the law of sin.

如今那些在基督耶稣里的，就不定罪了。
For this cause those who are in Christ Jesus will not be judged as sinners.

因为赐生命圣灵的律，在基督耶稣里释放了我，使我脱离罪和死的律了。
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death.

律法既因肉体软弱，有所不能行的，神就差遣自己的儿子，成为罪身的形状，作了赎罪祭，在肉体中定了罪案，
For what the law was not able to do because it was feeble through the flesh, God, sending his Son in the image of the evil flesh, and as an offering for sin, gave his decision against sin in the flesh:

使律法的义成就在我们这不随从肉体，只随从圣灵的人身上。
So that what was ordered by the law might be done in us, who are living, not in the way of the flesh, but in the way of the Spirit.

因为随从肉体的人体贴肉体的事，随从圣灵的人体贴圣灵的事。
For those who are living in the way of the flesh give their minds to the things of the flesh, but those who go in the way of the Spirit, to the things of the Spirit.

体贴肉体的，就是死，体贴圣灵的，乃是生命，平安。
For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace:

原来体贴肉体的，就是与神为仇。因为不服神的律法，也是不能服。
Because the mind of the flesh is opposite to God; it is not under the law of God, and is not able to be:

而且属肉体的人，不能得神的喜欢。
So that those who are in the flesh are not able to give pleasure to God.

如果神的灵住在你们心里，你们就不属肉体，乃属圣灵了。人若没有基督的灵，就不是属基督的。
You are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if the Spirit of God is in you. But if any man has not the Spirit of Christ he is not one of his.

基督若在你们心里，身体就因罪而死，心灵却因义而活。
And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.

然而叫耶稣从死里复活者的灵，若住在你们心里，那叫基督耶稣从死里复活的，也必借着住在你们心里的圣灵，使你们必死的身体又活过来。
But if the Spirit of him who made Jesus come again from the dead is in you, he who made Christ Jesus come again from the dead will in the same way, through his Spirit which is in you, give life to your bodies which now are under the power of death.

弟兄们，这样看来，我们并不是欠肉体的债，去顺从肉体活着。
So then, my brothers, we are in debt, not to the flesh to be living in the way of the flesh:

你们若顺从肉体活着必要死。若靠着圣灵治死身体的恶行必要活着。
For if you go in the way of the flesh, death will come on you; but if by the Spirit you put to death the works of the body, you will have life.

因为凡被神的灵引导的，都是神的儿子。
And all those who are guided by the Spirit of God are sons of God.

你们所受的不是奴仆的心，仍旧害怕。所受的乃是儿子的心，因此我们呼叫阿爸，父。
For you did not get the spirit of servants again to put you in fear, but the spirit of sons was given to you, by which we say, Abba, Father.

圣灵与我们的心同证我们是神的儿女。
The Spirit is witness with our spirit that we are children of God:

既是儿女，便是后嗣，就是神的后嗣，和基督同作后嗣。如果我们和他一同受苦，也必和他一同得荣耀。
And if we are children, we have a right to a part in the heritage; a part in the things of God, together with Christ; so that if we have a part in his pain, we will in the same way have a part in his glory.

我想现在的苦楚，若比起将来要显于我们的荣耀，就不足介意了。
I am of the opinion that there is no comparison between the pain of this present time and the glory which we will see in the future.

受造之物，切望等候神的众子显出来。
For the strong desire of every living thing is waiting for the revelation of the sons of God.

因为受造之物服在虚空之下，不是自己愿意，乃是因那叫他如此的。
For every living thing was put under the power of change, not by its desire, but by him who made it so, in hope

但受造之物仍然指望脱离败坏的辖制，得享神儿女自由的荣耀。（享原文作入）
That all living things will be made free from the power of death and will have a part with the free children of God in glory.

我们知道一切受造之物，一同叹息劳苦，直到如今。
For we are conscious that all living things are weeping and sorrowing in pain together till now.

不但如此，就是我们这有圣灵初结果子的，也是自己心里叹息，等候得着儿子的名分，乃是我们的身体得赎。
And not only so, but we who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we have sorrow in our minds, waiting for the time when we will take our place as sons, that is, the salvation of our bodies.

我们得救是在乎盼望。只是所见的盼望不是盼望。谁还盼望他所见的呢？（有古卷作人所看见的何必再盼望呢）
For our salvation is by hope: but hope which is seen is not hope: for who is hoping for what he sees?

但我们若盼望那所不见的，就必忍耐等候。
But if we have hope for that which we see not, then we will be able to go on waiting for it.

况且我们的软弱有圣灵帮助，我们本不晓得当怎样祷告，只是圣灵亲自用说不出来的叹息，替我们祷告。
And in the same way the Spirit is a help to our feeble hearts: for we are not able to make prayer to God in the right way; but the Spirit puts our desires into words which are not in our power to say;

鉴察人心的，晓得圣灵的意思因为圣灵照着神的旨意替圣徒祈求。
And he who is the searcher of hearts has knowledge of the mind of the Spirit, because he is making prayers for the saints in agreement with the mind of God.

我们晓得万事都互相效力，叫爱神的人得益处，就是按他旨意被召的人。
And we are conscious that all things are working together for good to those who have love for God, and have been marked out by his purpose.

因为他预先所知道的人，就预先定下效法他儿子的模样，使他儿子在许多弟兄中作长子。
Because those of whom he had knowledge before they came into existence, were marked out by him to be made like his Son, so that he might be the first among a band of brothers:

预先所定下的人又召他们来。所召来的人，又称他们为义。所称为义的人，又叫他们得荣耀。
And those who were marked out by him were named; and those who were named were given righteousness; and to those to whom he gave righteousness, in the same way he gave glory.

既是这样，还有什么说的呢？神若帮助我们，谁能敌挡我们呢？
What may we say about these things? If God is for us, who is against us?

神既不爱惜自己的儿子为我们众人舍了，岂不也把万物和他一同白白地赐给我们吗？
He who did not keep back his only Son, but gave him up for us all, will he not with him freely give us all things?

谁能控告神所拣选的人呢？有神称他们为义了。（或作是称他们为义的神吗？）
Who will say anything against the saints of God? It is God who makes us clear from evil;

谁能定他们的罪呢？有基督耶稣已经死了，而且从死里复活，现今在神的右边，也替我们祈求。（有基督云云或作是已经死了而且从死里复活现今在神的右边也替我们祈求的基督耶稣吗）
Who will give a decision against us? It is Christ Jesus who not only was put to death, but came again from the dead, who is now at the right hand of God, taking our part.

谁能使我们与基督的爱隔绝呢？难道是患难吗？是困苦吗？是逼迫吗？是饥饿吗？是赤身露体吗？是危险吗？是刀剑吗？
Who will come between us and the love of Christ? Will trouble, or pain, or cruel acts, or the need of food or of clothing, or danger, or the sword?

如经上所记，我们为你的缘故，终日被杀。人看我们如将宰的羊
As it is said in the holy Writings, Because of you we are put to death every day; we are like sheep ready for destruction.

然而靠着爱我们的主，在这一切的事上，已经得胜有余了。
But we are able to overcome all these things and more through his love.

因为我深信无论是死，是生，是天使，是掌权的，是有能的，是现在的事，是将来的事，
For I am certain that not death, or life, or angels, or rulers, or things present, or things to come, or powers,

是高处的，是低处的，是别的受造之物，都不能叫我们与神的爱隔绝。这爱是在我们的主基督耶稣里的。
Or things on high, or things under the earth, or anything which is made, will be able to come between us and the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

我在基督里说真话，并不谎言，有我良心被圣灵感动，给我作见证。
I say what is true in Christ, and not what is false, my mind giving witness with me in the Holy Spirit,

我是大有忧愁，心里时常伤痛。
That I am full of sorrow and pain without end.

为我弟兄，我骨肉之亲，就是自己被咒诅，与基督分离，我也愿意。
For I have a desire to take on myself the curse for my brothers, my family in the flesh:

他们是以色列人。那儿子的名分，荣耀，诸约，律法，礼仪，应许，都是他们的。
Who are Israelites: who have the place of sons, and the glory, and the agreements with God, and the giving of the law, and the worship, and the hope offered by God:

列祖就是他们的祖宗，按肉体说，基督也是从他们出来的，他是在万有之上，永远可称颂的神。阿们。
Whose are the fathers, and of whom came Christ in the flesh, who is over all, God, to whom be blessing for ever. So be it.

这不是说神的话落了空。因为从以色列生的，不都是以色列人。
But it is not as if the word of God was without effect. For they are not all Israel, who are of Israel:

也不因为是亚伯拉罕的后裔，就都作他的儿女。惟独从以撒生的，才要称为你的后裔。
And they are not all children because they are the seed of Abraham; but, In Isaac will your seed be named.

这就是说，肉身所生的儿女，不是神的儿女。惟独那应许的儿女，才算是后裔。
That is, it is not the children of the flesh, but the children of God's undertaking, who are named as the seed.

因为所应许的话是这样说，到明年这时候我要来，撒拉必生一个儿子。
For this is the word of God's undertaking, At this time will I come, and Sarah will have a son.

不但如此，还有利百加，既从一个人，就是从我们的祖宗以撒怀了孕。
And not only so, but Rebecca being about to have a child by our father Isaac--

（双子还没有生下来，善恶还没有作出来，只因要显明神拣选人的旨意，不在乎人的行为，乃在乎召人的主）。
Before the children had come into existence, or had done anything good or bad, in order that God's purpose and his selection might be effected, not by works, but by him whose purpose it is,

神就对利百加说，将来大的要服事小的。
It was said to her, The older will be the servant of the younger.

正如经上所记，雅各是我所爱的，以扫是我所恶的。
Even as it is said, I had love for Jacob, but for Esau I had hate.

这样，我们可说什么呢？难道神有什么不公平吗？断乎没有。
What may we say then? is God not upright? let it not be said.

因他对摩西说，我要怜悯谁，就怜悯谁，要恩待谁，就恩待谁。
For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and pity on whom I will have pity.

据此看来，这不在乎那定意的，也不在乎那奔跑的，只在乎发怜悯的神。
So then, it is not by the desire or by the attempt of man, but by the mercy of God.

因为经上有话向法老说，我将你兴起来，特要在你身上彰显我的权能，并要使我的名传遍天下。
For the holy Writings say to Pharaoh, For this same purpose did I put you on high, so that I might make my power seen in you, and that there might be knowledge of my name through all the earth.

如此看来，神要怜悯谁，就怜悯谁，要叫谁刚硬，就叫谁刚硬。
So then, at his pleasure he has mercy on a man, and at his pleasure he makes the heart hard.

这样，你必对我说，他为什么还指责人呢？有谁抗拒他的旨意呢？
But you will say to me, Why does he still make us responsible? who is able to go against his purpose?

你这个人哪，你是谁，竟敢向神强嘴呢？受造之物岂能对造他的说，你为什么这样造我呢？
But, O man, who are you, to make answer against God? May the thing which is made say to him who made it, Why did you make me so?

窑匠难道没有权柄，从一团泥里拿一块作成贵重的器皿，又拿一块作成卑贱的器皿吗？
Or has not the potter the right to make out of one part of his earth a vessel for honour, and out of another a vessel for shame?

倘若神要显明他的忿怒，彰显他的权能，就多多忍耐宽容那可怒预备遭毁灭的器皿。
What if God, desiring to let his wrath and his power be seen, for a long time put up with the vessels of wrath which were ready for destruction:

又要将他丰盛的荣耀，彰显在那蒙怜悯早预备得荣耀的器皿上。
And to make clear the wealth of his glory to vessels of mercy, which he had before made ready for glory,

这器皿就是我们被神所召的，不但是从犹太人中，也是从外邦人中，这有什么不可呢？
Even us, who were marked out by him, not only from the Jews, but from the Gentiles?

就像神在何西阿书上说，那本来不是我子民的，我要称为我的子民。本来不是蒙爱的，我要称为蒙爱的。
As he says in Hosea, They will be named my people who were not my people, and she will be loved who was not loved.

从前在什么地方对他们说，你们不是我的子民，将来就在那里称他们为永生神的儿子。
And in the place where it was said to them, You are not my people, there they will be named the sons of the living God.

以赛亚指着以色列人喊着说，以色列人虽多如海沙，得救的不过是剩下的余数。
And Isaiah says about Israel, Even if the number of the children of Israel is as the sand of the sea, only a small part will get salvation:

因为主要在世上施行他的话，叫他的话都成全，速速地完结。
For the Lord will give effect to his word on the earth, putting an end to it and cutting it short.

又如以赛亚先前说过，若不是万军之主给我们存留余种，我们早已像所多玛，蛾摩拉的样子了。
And, as Isaiah had said before, If the Lord of armies had not given us a seed, we would have been like Sodom and Gomorrah.

这样，我们可说什么呢？那本来不追求义的外邦人，反得了义，就是因信而得的义。
What then may we say? That the nations who did not go after righteousness have got righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith:

但以色列人追求律法的义，反得不着律法的义。
But Israel, going after a law of righteousness, did not get it.

这是什么缘故呢？是因为他们不凭着信心求，只凭着行为求。他们正跌在那绊脚石上。
Why? Because they were not searching for it by faith, but by works. They came up against the stone which was in the way;

就如经上所记，我在锡安放一块绊脚的石头，跌人的磐石。信靠他的人必不至于羞愧。
As it is said, See, I am putting in Zion a stone causing a fall, and a rock in the way: but he who has faith in him will not be put to shame.

弟兄们，我心里所愿的，向神所求的，是要以色列人得救。
Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer to God for them is, that they may get salvation.

我可以证明他们向神有热心，但不是按着真知识。
For I give witness of them that they have a strong desire for God, but not with knowledge.

因为不知道神的义，想要立自己的义，就不服神的义了。
Because, not having knowledge of God's righteousness, and desiring to give effect to their righteousness, they have not put themselves under the righteousness of God.

律法的总结就是基督，使凡信他的都得着义。
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who has faith.

摩西写着说，人若行那出于律法的义，就必因此活着。
For Moses says that the man who does the righteousness which is of the law will get life by it.

惟有出于信心的义如此说，你不要心里说，谁要升到天上去呢？就是要领下基督来。
But the righteousness which is of faith says these words, Say not in your heart, Who will go up to heaven? (that is, to make Christ come down:)

谁要下到阴间去呢？就是要领基督从死里上来。
Or, Who will go down into the deep? (that is, to make Christ come again from the dead:)

他到底怎么说呢？他说，这道离你不远，正在你口里，在你心里。就是我们所传信主的道。
But what does it say? The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart: that is, the word of faith of which we are the preachers:

你若口里认耶稣为主，心里信神叫他从死里复活，就必得救。
Because, if you say with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and have faith in your heart that God has made him come back from the dead, you will have salvation:

因为人心里相信，就可以称义。口里承认，就可以得救。
For with the heart man has faith to get righteousness, and with the mouth he says that Jesus is Lord to get salvation.

经上说，凡信他的人，必不至于羞愧。
Because it is said in the holy Writings, Whoever has faith in him will not be shamed.

犹太人和希利尼人，并没有分别。因为众人同有一位主，他也厚待一切求告他的人。
And the Jew is not different from the Greek: for there is the same Lord of all, who is good to all who have hope in his name:

因为凡求告主名的，就必得救。
Because, Whoever will give worship to the name of the Lord will get salvation.

然而人未曾信他，怎能求他呢？未曾听见他，怎能信他呢？没有传道的，怎能听见呢？
But how will they give worship to him in whom they have no faith? and how will they have faith in him of whom they have not had news? and how will they have news without a preacher?

若没有奉差遣，怎能传道呢？如经上所记，报福音传喜信的人，他们的脚踪何等佳美，
And how will there be preachers if they are not sent? As it is said, How beautiful are the feet of those who give the glad news of good things.

只是人没有都听从福音。因为以赛亚说，主阿，我们所传的有谁信呢？
But they have not all given ear to the good news. For Isaiah says, Lord, who has had faith in our word?

可见信道是从听道来的，听道是从基督的话来的。
So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ.

但我说，人没有听见吗？诚然听见了。他们的声音传遍天下，他们的言语传到地极。
But I say, Did not the word come to their ears? Yes, certainly: Their sound has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world.

我再说，以色列人不知道吗？先有摩西说，我要用那不成子民的，惹动你们的愤恨。我要用那无知的民，触动你们的怒气。
But I say, Had Israel no knowledge? First Moses says, You will be moved to envy by that which is not a nation, and by a foolish people I will make you angry.

又有以赛亚放胆说，没有寻找我的，我叫他们遇见。没有访问我的，我向他们显现。
And Isaiah says without fear, Those who were not searching for me made discovery of me; and I was seen by those whose hearts were turned away from me.

至于以色列人，他说，我整天伸手招呼那悖逆顶嘴的百姓。
But about Israel he says; All the day my hands have been stretched out to a people whose hearts were turned away, and who put themselves against my word.

我且说，神弃绝了他的百姓吗？断乎没有。因为我也是以色列人，亚伯拉罕的后裔，属便雅悯支派的。
So I say, Has God put his people on one side? Let there be no such thought. For I am of Israel, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.

神并没有弃绝他预先所知道的百姓。你们岂不晓得经上论到以利亚是怎么说的呢？他在神面前怎样控告以色列人，说，
God has not put away the people of his selection. Or have you no knowledge of what is said about Elijah in the holy Writings? how he says words to God against Israel,

主阿，他们杀了你的先知，拆了你的祭坛，只剩下我一个人，他们还要寻索我的命。
Lord, they have put your prophets to death, and made waste your altars, and now I am the last, and they are searching for me to take away my life.

神的回话是怎么说的呢？他说，我为自己留下七千人，是未曾向巴力屈膝的。
But what answer does God make to him? I have still seven thousand men whose knees have not been bent to Baal.

如今也是这样，照着拣选的恩典还有所留的余数。
In the same way, there are at this present time some who are marked out by the selection of grace.

既是出于恩典，就不在乎行为。不然，恩典就不是恩典了。
But if it is of grace, then it is no longer of works: or grace would not be grace.

这是怎么样呢？以色列人所求的，他们没有得着。惟有蒙拣选的人得着了，其余的就成了顽梗不化的。
What then? That which Israel was searching for he did not get, but those of the selection got it and the rest were made hard.

如经上所记，神给他们昏迷的心，眼睛不能看见，耳朵不能听见，直到今日。
As it was said in the holy Writings, God gave them a spirit of sleep, eyes which might not see, and ears which have no hearing, to this day.

大卫也说，愿他们的筵席变为网罗，变为机槛，变为绊脚石，作他们的报应。
And David says, Let their table be made a net for taking them, and a stone in their way, and a punishment:

愿他们的眼睛昏蒙，不得看见。愿你时常弯下他们的腰。
Let their eyes be made dark so that they may not see, and let their back be bent down at all times.

我且说，他们失脚是要他们跌倒吗？断乎不是。反倒因他们的过失，救恩便临到外邦人，要激动他们发愤。
So I say, Were their steps made hard in order that they might have a fall? In no way: but by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, so that they might be moved to envy.

若他们的过失，为天下的富足，他们的缺乏，为外邦人的富足。何况他们的丰满呢？
Now, if their fall is the wealth of the world, and their loss the wealth of the Gentiles, how much greater will be the glory when they are made full?

我对你们外邦人说这话。因我是外邦人的使徒，所以敬重我的职分。（敬重原文作荣耀）
But I say to you, Gentiles, in so far as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I make much of my position:

或者可以激动我骨肉之亲发愤，好救他们一些人。
If in any way those who are of my flesh may be moved to envy, so that some of them may get salvation by me.

若他们被丢弃，天下就得与神和好，他们被收纳，岂不是死而复生吗？
For, if by their putting away, the rest of men have been made friends with God, what will their coming back again be, but life from the dead?

所献的新面，若是圣洁，全团也就圣洁了。树根若是圣洁，树枝也就圣洁了。
And if the first-fruit is holy, so is the mass: and if the root is holy, so are the branches.

若有几根枝子被折下来，你这野橄榄得接在其中，一同得着橄榄根的肥汁。
But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, an olive-tree of the fields, were put in among them, and were given a part with them in the root by which the olive-tree is made fertile,

你就不可向旧枝子夸口，若是夸口，当知道不是你托着根，乃是根托着你。
Do not be uplifted in pride over the branches: because it is not you who are the support of the root, but it is by the root that you are supported.

你若说，那枝子被折下来，是特为叫我接上。
You will say, Branches were broken off so that I might be put in.

不错。他们因为不信，所以被折下来。你因为信，所以立得住。你不可自高，反要惧怕。
Truly, because they had no faith they were broken off, and you have your place by reason of your faith. Do not be lifted up in pride, but have fear;

神既不爱惜原来的枝子，也必不爱惜你。
For, if God did not have mercy on the natural branches, he will not have mercy on you.

可见神的恩慈，和严厉。向那跌倒的人，是严厉的。向你是有恩慈的，只要你长久在他的恩慈里。不然，你也要被砍下来。
See then that God is good but his rules are fixed: to those who were put away he was hard, but to you he has been good, on the condition that you keep in his mercy; if not, you will be cut off as they were.

而且他们若不是长久不信，仍要被接上。因为神能够把他们从新接上。
And they, if they do not go on without faith, will be united to the tree again, because God is able to put them in again.

你是从那天生的野橄榄上砍下来的，尚且逆着性得接在好橄榄上，何况这本树的枝子，要接在本树上呢。
For if you were cut out of a field olive-tree, and against the natural use were united to a good olive-tree, how much more will these, the natural branches, be united again with the olive-tree which was theirs?

弟兄们，我不愿意你们不知道这奥秘，（恐怕你们自以为聪明）就是以色列人有几分是硬心的，等到外邦人的数目添满了。
For it is my desire, brothers, that this secret may be clear to you, so that you may not have pride in your knowledge, that Israel has been made hard in part, till all the Gentiles have come in;

于是以色列全家都要得救，如经上所记，必有一位救主，从锡安出来，要消除雅各家的一切罪恶。
And so all Israel will get salvation: as it is said in the holy Writings, There will come out of Zion the One who makes free; by him wrongdoing will be taken away from Jacob:

又说，我除去他们罪的时候，这就是我与他们所立的约。
And this is my agreement with them, when I will take away their sins.

就着福音说，他们为你们的缘故是仇敌。就着拣选说，他们为列祖的缘故是蒙爱的。
As far as the good news is in question, they are cut off from God on account of you, but as far as the selection is in question, they are loved on account of the fathers.

因为神的恩赐和选召，是没有后悔的。
Because God's selection and his mercies may not be changed.

你们从前不顺服神，如今因他们的不顺服，你们倒蒙了怜恤。
For as you, in time past, were not under the rule of God, but now have got mercy through their turning away,

这样，他们也是不顺服，叫他们因着施给你们的怜恤，现在也就蒙怜恤。
So in the same way these have gone against the orders of God, so that by the mercy given to you they may now get mercy.

因为神将众人都圈在不顺服之中，特意要怜恤众人。
For God has let them all go against his orders, so that he might have mercy on them all.

深哉，神丰富的智慧和知识。他的判断，何其难测，他的踪迹，何其难寻，
O how deep is the wealth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! no one is able to make discovery of his decisions, and his ways may not be searched out.

谁知道主的心？谁作过他的谋士呢？
Who has knowledge of the mind of the Lord? or who has taken part in his purposes?

谁是先给了他，使他后来偿还呢？
Or who has first given to him, and it will be given back to him again?

因为万有都是本于他，倚靠他，归于他。愿荣耀归给他，直到永远。阿们。
For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things. To him be the glory for ever. So be it.

所以弟兄们，我以神的慈悲劝你们，将身体献上，当作活祭，是圣洁的，是神所喜悦的。你们如此事奉，乃是理所当然的。
For this reason I make request to you, brothers, by the mercies of God, that you will give your bodies as a living offering, holy, pleasing to God, which is the worship it is right for you to give him.

不要效法这个世界。只要心意更新而变化，叫你们察验何为神的善良，纯全可喜悦的旨意。
And let not your behaviour be like that of this world, but be changed and made new in mind, so that by experience you may have knowledge of the good and pleasing and complete purpose of God.

我凭着所赐我的恩，对你们各人说，不要看自己过于所当看的。要照着神所分给各人信心的大小，看得合乎中道。
But I say to every one of you, through the grace given to me, not to have an over-high opinion of himself, but to have wise thoughts, as God has given to every one a measure of faith.

正如我们一个身子上有好些肢体，肢体也不都是一样的用处。
For, as we have a number of parts in one body, but all the parts have not the same use,

我们这许多人，在基督里成为一身，互相联络作肢体，也是如此。
So we, though we are a number of persons, are one body in Christ, and are dependent on one another;

按我们所得的恩赐，各有不同。或说预言，就当照着信心的程度说预言
And having different qualities by reason of the grace given to us, such as the quality of a prophet, let it be made use of in relation to the measure of our faith;

或作执事，就当专一执事。或作教导的，就当专一教导。
Or the position of a Deacon of the church, let a man give himself to it; or he who has the power of teaching, let him make use of it;

或作劝化的，就当专一劝化。施舍的就当诚实。治理的，就当殷勤。怜悯人的，就当甘心。
He who has the power of comforting, let him do so; he who gives, let him give freely; he who has the power of ruling, let him do it with a serious mind; he who has mercy on others, let it be with joy.

爱人不可虚假，恶要厌恶，善要亲近。
Let love be without deceit. Be haters of what is evil; keep your minds fixed on what is good.

爱弟兄，要彼此亲热。恭敬人，要彼此推让。
Be kind to one another with a brother's love, putting others before yourselves in honour;

殷勤不可懒惰。要心里火热。常常服事主。
Be not slow in your work, but be quick in spirit, as the Lord's servants;

在指望中要喜乐。在患难中要忍耐。祷告要恒切。
Being glad in hope, quiet in trouble, at all times given to prayer,

圣徒缺乏要帮补。客要一味地款待。
Giving to the needs of the saints, ready to take people into your houses.

逼迫你们的，要给他们祝福。只要祝福，不可咒诅。
Give blessing and not curses to those who are cruel to you.

与喜乐的人要同乐。与哀哭的人要同哭。
Take part in the joy of those who are glad, and in the grief of those who are sorrowing.

要彼此同心。不要志气高大，倒要俯就卑微的人。（人或作事）不要自以为聪明。
Be in harmony with one another. Do not have a high opinion of yourselves, but be in agreement with common people. Do not give yourselves an air of wisdom.

不要以恶报恶，众人以为美的事，要留心去作。
Do not give evil for evil to any man. Let all your business be well ordered in the eyes of all men.

若是能行，总要尽力与众人和睦。
As far as it is possible for you be at peace with all men.

亲爱的弟兄，不要自己伸冤，宁可让步，听凭主怒。（或作让人发怒）因为经上记着，主说，伸冤在我。我必报应。
Do not give punishment for wrongs done to you, dear brothers, but give way to the wrath of God; for it is said in the holy Writings, Punishment is mine, I will give reward, says the Lord.

所以，你的仇敌若饿了，就给他吃。若渴了，就给他喝。因为你这样行，就是把炭火堆在他的头上。
But if one who has hate for you is in need of food or of drink, give it to him, for in so doing you will put coals of fire on his head.

你不可为恶所胜，反要以善胜恶。
Do not let evil overcome you, but overcome evil by good.

在上有权柄的，人人当顺服他。因为没有权柄不是出于神的。凡掌权的都是神所命的。
Let everyone put himself under the authority of the higher powers, because there is no power which is not of God, and all powers are ordered by God.

所以抗拒掌权的，就是抗拒神的命。抗拒的必自取刑罚
For which reason everyone who puts himself against the authority puts himself against the order of God: and those who are against it will get punishment for themselves.

作官的原不是叫行善的惧怕，乃是叫作恶的惧怕。你愿意不惧怕掌权的吗？你只要行善，就可得他的称赞。
For rulers are not a cause of fear to the good work but to the evil. If you would have no fear of the authority, do good and you will have praise;

因为他是神的用人，是与你有益的。你若作恶，却当惧怕。因为他不是空空的佩剑。他是神的用人，是伸冤的，刑罚那作恶的。
For he is the servant of God to you for good. But if you do evil, have fear; for the sword is not in his hand for nothing: he is God's servant, making God's punishment come on the evil-doer.

所以你们必须顺服，不但是因为刑罚，也是因为良心。
So put yourselves under the authority, not for fear of wrath, but because you have the knowledge of what is right.

你们纳粮，也为这个缘故。因他们是神的差役，常常特管这事。
For the same reason, make payment of taxes; because the authority is God's servant, to take care of such things at all times.

凡人所当得的，就给他。当得粮的，给他纳粮。当得税的，给他上税。当惧怕的，惧怕他。当恭敬的，恭敬他。
Give to all what is their right: taxes to him whose they are, payment to him whose right it is, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour is to be given.

凡事都不可亏欠人，惟有彼此相爱，要常以为亏欠。因为爱人的就完全了律法。
Be in debt for nothing, but to have love for one another: for he who has love for his neighbour has kept all the law.

像那不可奸淫，不可杀人，不可偷盗，不可贪婪，或有别的诫命，都包在爱人如己这一句话之内了。
And this, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not put to death, Do not take what is another's, Do not have desire for what is another's, and if there is any other order, it is covered by this word, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.

爱是不加害与人的，所以爱就完全了律法。
Love does no wrong to his neighbour, so love makes the law complete.

再者，你们晓得现今就是该趁早睡醒的时候，因为我们得救，现今比初信的时候更近了。
See then that the time has come for you to be awake from sleep: for now is your salvation nearer than when you first had faith.

黑夜已深，白昼将近。我们就当脱去暗昧的行为，带上光明的兵器。
The night is far gone, and the day is near: so let us put off the works of the dark, arming ourselves with light,

行事为人要端正，好像行在白昼。不可荒宴醉酒。不可好色邪荡。不可争竞嫉妒。
With right behaviour as in the day; not in pleasure-making and drinking, not in bad company and unclean behaviour, not in fighting and envy.

总要披戴主耶稣基督，不要为肉体安排，去放纵私欲。
But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not give thought to the flesh to do its desires.

信心软弱的，你们要接纳，但不要辩论所疑惑的事。
Do not put on one side him who is feeble in faith, and do not put him in doubt by your reasonings.

有人信百物都可吃。但那软弱的，只吃蔬菜。
One man has faith to take all things as food: another who is feeble in faith takes only green food.

吃的人不可轻看不吃的人。不吃的人不可论断吃的人。因为神已经收纳他了。
Let not him who takes food have a low opinion of him who does not: and let not him who does not take food be a judge of him who does; for he has God's approval.

你是谁，竟论断别人的仆人呢？他或站住，或跌倒，自有他的主人在。而且他也必要站住。因为主能使他站住。
Who are you to make yourself a judge of another man's servant? it is to his master that he is responsible for good or bad. Yes, his place will be safe, because the Lord is able to keep him from falling.

有人看这日比那日强，有人看日日都是一样。只是各人心里要意见坚定。
This man puts one day before another: to that man they are the same. Let every man be certain in his mind.

守日的人，是为主守的。吃的人，是为主吃的，因他感谢神。不吃的人，是为主不吃的，也感谢神。
He who keeps the day, keeps it to the Lord; and he who takes food, takes it as to the Lord, for he gives praise to God; and he who does not take food, to the Lord he takes it not, and gives praise to God.

我们没有一个人为自己活，也没有一个人为自己死。
For every man's life and every man's death has a relation to others as well as to himself.

我们若活着，是为主而活。若死了，是为主而死。所以我们或活或死，总是主的人。
As long as we have life we are living to the Lord; or if we give up our life it is to the Lord; so if we are living, or if our life comes to an end, we are the Lord's.

因此基督死了，又活了，为要作死人并活人的主。
And for this purpose Christ went into death and came back again, that he might be the Lord of the dead and of the living.

你这个人，为什么论断弟兄呢？又为什么轻看弟兄呢？因我们都要站在神的台前。
But you, why do you make yourself your brother's judge? or again, why have you no respect for your brother? because we will all have to take our place before God as our judge.

经上写着，主说，我凭着我的永生起誓，万膝必向我跪拜，万口必向我承认。
For it is said in the holy Writings, By my life, says the Lord, to me every knee will be bent, and every tongue will give worship to God.

这样看来，我们各人必要将自己的事，在神面前说明。
So every one of us will have to give an account of himself to God.

所以我们不可再彼此论断。宁可定意谁也不给弟兄放下绊脚跌人之物。
Then let us not be judges of one another any longer: but keep this in mind, that no man is to make it hard for his brother, or give him cause for doubting.

我凭着主耶稣确知深信，凡物本来没有不洁净的。惟独人以为不洁净的，在他就不洁净了。
I am conscious of this, and am certain in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean in itself; but for the man in whose opinion it is unclean, for him it is unclean.

你若因食物叫弟兄忧愁，就不是按着爱人的道理行。基督已经替他死，你不可因你的食物叫他败坏。
And if because of food your brother is troubled, then you are no longer going on in the way of love. Do not let your food be destruction to him for whom Christ went into death.

不可叫你的善被人毁谤。
Let it not be possible for men to say evil about your good:

因为神的国，不在乎吃喝，只在乎公义，和平，并圣灵中的喜乐。
For the kingdom of God is not food and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.

在这几样上服事基督的，就为神所喜悦，又为人所称许。
And he who in these things is Christ's servant, is pleasing to God and has the approval of men.

所以我们务要追求和睦的事，与彼此建立德行的事。
So then, let us go after the things which make peace, and the things by which we may be a help to one another.

不可因食物毁坏神的工程。凡物固然洁净，但有人因食物叫人跌倒，就是他的罪了。
Do not let the work of God come to nothing on account of food. All things are certainly clean; but it is evil for that man who by taking food makes it hard for another.

无论是吃肉，是喝酒，是什么别的事，叫弟兄跌倒，一概不作才好。
It is better not to take meat or wine or to do anything which might be a cause of trouble to your brother.

你有信心，就当在神面前守着。人在自己以为可行的事上，能不自责，就有福了。
The faith which you have, have it to yourself before God. Happy is the man who is not judged by that to which he gives approval.

若有疑心而吃的，就必有罪。因为他吃，不是出于信心。凡不出于信心的都是罪。
But he who is in doubt is judged if he takes food, because he does it not in faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin.

我们坚固的人，应该担代不坚固人的软弱，不求自己的喜悦。
We who are strong have to be a support to the feeble, and not give pleasure to ourselves.

我们各人务要叫邻舍喜悦，使他得益处，建立德行。
Let every one of us give pleasure to his neighbour for his good, to make him strong.

因为基督也不求自己的喜悦，如经上所记，辱骂你人的辱骂，都落在我身上。
For Christ did not give pleasure to himself, but, as it is said, The bitter words of those who were angry with you came on me.

从前所写的圣经都是为教训我们写的，叫我们因圣经所生的忍耐和安慰，可以得着盼望。
Now those things which were put down in writing before our time were for our learning, so that through quiet waiting and through the comfort of the holy Writings we might have hope.

但愿赐忍耐安慰的神，叫你们彼此同心，效法基督耶稣。
Now may the God who gives comfort and strength in waiting make you of the same mind with one another in harmony with Christ Jesus:

一心一口，荣耀神，我们主耶稣基督的父。
So that with one mouth you may give glory to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

所以你们要彼此接纳，如同基督接纳你们一样，使荣耀归与神。
So then, take one another to your hearts, as Christ took us, to the glory of God.

我说，基督是为神真理作了受割礼人的执事，要证实所应许列祖的话。
Now I say that Christ has been made a servant of the circumcision to give effect to the undertakings given by God to the fathers,

并叫外邦人，因他的怜悯，荣耀神。如经上所记，因此我要在外邦中称赞你，歌颂你的名。
And so that the Gentiles might give glory to God for his mercy; as it is said, For this reason I will give praise to you among the Gentiles, and I will make a song to your name.

又说，你们外邦人，当与主的百姓一同欢乐。
And again he says, Take part, you Gentiles, in the joy of his people.

又说，外邦阿，你们当赞美主。万民哪，你们都当颂赞他。
And again, Give praise to the Lord, all you Gentiles; and let all the nations give praise to him.

又有以赛亚说，将来有耶西的根，就是那兴起来要治理外邦的。外邦人要仰望他。
And again Isaiah says, There will be the root of Jesse, and he who comes to be the ruler over the Gentiles; in him will the Gentiles put their hope.

但愿使人有盼望的神，因信将诸般的喜乐平安，充满你们的心，使你们借着圣灵的能力，大有盼望。
Now may the God of hope make you full of joy and peace through faith, so that all hope may be yours in the power of the Holy Spirit.

弟兄们，我自己也深信你们是满有良善，充足了诸般的知识，也能彼此劝戒。
And I myself am certain of you, brothers, that you are full of what is good, complete in all knowledge, able to give direction to one another.

但我稍微放胆写信给你们，是要提醒你们的记性，特因神所给我的恩典，
But I have, in some measure, less fear in writing to you to put these things before you again, because of the grace which was given to me by God,

使我为外邦人作基督耶稣的仆役，作神福音的祭司，叫所献上的外邦人，因着圣灵，成为圣洁，可蒙悦纳。
To be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, doing the work of a priest in the good news of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles might be pleasing to God, being made holy by the Holy Spirit.

所以论到神的事我在基督耶稣里有可夸的。
So I have pride in Christ Jesus in the things which are God's.

除了基督借我作的那些事，我什么都不敢提。只提他借我言语作为，用神迹奇事的能力，并圣灵的能力，使外邦人顺服。
And I will keep myself from talking of anything but those things which Christ has done by me to put the Gentiles under his rule in word and in act,

甚至我从耶路撒冷，直转到以利哩古，到处传了基督的福音。
By signs and wonders, in the power of the Holy Spirit; so that from Jerusalem and round about as far as Illyricum I have given all the good news of Christ;

我立了志向，不在基督的名被称过的地方传福音，免得建造在别人的根基上。
Making it my purpose not to take the good news where Christ was named, so that my work might not be resting on that of others;

就如经上所记，未曾闻知他信息的，将要看见。未曾听过的，将要明白。
But as it is said in the holy Writings, They will see, to whom the news of him had not been given, and those to whose ears it had not come will have knowledge.

我因多次被拦阻，总不得到你们那里去。
For which reason I was frequently kept from coming to you:

但如今在这里再没有可传的地方，而且这好几年，我切心想望到士班雅去的时候，可以到你们那里。
But now, having no longer any place in these parts and having had for a number of years a great desire to come to you,

盼望从你们那里经过，得见你们，先与你们彼此交往，心里稍微满足，然后蒙你们送行。
Whenever I go to Spain (for it is my hope to see you on my way, and to be sent on there by you, if first I may in some measure have been comforted by your company)--

但现在我往耶路撒冷去，供给圣徒。
But now I go to Jerusalem, taking help for the saints.

因为马其顿，和亚该亚人乐意凑出捐项，给耶路撒冷圣徒中的穷人。
For it has been the good pleasure of those of Macedonia and Achaia to send a certain amount of money for the poor among the saints at Jerusalem.

这固然是他们乐意的。其实也算是所欠的债。因外邦人，既然在他们属灵的好处上有分，就当把养身之物供给他们。
Yes, it has been their good pleasure; and they are in their debt. For if the Gentiles have had a part in the things of the Spirit which were theirs, it is right for them, in the same way, to give them help in the things of the flesh.

等我办完了这事，把这善果向他们交付明白，我就要路过你们那里，往士班雅去。
So when I have done this, and have given them this fruit of love, I will go on by you into Spain.

我也晓得去的时候，必带着基督丰盛的恩典而去。
And I am certain that when I come, I will be full of the blessing of Christ.

弟兄们，我借着我们主耶稣基督，又借着圣灵的爱，劝你们与我一同竭力，为我祈求神。
Now I make request to you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you will be working together with me in your prayers to God for me;

叫我脱离在犹太不顺从的人，也叫我为耶路撒冷所办的捐项，可蒙圣徒悦纳。
So that I may be kept safe from those in Judaea who have not put themselves under the rule of God, and that the help which I am taking for Jerusalem may be pleasing to the saints;

并叫我顺着神的旨意，欢欢喜喜地到你们那里，与你们同得安息。
So that I may come to you in joy by the good pleasure of God, and have rest with you.

愿赐平安的神，常和你们众人同在，阿们。
Now may the God of peace be with you all. So be it.

我对你们举荐我们的姊妹非比，她是坚革哩教会中的女执事。
It is my desire to say a good word for Phoebe, who is a servant of the church in Cenchreae:

请你们为主接待她，合乎圣徒的体统。她在何事上，要你们帮助，你们就帮助她。因她素来帮助许多人，也帮助了我。
That you will take her in kindly, after the way of the saints, as one who is the Lord's, and give her help in anything in which she may have need of you: because she has been a help to a great number and to myself.

问百基拉和亚居拉安。他们在基督耶稣里与我同工，
Give my love to Prisca and Aquila, workers with me in Christ Jesus,

也为我的命，将自己的颈项，置之度外。不但我感谢他们，就是外邦的众教会，也感谢他们。
Who for my life put their necks in danger; to whom not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are in debt:

又问在他们家中的教会安。问我所亲爱的以拜尼土安。他在亚西亚是归基督初结的果子。
And say a kind word to the church which is in their house. Give my love to my dear Epaenetus, who is the first fruit of Asia to Christ.

又问马利亚安。她为你们多受劳苦。
Give my love to Mary, who gave much care to you.

又问我亲属与我一同坐监的安多尼古和犹尼亚安。他们在使徒中是有名望的，也是比我先在基督里。
Give my love to Andronicus and Junia, my relations, who were in prison with me, who are noted among the Apostles, and who were in Christ before me.

又问我在主里面所亲爱的暗伯利安。
Give my love to Ampliatus, who is dear to me in the Lord,

又问在基督里与我们同工的耳巴奴，并我所亲爱的士大古安。
Give my love to Urbanus, a worker in Christ with us, and to my dear Stachys.

又问在基督里经过试验的亚比利安。问亚利多布家里的人安。
Give my love to Apelles, who has the approval of Christ. Say a kind word to those who are of the house of Aristobulus.

又问我亲属希罗天安。问拿其数家在主里的人安。
Give my love to Herodion, my relation. Say a kind word to those of the house of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.

又问为主劳苦的土非拿氏和土富撒氏安。问可亲爱为主多受劳苦的彼息氏安。
Give my love to Tryphaena and Tryphosa, workers in the Lord. Give my love to my dear Persis, who did much work in the Lord.

又问在主蒙拣选的鲁孚和他母亲安。他的母亲就是我的母亲。
Give my love to Rufus, one of the Lord's selection, and to his mother and mine.

又问亚逊其土，弗勒干，黑米，八罗巴，黑马，并与他们在一处的弟兄们安。
Give my love to Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.

又问非罗罗古，和犹利亚，尼利亚，和他姊妹，同阿林巴，并与他们在一处的众圣徒安。
Give my love to Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.

你们亲嘴问安，彼此务要圣洁。基督的众教会都问你们安。
Give one another a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ send their love to you.

弟兄们，那些离间你们，叫你们跌倒，背乎所学之道的人，我劝你们要留意躲避他们。
Now, it is my desire, brothers, that you will take note of those who are causing division and trouble among you, quite against the teaching which was given to you: and keep away from them.

因为这样的人不服事我们的主基督，只服事自己的肚腹。用花言巧语，诱惑那些老实人的心。
For such people are not servants of the Lord Christ, but of their stomachs; and by their smooth and well-said words the hearts of those who have no knowledge of evil are tricked.

你们的顺服，已经传于众人，所以我为你们欢喜。但我愿意你们在善上聪明，在恶上愚拙。
For all have knowledge of how you do what you are ordered. For this reason I have joy in you, but it is my desire that you may be wise in what is good, and without knowledge of evil.

赐平安的神，快要将撒但践踏在你们脚下。愿我主耶稣基督的恩，常和你们同在。
And the God of peace will be crushing Satan under your feet before long. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

与我同工的提摩太，和我的亲属路求，耶孙，所西巴德，问你们安。
Timothy, who is working with me, sends his love to you, so do Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my relations.

我这代笔写信的德丢，在主里面问你们安。
I, Tertius, who have done the writing of this letter, send love in the Lord.

那接待我，也接待全教会的该犹，问你们安。
Gaius, with whom I am living, whose house is open to all the church, sends his love, so does Erastus, the manager of the accounts of the town, and Quartus, the brother.

城内管银库的以拉都，和兄弟括土，问你们安。
[]

惟有神能照我所传的福音，和所讲的耶稣基督，并照永古隐藏不言的奥秘，坚固你们的心。
Now to him who is able to make you strong in agreement with the good news which I gave you and the preaching of Jesus Christ, in the light of the revelation of that secret which has been kept through times eternal,

这奥秘如今显明出来，而且按着永生神的命，借众先知的书指示万国的民，使他们信服真道。
But is now made clear; and by the writings of the prophets, by the order of the eternal God, the knowledge of it has been given to all the nations, so that they may come under the rule of the faith;

愿荣耀因耶稣基督归与独一全智的神，直到永远。阿们。
To the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be the glory for ever. So be it.

