腓利门书 Philemon


为基督耶稣被囚的保罗，同兄弟提摩太，写信给我们所亲爱的同工腓利门，
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our dear helper in the faith,

和妹子亚腓亚，并与我们同当兵的亚基布，以及在你家的教会。
And to Apphia, our sister, and to Archippus, our brother in God's army, and to the church in your house:

愿恩惠平安，从神我们的父，和主耶稣基督，归与你们。
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

我祷告的时候提到你，常为你感谢我的神。
I give praise to God at all times and make prayer for you,

因听说你的爱心，并你向主耶稣和众圣徒的信心。（或作因听说你向主耶稣和众圣徒有爱心有信心）
Hearing of the love and the faith which you have to the Lord Jesus and to all the saints;

愿你与人所同有的信心显出功效，使人知道你们各样善事都是为基督作的。
That the faith which you have in common with them may be working with power, in the knowledge of every good thing in you, for Christ.

兄弟阿，我为你的爱心，大有快乐，大得安慰。因众圣徒的心从你得了畅快。
For I had great joy and comfort in your love, because the hearts of the saints have been made strong again through you, brother.

我虽然靠着基督能放胆吩咐你合宜的事。
And so, though I might, in the name of Christ, give you orders to do what is right,

然而像我这有年纪的保罗，现在又是为基督耶稣被囚的，宁可凭着爱心求你。
Still, because of love, in place of an order, I make a request to you, I, Paul, an old man and now a prisoner of Christ Jesus:

就是为我在捆锁中所生的儿子阿尼西母（此名就是有益处的意思）求你。
My request is for my child Onesimus, the child of my chains,

他从前与你没有益处，但如今与你我都有益处。
Who in the past was of no profit to you, but now is of profit to you and to me:

我现在打发他亲自回你那里去。他是我心上的人。
Whom I have sent back to you, him who is my very heart:

我本来有意将他留下，在我为福音所受的捆锁中替你伺候我。
Though my desire was to keep him with me, to be my servant in the chains of the good news, in your place:

但不知道你的意思，我就不愿意这样行，叫你的善行不是出于勉强，乃是出于甘心。
But without your approval I would do nothing; so that your good works might not be forced, but done freely from your heart.

他暂时离开你，或者是叫你永远得着他。
For it is possible that for this reason he was parted from you for a time, so that you might have him for ever;

不再是奴仆，乃是高过奴仆，是亲爱的兄弟，在我实在是如此，何况在你呢。这也不拘是按肉体说，是按主说。
No longer as a servant, but more than a servant, a brother, very dear to me specially, but much more to you, in the flesh as well as in the Lord.

你若以我为同伴，就收纳他，如同收纳我一样。
If then you take me to be your friend and brother, take him in as myself.

他若亏负你，或欠你什么，都归在我的账上。
If he has done you any wrong or is in debt to you for anything, put it to my account.

我必偿还。这是我保罗亲笔写的。我并不用对你说，连你自己也是亏欠于我。
I, Paul, writing this myself, say, I will make payment to you: and I do not say to you that you are in debt to me even for your life.

兄弟阿，望你使我在主里因你得快乐（或作益处）。并望你使我的心在基督里得畅快。
So brother, let me have joy of you in the Lord: give new life to my heart in Christ.

我写信给你，深信你必顺服，知道你所要行的，必过于我所说的。
Being certain that you will do my desire, I am writing to you, in the knowledge that you will do even more than I say.

此外你还要给我预备住处，因为我盼望借着你们的祷告，必蒙恩到你们那里去。
And make a room ready for me; for I am hoping that through your prayers I will be given to you.

为基督耶稣与我同坐监的以巴弗问你安。
Epaphras, my brother-prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you his love;

与我同工的马可，亚里达古，底马，路加，也都问你安。
And so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my brother-workers.

愿我们主耶稣基督的恩常在你的心里。阿们。
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. So be it.

