马可福音 Mark


神的儿子，耶稣基督福音的起头，
The first words of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

正如先知以赛亚书上记着说，（有古卷无以赛亚三字）看哪，我要差遣我的使者在你前面，预备道路。
Even as it is said in the book of Isaiah the prophet, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way;

在旷野有人声喊着说，预备主的道，修直他的路。
The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight;

照这话，约翰来了，在旷野施洗，传悔改的洗礼，使罪得赦。
John came, and gave baptism in the waste land, preaching baptism as a sign of forgiveness of sin for those whose hearts were changed.

犹太全地，和耶路撒冷的人，都出去到约翰那里，承认他们的罪，在约但河里受他的洗。
And there went out to him all the people of Judaea, and all those of Jerusalem, and they were given baptism by him in the river Jordan, saying that they were sinners.

约翰穿骆驼毛的衣服，腰束皮带，吃的是蝗虫野蜜。
And John was clothed in camel's hair, with a leather band about him; and his food was locusts and honey.

他传道说，有一位在我以后来的，能力比我更大，我就是弯腰给他解鞋带，也是不配的。
And he said to them all, There is one coming after me who is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to undo.

我是用水给你们施洗，他却要用圣灵给你们施洗。
I have given you baptism with water, but he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit.

那时，耶稣从加利利的拿撒勒来，在约但河里受了约翰的洗。
And it came about in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was given baptism by John in the Jordan.

他从水里一上来，就看见天裂开了，圣灵仿佛鸽子，降在他身上。
And straight away, coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens broken open and the Spirit coming down on him as a dove:

又有声音从天上来说，你是我的爱子，我喜悦你。
And a voice came out of heaven, You are my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

圣灵就把耶稣催到旷野里去。
And straight away the Spirit sent him out into the waste land.

他在旷野四十天受撒但的试探。并与野兽同在一处。且有天使来伺候他。
And he was in the waste land for forty days, being tested by Satan; and he was with the beasts; and the angels took care of him.

约翰下监以后，耶稣来到加利利，宣传神的福音，
Now after John had been put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the good news of God,

说，日期满了，神的国近了。你们当悔改，信福音。
And saying, The time has come, and the kingdom of God is near: let your hearts be turned from sin and have faith in the good news.

耶稣顺着加利利的海边走，看见西门，和西门的兄弟安得烈，在海里撒网。他们本是打鱼的。
And going by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon, and Andrew, the brother of Simon, putting a net into the sea: for they were fishermen.

耶稣对他们说，来跟从我，我要叫你们得人如得鱼一样。
And Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.

他们就立刻舍了网，跟从了他。
And they went straight from their nets, and came after him.

耶稣稍往前走，又见西庇太的儿子雅各，和雅各的兄弟约翰，在船上补网。
And going on a little farther, he saw James, the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were in their boat stitching up their nets.

耶稣随即招呼他们。他们就把父亲西庇太，和雇工人留在船上，跟从耶稣去了。
And he said, Come after me: and they went away from their father Zebedee, who was in the boat with the servants, and came after him.

到了迦百农，耶稣就在安息日进了会堂教训人。
And they came to Capernaum; and on the Sabbath he went into the Synagogue and gave teaching.

众人很希奇他的教训。因为他教训他们，正像有权柄的人，不像文士。
And they were full of wonder at his teaching, because he gave it as one having authority, and not like the scribes.

在会堂里有一个人，被污鬼附着。他喊叫说，
And there was in their Synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he gave a cry,

拿撒勒人耶稣，我们与你有什么相干，你来灭我们吗？我知道你是谁，乃是神的圣者。
Saying, What have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? have you come to put an end to us? I see well who you are, the Holy One of God.

耶稣责备他说，不要作声，从这人身上出来吧。
And Jesus said to him sharply, Be quiet, and come out of him.

污鬼叫那人抽了一阵疯，大声喊叫，就出来了。
And the unclean spirit, shaking him violently, and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.

众人都惊讶，以致彼此对问说，这是什么事，是个新道理阿。他用权柄吩咐污鬼，连污鬼也听从了他。
And they were all greatly surprised, so that they put questions to one another, saying, What is this? a new teaching! with authority he gives orders even to the unclean spirits, and they do what he says.

耶稣的名声，就传遍了加利利的四方。
And news of him went out quickly everywhere into all parts of Galilee round about.

他们一出会堂，就同着雅各约翰，进了西门和安得烈的家。
And when they came out of the Synagogue, they went into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.

西门的岳母，正害热病躺着。就有人告诉耶稣。
Now Simon's wife's mother was ill, with a burning heat; and they gave him word of her:

耶稣进前拉着她的手，扶她起来，热就退了，她就服事他们。
And he came and took her by the hand, lifting her up; and she became well, and took care of their needs.

天晚日落的时候，有人带着一切害病的，和被鬼附的，来到耶稣跟前。
And in the evening, at sundown, they took to him all who were diseased, and those who had evil spirits.

合城的人都聚集在门前。
And all the town had come together at the door.

耶稣治好了许多害各样病的人，又赶出许多鬼，不许鬼说话，因为鬼认识他。
And a number, who were ill with different diseases, he made well, and sent out evil spirits; but he did not let the evil spirits say anything, because they had knowledge of him.

次日早晨，天未亮的时候，耶稣起来，到旷野地方去，在那里祷告。
And in the morning, a long time before daylight, he got up and went out to a quiet place, and there he gave himself up to prayer.

西门和同伴追了他去。
And Simon and those who were with him came after him.

遇见了就对他说，众人都找你。
And when they came up with him, they said to him, Everyone is looking for you.

耶稣对他们说，我们可以往别处去，到邻近的乡村，我也好在那里传道。因为我是为这事出来的。
And he said to them, Let us go to other parts into the nearest towns, so that I may give teaching there, because for this purpose I came.

于是在加利利全地，进了会堂，传道赶鬼。
And he went into their Synagogues in every part of Galilee, preaching and driving out evil spirits.

有一个长大麻疯的，来求耶稣，向他跪下说，你若肯，必能叫我洁净了。
And a leper came to him and, going down on his knees before him, made a request, saying, If it is your pleasure, you have the power to make me clean.

耶稣动了慈心，就伸手摸他，说，我肯，你洁净了吧。
And being moved with pity, he put out his hand, and touching him said to him, It is my pleasure; be made clean.

大麻疯即时离开他，他就洁净了。
And straight away the disease went from him, and he was made clean.

耶稣严严地嘱咐他，就打发他走，
And he sent him away, saying to him very sharply,

对他说，你要谨慎，什么话都不可告诉人。只要去把身体给祭司察看，又因为你洁净了，献上摩西所吩咐的礼物，对众人作证据。
See that you say nothing to any man: but go and let the priest see you, and make yourself clean by an offering of the things ordered by Moses, for a witness to them.

那人出去，倒说许多的话，把这件事传扬开了，叫耶稣以后不得再明明地进城，只好在外边旷野地方。人从各处都就了他来。
But he went out, and made it public, giving an account of it everywhere, so that Jesus was no longer able to go openly into a town, but was outside in the waste land; and they came to him from every part.

过了些日子，耶稣又进了迦百农。人听见他在房子里，
And when he came into Capernaum again after some days, the news went about that he was in the house.

就有许多人聚集，甚至连门前都没有空地，耶稣就对他们讲道。
And a great number had come together, so that there was no longer room for them, no, not even about the door: and he gave them teaching.

有人带着一个瘫子来见耶稣，是用四个人抬来的。
And four men came to him with one on a bed who had no power of moving.

因为人多，不得近前，就把耶稣所在的房子，拆了房顶，既拆通了，就把瘫子连所躺卧的褥子都缒下来。
And when they were unable to get near him because of all the people, they got the roof uncovered where he was: and when it was broken up, they let down the bed on which the man was.

耶稣见他们的信心，就对瘫子说，小子，你的罪赦了。
And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to him, Son, you have forgiveness for your sins.

有几个文士坐在那里，心里议论说，
But there were certain of the scribes seated there, and reasoning in their hearts,

这个人为什么这样说呢？他说僭妄的话了。除了神以外，谁能赦罪呢？
Why does this man say such things? he has no respect for God: from whom does forgiveness come but from God only?

耶稣心中知道他们心里这样议论，就说，你们心里为什么这样议论呢？
And Jesus, having knowledge in his spirit of their thoughts, said to them, Why are you reasoning about these things in your hearts?

或对瘫子说，你的罪赦了，或说，起来拿你的褥子行走，哪一样容易呢？
Which is the simpler, to say to a man who is ill, You have forgiveness for your sins, or, Get up, take up your bed, and go?

但要叫你们知道人子在地上有赦罪的权柄，就对瘫子说，
But so that you may see that the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins on earth, (he said to the man,)

我吩咐你起来，拿你的褥子回家去吧。
I say to you, Get up, take up your bed, and go to your house.

那人就起来，立刻拿着褥子，当众人面前出去了。以致众人都惊奇，归荣耀与神说，我们从来没有见过这样的事。
And he got up, and straight away took up the bed and went out before them all, so that they were all full of wonder, and gave glory to God, saying, We have never seen anything like this.

耶稣又出到海边去，众人都就了他来，他便教训他们。
And he went out again by the seaside; and all the people came to him, and he gave them teaching.

耶稣经过的时候，看见亚勒腓的儿子利未，坐在税关上，就对他说，你跟从我来。他就起来跟从了耶稣。
And when he went by, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, seated at the place where taxes were taken, and he said to him, Come with me. And he got up, and went with him.

耶稣在利未家里坐席的时候，有好些税吏和罪人，与耶稣并门徒一同坐席。因为这样的人多，他们也跟随耶稣。
And it came about that he was seated at meat in his house, and a number of tax-farmers and sinners were at table with Jesus and his disciples: for there were a great number of them, and they came after him.

法利赛人中的文士，（有古卷作文士和法利赛人）看见耶稣和罪人并税吏一同吃饭，就对他门徒说，他和税吏并罪人一同吃喝吗？
And the scribes of the Pharisees, when they saw that he was taking food with the tax-farmers and sinners, said to his disciples, Why does he take food and drink with such men?

耶稣听见，就对他们说，健康的人用不着医生，有病的人才用得着。我来本不是召义人，乃是召罪人。
And Jesus, hearing it, said to them, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill: I have come not to get the upright but sinners.

当下，约翰的门徒和法利赛人禁食。他们来问耶稣说，约翰的门徒和法利赛人的门徒禁食，你的门徒倒不禁食，这是为什么呢？
And John's disciples and the Pharisees were taking no food: and they came and said to him, Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees go without food, but your disciples do not?

耶稣对他们说，新郎和陪伴之人同在的时候，陪伴之人岂能禁食呢？新郎还同在，他们不能禁食。
And Jesus said to them, Will the friends of a newly-married man go without food while he is with them? as long as they have him with them they will not go without food.

但日子将到，新郎要离开他们，那日他们就要禁食。
But the days will come when the husband will be taken away from them, and then they will go without food.

没有人把新布缝在旧衣服上。恐怕所补上的新布，带坏了旧衣服，破得就更大了。
No man puts a bit of new cloth on an old coat: or the new, by pulling away from the old, makes a worse hole.

也没有人把新酒装在旧皮袋里。恐怕酒把皮袋裂开，酒和皮袋就都坏了。惟把新酒装在新皮袋里。
And no man puts new wine into old wine-skins: or the skins will be burst by the wine, and the wine and the skins will be wasted: but new wine has to be put into new wine-skins.

耶稣当安息日，从麦地经过。他门徒行路的时候，掐了麦穗。
And it came about that on the Sabbath day he was going through the grain-fields; and while they were walking, his disciples took the heads of grain.

法利赛人对耶稣说，看哪，他们在安息日为什么作不可作的事呢？
And the Pharisees said to him, Why are they doing what it is not right to do on the Sabbath?

耶稣对他们说，经上记着大卫和跟从他的人，缺乏饥饿之时所作的事，你们没有念过吗？
And he said to them, Have you no knowledge of what David did, when he had need and was without food, he, and those who were with him?

他当亚比亚他作大祭司的时候，怎么进了神的殿，吃了陈设饼，又给跟从他的人吃。这饼除了祭司以外，人都不可吃。
How he went into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and took for food the holy bread, which only the priests may take, and gave it to those who were with him?

又对他们说，安息日是为人设立的，人不是为安息日设立的。
And he said to them, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath;

所以人子也是安息日的主
So that the Son of man is lord even of the Sabbath.

耶稣又进了会堂。在那里有一个人枯干了一只手。
And he went again into the Synagogue; and there was a man there whose hand was dead.

众人窥探耶稣，在安息日医治不医治，意思是要控告耶稣。
And they were watching him to see if he would make him well on the Sabbath day, so that they might have something against him.

耶稣对那枯干一只手的人说，起来，站在当中。
And he said to the man, Get up and come forward.

又问众人说，在安息日行善行恶，救命害命，那样是可以的呢？他们都不作声。
And he said to them, Is it right to do good on the Sabbath or to do evil? to give life or to put to death? But they said nothing.

耶稣怒目周围看他们，忧愁他们的心刚硬，就对那人说，伸出手来。他把手一伸，手就复了原。
And looking round on them he was angry, being sad because of their hard hearts; and he said to the man, Put out your hand. And he put it out, and his hand was made well.

法利赛人出去，同希律一党的人商议，怎样可以除灭耶稣。
And the Pharisees went out, and straight away made designs with the Herodians about how they might put him to death.

耶稣和门徒退到海边去。有许多人从加利利跟随他。
And Jesus went away with his disciples to the sea, and a great number from Galilee came after him: and from Judaea,

还有许多人听见他所作的大事，就从犹太，耶路撒冷，以土买，约但河外，并推罗西顿的四方，来到他那里。
And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and the other side of Jordan, and the country about Tyre and Sidon, a great number, hearing what great things he did, came to him.

他因为人多，就吩咐门徒叫一只小船伺候着，免得众人拥挤他。
And he made a request to his disciples to have a little boat ready for him, so that he might not be crushed by the people;

他治好了许多人，所以凡有灾病的，都挤进来要摸他。
For he had made such a great number well that all those who were diseased were falling down before him for the purpose of touching him.

污鬼无论何时看见他就俯伏在他面前喊着说，你是神的儿子。
And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, went down before him, crying out, and saying, You are the Son of God.

耶稣再三地嘱咐他们，不要把他显露出来。
And he gave them special orders not to say who he was.

耶稣上了山，随自己的意思叫人来，他们便来到他那里。
And he went up into the mountain, and sent for those whom it was his pleasure to have with him: and they went to him.

他就设立十二个人，要他们常和自己同在，也要差他们去传道，
And he took twelve to be with him, so that he might send them out as preachers,

并给他们权柄赶鬼。
And give them the power of driving out evil spirits:

这十二个人有西门，耶稣又给他起名叫彼得。
To Simon he gave the second name of Peter;

还有西庇太的儿子雅各，和雅各的兄弟约翰。又给这两个人起名叫半尼其，就是雷子的意思。
And to James, the son of Zebedee, and John, the brother of James, he gave the second name of Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder:

又有安得烈，腓力，巴多罗买，马太，多马，亚勒腓的儿子雅各，和达太，并奋锐党的西门。
And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Zealot;

还有卖耶稣的加略人犹大。
And Judas Iscariot, who was false to him.

耶稣进了一个屋子，众人又聚集，甚至他连饭也顾不得吃。
And he went into a house. And the people came together again, so that they were not even able to take bread.

耶稣的亲属听见，就出来要拉住他，因为他们说他癫狂了。
And when his friends had news of it, they went out to get him, saying, He is off his head.

从耶路撒冷下来的文士说，他是被别西卜附着。又说，他是靠着鬼王赶鬼。
And the scribes who came down from Jerusalem, said, He has Beelzebub, and, By the ruler of evil spirits he sends evil spirits out of men.

耶稣叫他们来，用比喻对他们说，撒但怎能赶出撒但呢？
And turning to them, he said to them in the form of a story, How is it possible for Satan to put out Satan?

若一国自相分争，那国就站立不住。
If there is division in a kingdom, that kingdom will come to destruction;

若一家自相分争，那家就站立不住。
And if there is division in a house, that house will come to destruction;

若撒但自相攻打分争，他就站立不住，必要灭亡。
And if Satan is at war with himself, and there is division in him, he will not keep his place but will come to an end.

没有人能进壮士家里抢夺他的家具。必先捆住那壮士，才可以抢夺他的家。
But no one is able to go into the house of the strong man and take his goods, without first putting cords round the strong man, and then he will take his goods.

我实在告诉你们，世人一切的罪，和一切亵渎的话，都可得赦免。
Truly, I say to you, The sons of men will have forgiveness for all their sins and for all the evil words they say:

凡亵渎圣灵的，却永不得赦免，乃要担当永远的罪。
But whoever says evil things against the Holy Spirit will never have forgiveness, but the evil he has done will be with him for ever:

这话是因为他们说，他是被污鬼附着的。
Because they said, He has an unclean spirit.

当下耶稣的母亲，和弟兄，来站在外边，打发人去叫他。
And his mother and brothers came and were outside, and sent for him, requesting to see him.

有许多人在耶稣周围坐着。他们就告诉他说，看哪，你母亲，和你弟兄，在外边找你。
And a great number were seated round him; and they said to him, See, your mother and your brothers are outside looking for you.

耶稣回答说，谁是我的母亲，谁是我的弟兄。
And he said in answer, Who are my mother and my brothers?

就四面观看那周围坐着的人，说，看哪，我的母亲，我的弟兄。
And looking round at those who were seated about him, he said, See, my mother and my brothers!

凡遵行神旨意的人，就是我的弟兄姐妹和母亲了。
Whoever does God's pleasure, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

耶稣又在海边教训人。有许多人到他那里聚集，他只得上船坐下。船在海里，众人都靠近海站在岸上。
And again he was teaching by the seaside. And a very great number of people had come to him, so that he got into a boat on the sea and took his seat; and all the people were on the land by the seaside.

耶稣就用比喻教训他们许多道理。在教训之间，对他们说，
And he gave them teaching about a number of things in the form of stories, and said to them in his teaching, Give ear:

你们听阿。有一个撒种的。出去撒种。
A man went out to put seed in the earth:

撒的时候，有落在路旁的，飞鸟来吃尽了。
And while he was doing it, some was dropped by the wayside, and the birds came and took it for food.

有落在土浅石头地上的，土既不深，发苗最快。
And some went on the stones, where it had not much earth; and it came up straight away, because the earth was not deep:

日头出来一晒，因为没有根，就枯干了。
And when the sun was high, it was burned; and because it had no root, it became dry and dead.

有落在荆棘里的，荆棘长起来，把他挤住了，就不结实。
And some went among the thorns, and the thorns came up, and it had no room for growth and gave no fruit.

又有落在好土里的，就发生长大，结实有三十倍的，有六十倍的，有一百倍的。
And some, falling on good earth, gave fruit, coming up and increasing, and giving thirty, sixty, and a hundred times as much.

又说，有耳可听的，就应当听。
And he said to them, Whoever has ears, let him give ear.

无人的时候，跟随耶稣的人，和十二个门徒，问他这比喻的意思。
And when he was by himself, those who were round him with the twelve put questions to him about the purpose of the stories.

耶稣对他们说，神国的奥秘，只叫你们知道，若是对外人讲，凡事就用比喻。
And he said to them, To you is given the secret of the kingdom of God, but to those who are outside, all things are given in the form of stories;

叫他们看是看见，却不晓得。听是听见，却不明白。恐怕他们回转过来，就得赦免。
So that seeing they may see, and it will not be clear to them; and hearing it, they will not get the sense; for fear that they may be turned again to me and have forgiveness.

又对他们说，你们不明白这比喻吗？这样怎能明白一切的比喻呢？
And he said to them, If you are not clear about this story, how will you be clear about the others?

撒种之人所撒的，就是道。
The seed is the word.

那撒在路旁的，就是人听了道，撒但立刻来，把撒在他心里的道夺了去。
And these are they by the wayside, where the word is planted; and when they have given ear, the Evil One comes straight away and takes away the word which has been planted in them.

那撒在石头地上的，就是人听了道，立刻欢喜领受。
And in the same way, these are they who are planted on the stones, who, when the word has come to their ears, straight away take it with joy;

但他心里没有根，不过是暂时的，及至为道遭了患难，或是受了逼迫，立刻就跌倒了。
And they have no root in themselves, but go on for a time; then, when trouble comes or pain, because of the word, they quickly become full of doubts.

还有那撒在荆棘里的，就是人听了道。
And others are those planted among the thorns; these are they who have given ear to the word,

后来有世上的思虑，钱财的迷惑，和别样的私欲，进来把道挤住了，就不能结实。
And the cares of this life, and the deceits of wealth, and the desire for other things coming in, put a stop to the growth of the word, and it gives no fruit.

那撒在好地上的，就是人听道，又领受，并且结实，有三十倍的，有六十倍的，有一百倍的。
And these are they who were planted on the good earth; such as give ear to the word, and take it into their hearts, and give fruit, thirty and sixty and a hundred times as much.

耶稣又对他们说，人拿灯来，岂是要放在斗底下，床底下，不放在灯台上吗？
And he said to them, When the light comes in, do people put it under a vessel, or under the bed, and not on its table?

因为掩藏的事，没有不显出来的。隐瞒的事，没有不露出来的。
There is nothing covered which will not be seen openly, and nothing has been made secret which will not come to light.

有耳可听的，就应当听。
If any man has ears, let him give ear.

又说你们所听的要留心。你们用什么量器量给人，也必用什么量器量给你们，并且要多给你们。
And he said to them, Take care what you give ear to: in the same measure as you give you will get, and more will be given to you.

因为有的还要给他。没有的，连他所有的也要夺去。
He who has, to him will be given: and he who has not, from him will be taken even that which he has.

又说，神的国，如同人把种撒在地上，
And he said, Such is the kingdom of God, as if a man put seed in the earth,

黑夜睡觉，白日起来，这种就发芽渐长，那人却不晓得如何这样。
And went to sleep and got up, night and day, and the seed came to growth, though he had no idea how.

地生五谷，是出于自然的。先发苗，后长穗，再后穗上结成饱满的子粒。
The earth gives fruit by herself; first the leaf, then the head, then the full grain.

谷既熟了，就用镰刀去割，因为收成的时候到了。
But when the grain is ready, he quickly sends men to get it cut, because the time for cutting has come.

又说，神的国，我们可用什么比较呢？可用什么比喻表明呢？
And he said, What picture may we give of the kingdom of God, or with what story may we make it clear?

好像一粒芥菜种，种在地里的时候，虽比地上的百种都小，
It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is put in the earth, is smaller than all the seeds on the earth,

但种上以后，就长起来，比各样的菜都大，又长出大枝来。甚至天上的飞鸟，可以宿在它的荫下。
But when it is planted, it comes up, and becomes taller than all the plants, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of heaven are able to take rest in its shade.

耶稣用许多这样的比喻，照他们所能听的，对他们讲道。
And with a number of such stories he gave them his teaching, as they were able to take it:

若不用比喻，就不对他们讲。没有人的时候，就把一切的道讲给门徒听。
And without a story he said nothing to them: but privately to his disciples he made all things clear.

当那天晚上，耶稣对门徒说，我们渡到那边去吧。
And on that day, when the evening had come, he said to them, Let us go over to the other side.

门徒离开众人，耶稣仍在船上，他们就把他一同带去。也有别的船和他同行。
And going away from the people, they took him with them, as he was, in the boat. And other boats were with him.

忽然起了暴风，波浪打入船内，甚至船要满了水。
And a great storm of wind came up, and the waves came into the boat, so that the boat was now becoming full.

耶稣在船尾上，枕着枕头睡觉。门徒叫醒了他，说，夫子，我们丧命，你不顾吗？
And he himself was in the back of the boat, sleeping on the cushion: and they, awaking him, said, Master, is it nothing to you that we are in danger of destruction?

耶稣醒了，斥责风，向海说，住了吧，静了吧。风就止住，大大地平静了。
And he came out of his sleep, and gave strong orders to the wind, and said to the sea, Peace, be at rest. And the wind went down, and there was a great calm.

耶稣对他们说，为什么胆怯。你们还没有信心吗？
And he said to them, Why are you full of fear? have you still no faith?

他们就大大地惧怕，彼此说，这到底是谁，连风和海也听从他了。
And their fear was great, and they said one to another, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea do his orders?

他们来到海那边，格拉森人的地方。
And they came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gerasenes.

耶稣一下船，就有一个被污鬼附着的人，从坟茔里出来迎着他。
And when he had got out of the boat, straight away there came to him from the place of the dead a man with an unclean spirit.

那人常住在坟茔里，没有人能捆住他，就是用铁链也不能。
He was living in the place of the dead: and no man was able to keep him down, no, not with a chain;

因为人屡次用脚镣和铁链捆锁他，铁链竟被他挣断了，脚镣也被他弄碎了。总没有人能制伏他。
Because he had frequently been prisoned in chains and iron bands, and the chains had been parted and the bands broken by him: and no man was strong enough to make him quiet.

他昼夜常在坟茔里和山中喊叫，又用石头砍自己。
And all the time, by day and by night, in the place of the dead, and in the mountains, he was crying out and cutting himself with stones.

他远远地看见耶稣，就跑过去拜他。
And when he saw Jesus from far off, he went quickly to him and gave him worship;

大声呼叫说，至高神的儿子耶稣，我与你有什么相干。我指着神恳求你，不要叫我受苦。
And crying out with a loud voice he said, What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? In God's name, do not be cruel to me.

是因耶稣曾吩咐他说，污鬼阿，从这人身上出来吧。
For Jesus had said to him, Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.

耶稣问他说，你名叫什么。回答说，我名叫群，因为我们多的缘故。
And Jesus said, What is your name? And he made answer, My name is Legion, because there are a great number of us.

就再三地求耶稣，不要叫他们离开那地方。
And he made strong prayers to him not to send them away out of the country.

在那里山坡上，有一大群猪吃食。
Now on the mountain side there was a great herd of pigs getting their food.

鬼就央求耶稣说，求你打发我们往猪群里附着猪去。
And they said to him, Send us into the pigs, so that we may go into them.

耶稣准了他们。污鬼就出来，进入猪里去。于是那群猪闯下山崖，投在海里，淹死了。猪的数目，约有二千。
And he let them do it. And the unclean spirits came out and went into the pigs; and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the sea, about two thousand of them; and they came to their death in the sea.

放猪的就逃跑了，去告诉城里和乡下的人。众人就来要看是什么事。
And their keepers went running and gave an account of it in the town and in the country. And people came to see what had taken place.

他们来到耶稣那里，看见那被鬼附着的人，就是从前被群鬼所附的，坐着，穿上衣服，心里明白过来。他们就害怕。
And they came to Jesus, and saw the man in whom had been the evil spirits seated, clothed and with full use of his senses, and they were full of fear.

看见这事的，便将鬼附之人所遇见的，和那群猪的事，都告诉了众人。
And those who had seen it gave them an account of what had been done to him who had the evil spirits, and of the fate of the pigs.

众人就央求耶稣离开他们的境界。
And they made a request to him to go out of their country.

耶稣上船的时候，那从前被鬼附着的人，恳求和耶稣同在。
And when he was getting into the boat, the man in whom had been the evil spirits had a great desire to come with him.

耶稣不许，却对他说，你回家去，到你的亲属那里，将主为你所作的，是何等大的事，是怎样怜悯你，都告诉他们。
And he would not let him, but said to him, Go to your house, to your friends, and give them news of the great things the Lord has done for you, and how he had mercy on you.

那人就走了，在低加波利，传扬耶稣为他作了何等大的事，众人就都希奇。
And he went on his way, and made public in the country of Decapolis what great things Jesus had done for him: and all men were full of wonder.

耶稣坐船又渡到那边去，就有许多人到他那里聚集。他正在海边上。
And when Jesus had gone over again in the boat to the other side, a great number of people came to him: and he was by the sea.

有一个管会堂的人，名叫睚鲁，来见耶稣，就俯伏在他脚前，
And one of the rulers of the Synagogue, Jairus by name, came, and seeing him, went down at his feet,

再三地求他说，我的小女儿快要死了，求你去按手在她身上，使她痊愈，得以活了。
And made strong prayers to him, saying, My little daughter is near to death: it is my prayer that you will come and put your hands on her, so that she may be made well, and have life.

耶稣就和他同去，有许多人跟随拥挤他。
And he went with him; and a great number of people went after him, and came round him.

有一个女人，患了十二年的血漏，
And a woman, who had had a flow of blood for twelve years,

在好些医生手里，受了许多的苦。又花尽了她所有的，一点也不见好，病势反倒更重了。
And had undergone much at the hands of a number of medical men, and had given all she had, and was no better, but even worse,

她听见耶稣的事，就从后头来，杂在众人中间，摸耶稣的衣裳。
When she had news of the things which Jesus did, went among the people coming after him, and put her hand on his robe.

意思说，我只摸他的衣裳，就必痊愈。
For she said, If I may only put my hand on his robe, I will be made well.

于是她血漏的源头，立刻干了。她便觉得身上的灾病好了。
And straight away the fountain of her blood was stopped, and she had a feeling in her body that her disease had gone and she was well.

耶稣顿时心里觉得有能力从自己身上出去，就在众人中间转过来说，谁摸我的衣裳。
And straight away Jesus was conscious that power had gone out of him; and, turning to the people, he said, Who was touching my robe?

门徒对他说，你看众人拥挤你，还说谁摸我吗？
And his disciples said to him, You see the people round you on every side, and you say, Who was touching me?

耶稣周围观看，要见作这事的女人。
And on his looking round to see her who had done this thing,

那女人知道在自己身上所成的事，就恐惧战兢，来俯伏在耶稣跟前，将实情全告诉他。
The woman, shaking with fear, conscious of what had been done to her, came and, falling on her face before him, gave him a true account of everything.

耶稣对她说，女儿，你的信救了你，平平安安地回去吧。你的灾病痊愈了。
And he said to her, Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace, and be free from your disease.

还说话的时候，有人从管会堂的家里来说，你的女儿死了，何必还劳动先生呢？
And while he was still talking, they came from the ruler of the Synagogue's house, saying, Your daughter is dead: why are you still troubling the Master?

耶稣听见所说的话，就对管会堂的说，不要怕。只要信。
But Jesus, giving no attention to their words, said to the ruler of the Synagogue, Have no fear, only have faith.

于是带着彼得，雅各，和雅各的兄弟约翰同去，不许别人跟随他。
And he did not let anyone come with him, but Peter and James and John, the brother of James.

他们来到管会堂的家里，耶稣看见那里乱嚷，并有人大大地哭泣哀号。
And they came to the house of the ruler of the Synagogue; and he saw people running this way and that, and weeping and crying loudly.

进到里面，就对他们说，为什么乱嚷哭泣呢？孩子不是死了，是睡着了。
And when he had gone in, he said to them, Why are you making such a noise and weeping? The child is not dead, but sleeping.

他们就嗤笑耶稣。耶稣把他们都撵出去，就带着孩子的父母，和跟随的人进了孩子所在的地方。
And they were laughing at him. But he, having sent them all out, took the father of the child and her mother and those who were with him, and went in where the child was.

就拉着孩子的手，对她说，大利大古米。翻出来，就是说，闺女，我吩咐你起来。
And taking her by the hand, he said to her, Talitha cumi, which is, My child, I say to you, Get up.

那闺女立时起来走。他们就大大地惊奇。闺女已经十二岁了。
And the young girl got up straight away, and was walking about; she being twelve years old. And they were overcome with wonder.

耶稣切切地嘱咐他们，不要叫人知道这事。又吩咐给她东西吃。
And he gave them special orders that they were not to say anything of this; and he said that some food was to be given to her.

耶稣离开那里，来到自己的家乡。门徒也跟从他。
And he went away from there, and came into his country; and his disciples went with him.

到了安息日，他在会堂里教训人。众人听见，就甚希奇，说，这人从哪里有这些事呢？所赐给他的是什么智慧？他手所作的是何等的异能呢？
And when the Sabbath day had come, he was teaching in the Synagogue; and a number of people hearing him were surprised, saying, From where did this man get these things? and, What is the wisdom given to this man, and what are these works of power done by his hands?

这不是那木匠吗？不是马利亚的儿子，雅各，约西，犹大，西门的长兄吗？他妹妹们不也是在我们这里吗？他们就厌弃他。（厌弃他原文作因他跌倒）
Is not this the woodworker, the son of Mary, and brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were bitter against him.

耶稣对他们说，大凡先知，除了本地亲属本家之外，没有不被人尊敬的。
And Jesus said to them, A prophet is nowhere without honour, but in his country, and among his relations, and in his family.

耶稣就在那里不得行什么异能，不过按手在几个病人身上，治好他们。
And he was unable to do any work of power there, but only to put his hands on one or two persons who were ill, and make them well.

他也诧异他们不信，就往周围乡村教训人去了。
And he was greatly surprised because they had no faith. And he went about the country places teaching.

耶稣叫了十二个门徒来，差遣他们两个两个的出去。也赐给他们权柄，制伏污鬼。
And he gave orders to the twelve, and sent them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits;

并且嘱咐他们，行路的时候，不要带食物和口袋，腰袋里也不要带钱，除了拐杖以外，什么都不要带。
And he said that they were to take nothing for their journey, but a stick only; no bread, no bag, no money in their pockets;

只要穿鞋。也不要穿两件挂子。
They were to go with common shoes on their feet, and not to take two coats.

又对他们说，你们无论到何处，进了人的家，就住在那里，直到离开那地方。
And he said to them, Wherever you go into a house, make that your resting-place till you go away.

何处的人，不接待你们，不听你们，你们离开那里的时候，就把脚上的尘土跺下去，对他们作见证。
And whatever place will not take you in and will not give ear to you, when you go away, put off the dust from your feet as a witness against them.

门徒就出去，传道叫人悔改。
And they went out, preaching the need for a change of heart in men.

又赶出许多的鬼，用油抹了许多病人，治好他们。
And they sent out a number of evil spirits, and put oil on a great number who were ill, and made them well.

耶稣的名声传扬出来。希律王听见了，就说，施洗的约翰从死里复活了，所以这些异能由他里面发出来。
And king Herod had news of him, because his name was on the lips of all; and he said, John the Baptist has come back from the dead, and for this reason these powers are working in him.

但别人说，是以利亚。又有人说，是先知，正像先知中的一位。
But others said, It is Elijah. And others said, It is a prophet, even like one of the prophets.

希律听见，却说，是我所斩的约翰，他复活了。
But Herod, when he had news of it, said, John, whom I put to death, has come back from the dead.

先是希律为他兄弟腓力的妻子希罗底的缘故，差人去拿住约翰，锁在监里，因为希律已经娶了那妇人。
For Herod himself had sent men out to take John and put him in prison, because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, whom he had taken for himself.

约翰曾对希律说，你娶你兄弟的妻子是不合理的。
For John said to Herod, It is wrong for you to have your brother's wife.

于是希罗底怀恨他，想要杀他。只是不能。
And Herodias was bitter against him, desiring to put him to death; but she was not able;

因为希律知道约翰是义人，是圣人，所以敬畏他，保护他。听他讲论，就多照着行。并且乐意听他。（多照着行有古卷作游移不定）
For Herod was in fear of John, being conscious that he was an upright and holy man, and kept him safe. And hearing him, he was much troubled; and he gave ear to him gladly.

有一天，恰巧是希律的生日，希律摆设筵席，请了大臣和千夫长，并加利利作首领的。
And the chance came when Herod on his birthday gave a feast to his lords, and the high captains, and the chief men of Galilee;

希罗底的女儿进来跳舞，使希律和同席的人都欢喜。王就对女子说，你随意向我求什么，我必给你。
And when the daughter of Herodias herself came in and did a dance, Herod and those who were at table with him were pleased with her; and the king said to the girl, Make a request for anything and I will give it you.

又对她起誓说，随你向我求什么，就是我国的一半，我也必给你。
And he took an oath, saying to her, Whatever is your desire I will give it to you, even half of my kingdom.

她就出去，对她母亲说，我可以求什么呢？她母亲说，施洗约翰的头。
And she went out and said to her mother, What is my request to be? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.

她就急忙进去见王，求他说，我愿王立时把施洗约翰的头，放在盘子里给我。
And she came in quickly to the king, and said, My desire is that you give me straight away on a plate the head of John the Baptist.

王就甚忧愁。但因他所起的誓，又因同席的人，就不肯推辞。
And the king was very sad; but because of his oaths, and those who were with him at table, he would not say 'No' to her.

随即差一个护卫兵，吩咐拿约翰的头来。护卫兵就去在监里斩了约翰，
And straight away the king sent out one of his armed men, and gave him an order to come back with the head: and he went and took off John's head in prison,

把头放在盘子里，拿来给女子，女子就给她母亲。
And came back with the head on a plate, and gave it to the girl; and the girl gave it to her mother.

约翰的门徒听见了，就来把他的尸首领去，葬在坟墓里。
And when his disciples had news of it, they came and took up his body, and put it in its last resting-place.

使徒聚集到耶稣那里，将一切所作的事，所传的道，全告诉他。
And the twelve came together to Jesus; and they gave him an account of all the things they had done, and all they had been teaching.

他就说，你们来同我暗暗地到旷野地方去歇一歇。这是因为来往的人多，他们连吃饭也没有工夫。
And he said to them, Come away by yourselves to a quiet place, and take a rest for a time. Because there were a great number coming and going, and they had no time even for food.

他们就坐船，暗暗地往旷野地方去。
And they went away in the boat to a waste place by themselves.

众人看见他们去，有许多认识他们的，就从各城步行，一同跑到那里，比他们先赶到了。
And the people saw them going, and a number of them, having knowledge who they were, went running there together on foot from all the towns, and got there before them.

耶稣出来，见有许多的人，就怜悯他们。因为他们如同羊没有牧人一般。于是开口教训他们许多道理。
And he got out, and saw a great mass of people, and he had pity on them, because they were like sheep without a keeper: and he gave them teaching about a number of things.

天已经晚了，门徒进前来说，这是野地，天已经晚了，
And at the end of the day, his disciples came to him and said, This place is waste land, and it is late:

请叫众人散开，他们好往四面乡村里去，自己买什么吃。
Send them away, so that they may go into the country and small towns round about, and get some food for themselves.

耶稣回答说，你们给他们吃吧。门徒说，我们可以去买二十两银子的饼，给他们吃吗？
But he said to them in answer, Give them food yourselves. And they said to him, Are we to go and get bread for two hundred pence, and give it to them?

耶稣说，你们有多少饼，可以去看看。他们知道了，就说，五个饼，两条鱼。
And he said to them, How much bread have you? go and see. And when they had seen, they said, Five cakes of bread and two fishes.

耶稣吩咐他们叫众人一帮一帮地坐在青草地上。
And he made them all be seated in groups on the green grass.

众人就一排一排地坐下，有一百一排的，有五十一排的。
And they were placed in groups, by hundreds and by fifties.

耶稣拿着这五个饼，两条鱼，望着天祝福，掰开饼，递给门徒摆在众人面前。也把那两条鱼分给众人。
And he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing over them; and when the cakes were broken, he gave them to the disciples to put before the people; and he made division of the two fishes among them all.

他们都吃，并且吃饱了。
And they all took of the food and had enough.

门徒就把碎饼碎鱼，收拾起来，装满了十二个篮子。
And they took up twelve baskets full of the broken bits and of the fishes.

吃饼的男人，共有五千。
And those who took of the bread were five thousand men.

耶稣随即催门徒上船，先渡到那边伯赛大去，等他叫众人散开。
And straight away he made his disciples get into the boat, and go before him to the other side to Beth-saida, while he himself sent the people away.

他既辞别了他们，就往山上去祷告。
And after he had sent them away, he went up into a mountain for prayer.

到了晚上，船在海中，耶稣独自在岸上。
And by evening, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he by himself on the land.

看见门徒，因风不顺，摇橹甚苦。夜里约有四更天，就在海面上走往他们那里去，意思要走过他们去。
And seeing that they had trouble in getting their boat through the water, because the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea; and he would have gone past them;

但门徒看见他在海面上走，以为是鬼怪，就喊叫起来。
But they, when they saw him walking on the sea, took him for a spirit, and gave a loud cry:

因为他们都看见了他，且甚惊慌。耶稣连忙对他们说，你们放心。是我，不要怕。
For they all saw him, and were troubled. But straight away he said to them, Take heart, it is I, have no fear.

于是到他们那里上了船，风就住了。他们心里十分惊奇。
And he went to them into the boat, and the wind went down, and they were full of wonder in themselves;

这是因为他们不明白那分饼的事，心里还是愚顽。
For it was not clear to them about the bread; but their hearts were hard.

既渡过去，来到革尼撒勒地方，就靠了岸。
And when they had gone across, they came to Gennesaret, and got their boat to land.

一下船，众人认得是耶稣。
And when they had got out of the boat, the people quickly had news of him,

就跑遍那一带地方，听见他在何处，便将有病的人，用褥子抬到那里。
And went running through all the country round about, and took on their beds those who were ill, to where it was said that he was.

凡耶稣所到的地方，或村中，或城里，或乡间，他们都将病人放在街市上，求耶稣只容他们摸他的衣裳？？子。凡摸着的人，就都好了。
And wherever he went, into small towns, or great towns, or into the country, they took those who were ill into the market-places, requesting him that they might put their hands even on the edge of his robe: and all those who did so were made well.

有法利赛人，和几个文士，从耶路撒冷来，到耶稣那里聚集。
And there came together to him the Pharisees and certain of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem,

他们曾看见他的门徒中，有人用俗手，就是没有洗的手，吃饭。
And had seen that some of his disciples took their bread with unclean, that is, unwashed, hands.

（原来法利赛人，和犹太人，都拘守古人的遗传，若不仔细洗手，就不吃饭。
Now the Pharisees, and all the Jews, do not take food without washing their hands with care, keeping the old rule which has been handed down to them:

从市上来，若不洗浴，也不吃饭，还有好些别的规矩，他们历代拘守，就是洗杯，罐，铜器，等物）。
And when they come from the market-place, they take no food till their hands are washed; and a number of other orders there are, which have been handed down to them to keep--washings of cups and pots and brass vessels.

法利赛人和文士问他说，你的门徒为什么不照古人的遗传，用俗手吃饭呢？
And the Pharisees and the scribes put the question to him, Why do your disciples not keep the rules of the fathers, but take their bread with unwashed hands?

耶稣说，以赛亚指着你们假冒为善之人所说的预言，是不错的，如经上说，这百姓用嘴唇尊敬我，心却远离我。
And he said, Well did Isaiah say of you, you false ones: These people give me honour with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

他们将人的吩咐，当作道理教导人，所以拜我也是枉然。
But their worship is to no purpose, while they give as their teaching the rules of men.

你们是离弃神的诫命，拘守人的遗传。
For, turning away from the law of God, you keep the rules of men.

又说，你们诚然是废弃神的诫命，要守自己的遗传。
And he said to them, Truly you put on one side the law of God, so that you may keep the rules which have been handed down to you.

摩西说，当孝敬父母。又说，咒骂父母的，必治死他。
For Moses said, Give honour to your father and mother, and, He who says evil of father or mother, let him have the punishment of death:

你们倒说，人若对父母说，我所当奉给你的，已经作了各耳板，（各耳板，就是供献的意思）
But you say, If a man says to his father or his mother, That by which you might have had profit from me is Corban, that is to say, Given to God,

以后你们就不容他再奉养父母。
You no longer let him do anything for his father or his mother;

这就是你们承接遗传，废了神的道。你们还作许多这样的事。
Making the word of God of no effect by your rule, which you have given: and a number of other such things you do.

耶稣又叫众人来，对他们说，你们都要听我的话，也要明白。
And turning to the people again, he said to them, Give ear to me all of you, and let my words be clear to you:

从外面进去的，不能污秽人，惟有从里面出来的，乃能污秽人。（有古卷在此有，
There is nothing outside the man which, going into him, is able to make him unclean: but the things which come out of the man are those which make the man unclean.

有耳可听的就应当听）。
[]

耶稣离开众人，进了屋子，门徒就问他这比喻的意思。
And when he had gone into the house away from all the people, his disciples put questions to him about the saying.

耶稣对他们说，你们也是这样不明白吗？岂不晓得凡从外面进入的，不能污秽人。
And he said to them, Have even you so little wisdom? Do you not see that whatever goes into a man from outside is not able to make him unclean,

因为不是入他的心，乃是入他的肚腹，又落到茅厕里。这是说，各样的食物，都是洁净的。
Because it goes not into the heart but into the stomach, and goes out with the waste? He said this, making all food clean.

又说，从人里面出来的，那才能污秽人。
And he said, That which comes out of the man, that makes the man unclean.

因为从里面，就是从人心里，发出恶念，苟合，
Because from inside, from the heart of men, come evil thoughts and unclean pleasures,

偷盗，凶杀，奸淫，贪婪，邪恶，诡诈，淫荡，嫉妒，谤？？，骄傲，狂妄。
The taking of goods and of life, broken faith between husband and wife, the desire of wealth, wrongdoing, deceit, sins of the flesh, an evil eye, angry words, pride, foolish acts:

这一切的恶，都是从里面出来，且能污秽人。
All these evil things come from inside, and make the man unclean.

耶稣从那里起身，往推罗西顿的境内去。进了一家，不愿意人知道，却隐藏不住。
And he went away from there to the country of Tyre and Sidon. And he went into a house, desiring that no man might have knowledge of it: and he was not able to keep it secret.

当下有一个妇人，她的小女儿被污鬼附着，听见耶稣的事，就来俯伏在他脚前。
But a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having had news of him, came straight away and went down at his feet.

这妇人是希利尼人，属叙利非尼基族。她求耶稣赶出那鬼，离开她的女儿。
Now the woman was a Greek, a Syro-phoenician by birth: and she made a request to him that he would send the evil spirit out of her daughter.

耶稣对她说，让儿女们先吃饱。不好拿儿女的饼丢给狗吃。
And he said to her, Let the children first have their food: for it is not right to take the children's bread and give it to the dogs.

妇人回答说，主阿，不错。但是狗在桌子底下，也吃孩子们的碎渣儿。
But she said to him in answer, Yes, Lord: even the dogs under the table take the bits dropped by the children.

耶稣对她说，因这句话，你回去吧。鬼已经离开你的女儿了。
And he said to her, For this saying go your way; the evil spirit has gone out of your daughter.

她就回家去，见小孩子躺在床上，鬼已经出去了。
And she went away to her house, and saw the child on the bed, and the evil spirit gone out.

耶稣又离了推罗的境界，经过西顿，就从低加波利境内来到加利利海。
And again he went out from Tyre, and came through Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the country of Decapolis.

有人带着一个耳聋舌结的人，来见耶稣，求他按手在他身上。
And they came to him with one who had no power of hearing and had trouble in talking; and they made a request to him to put his hands on him.

耶稣领他离开众人，到一边去，就用指头探他的耳朵，吐唾沫抹他的舌头，
And he took him on one side from the people privately, and put his fingers into his ears, and he put water from his mouth on the man's tongue with his finger;

望天叹息，对他说，以法大，就是说，开了吧。
And looking up to heaven, he took a deep breath, and said to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be open.

他的耳朵就开了，舌结也解了，说话也清楚了。
And his ears became open, and the band of his tongue was made loose, and his words became clear.

耶稣嘱咐他们，不要告诉人。但他越发嘱咐，他们越发传扬开了。
And he gave them orders not to give news of it to anyone; but the more he made this request, so much the more they made it public.

众人分外希奇，说，他所作的事都好，他连聋子也叫他们听见，哑吧也叫他们说话。
And they were overcome with wonder, saying, He has done all things well: he even gives back the power of hearing and the power of talking to those who have been without them.

那时，又有许多人聚集，并没有什么吃的。耶稣叫门徒来，说，
In those days again, when there was a great mass of people and they had no food, he made his disciples come to him and said to them,

我怜悯这众人，因为他们同我在这里已经三天，也没有吃的了。
I have pity for these people because they have been with me now three days, and have no food;

我若打发他们饿着回家，就必在路上困乏。因为其中有从远处来的。
If I send them away to their houses with no food, they will be overcome by weariness on the way; and some of them have come from far.

门徒回答说，在这野地，从哪里能得饼，叫这些人吃饱呢？
And his disciples said in answer, How will it be possible to get enough bread for these men here in a waste place?

耶稣问他们说，你们有多少饼？他们说，七个。
And he put the question, How much bread have you? And they said, Seven cakes.

他吩咐众人坐在地上，就拿着这七个饼，祝谢了，掰开递给门徒叫他们摆开，门徒就摆在众人面前。
And he made the people be seated on the earth: and he took the seven cakes and, having given praise, he gave the broken bread to his disciples to put before them; and they put it before the people.

又有几条小鱼。耶稣祝了福，就吩咐也摆在众人面前。
And they had some small fishes; and blessing them he had them put before the people in the same way.

众人都吃，并且吃饱了。收拾剩下的零碎，有七筐子。
And they took the food, and had enough; and they took up seven baskets full of the broken bits.

人数约有四千。耶稣打发他们走了，
And there were about four thousand people: and he sent them away.

随即同门徒上船，来到大玛努他境内。
And he got into the boat with his disciples straight away, and came into the country of Dalmanutha.

法利赛人出来盘问耶稣，求他从天上显个神迹给他们看，想要试探他。
And the Pharisees came out and put questions to him, requesting from him a sign from heaven, testing him.

耶稣心里深深地叹息说，这世代为什么求神迹呢？我实在告诉你们，没有神迹给这世代看。
And he was very sad in spirit, and said, Why is this generation looking for a sign? truly, I say to you, No sign will be given to this generation.

他就离开他们，又上船往海那边去了。
And he went away from them, and again got into the boat and went across to the other side.

门徒忘了带饼。在船上除了一个饼，没有别的食物。
And they had taken no thought to get bread; and they had only one cake of bread with them in the boat.

耶稣嘱咐他们说，你们要谨慎，防备法利赛人的酵，和希律的酵。
And he said to them, Take care to be on the watch against the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.

他们彼此议论说，这是因为我们没有饼吧。
And they said to one another, We have no bread.

耶稣看出来，就说，你们为什么因为没有饼就议论呢？你们还不省悟，还不明白吗？你们的心还是愚顽吗？
And Jesus, hearing it, said to them, Why are you reasoning among yourselves because you have no bread? do you still not see, and is it still not clear to you? are your hearts so hard?

你们有眼睛看不见吗？有耳朵，听不见吗？也不记得吗？
Having eyes, do you not see? and having ears, have you no hearing? and have you no memory?

我掰开那五个饼分给五千人，你们收拾的零碎，装满了多少篮子呢？他们说，十二个。
When I made a division of the five cakes of bread among the five thousand, what number of baskets full of broken bits did you take up? They said to him, Twelve.

又掰开那七个饼分给四千人，你们收拾的零碎，装满了多少筐子呢？他们说，七个。
And when the seven among the four thousand, what number of baskets full of broken bits did you take up? And they said to him, Seven.

耶稣说，你们还是不明白吗？
And he said to them, Is it still not clear to you?

他们来到伯赛大，有人带一个瞎子来，求耶稣摸他。
And they came to Beth-saida. And they took a blind man to him, requesting him to put his hands on him.

耶稣拉着瞎子的手，领他到村外。就吐唾沫在他眼睛上，按手在他身上，问他说，你看见什么了。
And he took the blind man by the hand, and went with him out of the town; and when he had put water from his mouth on his eyes, and put his hands on him, he said, Do you see anything?

他就抬头一看说，我看见人了。他们好像树木，并且行走。
And looking up, he said, I see men; I see them like trees, walking.

随后又按手在他眼睛上，他定睛一看，就复了原，样样都看得清楚了。
Then again he put his hands on his eyes; and looking hard, he was able to see, and saw all things clearly.

耶稣打发他回家，说，连这村子你也不要进去。
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Do not even go into the town.

耶稣和门徒出去，往该撒利亚腓立比的村庄去。在路上问门徒说，人说我是谁。
And Jesus went out, with his disciples, into the little towns round Caesarea Philippi; and on the way he put a question to his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I am?

他们说，有人说，是施洗的约翰。有人说，是以利亚。又有人说，是先知里的一位。
And they made answer, John the Baptist; and others, Elijah; but others, One of the prophets.

又问他们说，你们说我是谁。彼得回答说，你是基督。
And he said to them, But who do you say I am? Peter said in answer, You are the Christ.

耶稣就禁戒他们，不要告诉人。
And he put them under orders not to say this of him to anyone.

从此他教训他们说，人子必须受许多的苦，被长老祭司长和文士弃绝，并且被杀，过三天复活。
And teaching them, he said that the Son of man would have to undergo much, and be hated by those in authority, and the chief priests, and the scribes, and be put to death, and after three days come back from the dead.

耶稣明明地说这话，彼得就拉着他，劝他。
And he said this openly. And Peter took him, and was protesting.

耶稣转过来，看着门徒，就责备彼得说，撒但，退我后边去吧。因为你不体贴神的意思，只体贴人的意思。
But he, turning about, and seeing his disciples, said sharply to Peter, Get out of my way, Satan: for your mind is not on the things of God, but on the things of men.

于是叫众人和门徒来，对他们说，若有人要跟从我，就当舍己，背起他的十字架来跟从我。
And turning to the mass of people with his disciples, he said to them, If any man has the desire to come after me, let him give up all other desires, and take up his cross and come after me.

因为凡要救自己生命的，（生命或作灵魂下同）必丧掉生命。凡为我和福音丧掉生命的，必救了生命。
Whoever has a desire to keep his life, will have it taken from him; and whoever gives up his life because of me and the good news, will keep it.

人就是赚得全世界，赔上自己的生命，有什么益处呢？
What profit has a man if he gets all the world with the loss of his life?

人还能拿什么换生命呢？
And what would a man give in exchange for his life?

凡在这淫乱罪恶的世代，把我和我的道当作可耻的，人子在他父的荣耀里，同圣天使降临的时候，也要把那人当作可耻的。
Whoever has a feeling of shame because of me and my words in this false and evil generation, the Son of man will have a feeling of shame because of him, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.

耶稣又对他们说，我实在告诉你们，站在这里的，有人在没尝死味以前，必要看见神的国大有能力临到。
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, There are some here who will have no taste of death till they see the kingdom of God come with power.

过了六天，耶稣带着彼得，雅各，约翰，暗暗地上了高山，就在他们面前变了形像。
And after six days Jesus took with him Peter and James and John, and made them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves: and he was changed in form before them:

衣服放光，极其洁白。地上漂布的，没有一个能漂得那样白。
And his clothing became shining, very white, as no cleaner on earth would make it.

忽然有以利亚同摩西向他们显现。并且和耶稣说话。
And there came before them Elijah with Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.

彼得对耶稣说，拉比，（拉比就是夫子）我们在这里真好。可以搭三座棚，一座为你，一座为摩西，一座为以利亚。
And Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tents; one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

彼得不知道说什么才好。因为他们甚是惧怕，
Because he was not certain what to say, for they were in great fear.

有一朵云彩来遮盖他们。也有声音从云彩里出来说，这是我的爱子，你们要听他。
And a cloud came over them; and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, give ear to him.

门徒忽然周围一看，不再见一人，只见耶稣同他们在那里。
And suddenly looking round about, they saw no one any longer, but Jesus only with themselves.

下山的时候，耶稣嘱咐他们说，人子还没有从死里复活，你们不要将所看见的告诉人。
And while they were coming down from the mountain, he gave them orders not to give word to any man of the things they had seen, till the Son of man had come back from the dead.

门徒将这话存记在心，彼此议论从死里复活是什么意思。
And they kept the saying, questioning among themselves what the coming back from the dead might be.

他们就问耶稣说，文士为什么说，以利亚必须先来。
And they put a question to him, saying, Why do the scribes say that Elijah has to come first?

耶稣说，以利亚固然先来，复兴万事。经上不是指着人子说，他要受许多的苦，被人轻慢呢？
And he said to them, Truly, Elijah does come first, and puts all things in order; and how is it said in the Writings that the Son of man will go through much sorrow and be made as nothing?

我告诉你们，以利亚已经来了，他们也任意待他，正如经上所指着他的话。
But I say to you that Elijah has come, and they have done to him whatever they were pleased to do, even as the Writings say about him.

耶稣到了门徒那里，看见有许多人围着他们，又有文士和他们辩论。
And when they came to the disciples, they saw a great mass of people about them, and scribes questioning them.

众人一见耶稣，都甚希奇，就跑上去问他的安。
And straight away all the people, when they saw him, were full of wonder, and running to him, gave him worship.

耶稣问他们说，你们和他们辩论的是什么。
And he said, What are you questioning them about?

众人中间有一个人回答说，夫子，我带了我的儿子到你这里来，他被哑巴鬼附着。
And one of the number said to him in answer, Master, I came to you with my son, who has in him a spirit which takes away his power of talking;

无论在哪里，鬼捉弄他，把他摔倒，他就口中流沫，咬牙切齿，身体枯干，我请过你的门徒把鬼赶出去，他们却是不能。
And wherever it takes him, it puts him down violently, streaming at the lips and twisted with pain; and his strength goes from him; and I made a request to your disciples to send it out, and they were not able.

耶稣说，嗳，不信的世代阿，我在你们这里要到几时呢？我忍耐你们要到几时呢？把他带到我这里来吧。
And he said to them in answer, O generation without faith, how long will I have to be with you? how long will I put up with you? let him come to me.

他们就带了他来。他一见耶稣，鬼便叫他重重地抽疯。倒在地上，翻来覆去，口中流沫。
And they took him to him: and when he saw him, the spirit in him straight away became violent; and he went down on the earth, rolling about and streaming at the lips.

耶稣问他父亲说，他得这病，有多少日子呢？回答说，从小的时候。
And Jesus questioning the father said, How long has he been like this? And he said, From a child.

鬼屡次把他扔在火里，水里，要灭他。你若能作什么，求你怜悯我们，帮助我们。
And frequently it has sent him into the fire and into the water, for his destruction; but if you are able to do anything, have pity on us, and give us help.

耶稣对他说，你若能信，在信的人，凡事都能。
And Jesus said to him, If you are able! All things are possible to him who has faith.

孩子的父亲立时喊着说，我信。但我信不足，求主帮助。（有古卷作立时流泪地喊着说）
Straight away the father of the child gave a cry, saying, I have faith; make my feeble faith stronger.

耶稣看见众人都跑上来，就斥责那污鬼，说，你这聋哑的鬼，我吩咐你从他里头出来，再不要进去。
And when Jesus saw that the people came running together, he gave orders to the unclean spirit, saying to him, You, spirit, who are the cause of his loss of voice and hearing, I say to you, come out of him, and never again go into him.

那鬼喊叫，使孩子大大地抽了一阵疯，就出来了。孩子好像死了一般，以致众人多半说，他是死了。
And after crying out and shaking him violently, it came out: and the child became like one dead; so that most of them said, He is dead.

但耶稣拉着他的手，扶他起来，他就站起来了。
But Jesus took him by the hand, lifting him up; and he got up.

耶稣进了屋子，门徒就暗暗地问他说，我们为什么不能赶出他去呢？
And when he had gone into the house, his disciples said to him privately, Why were we unable to send it out?

耶稣说，非用祷告，（有古卷在此有禁食二字）这一类的鬼，总不能出来。（或作不能赶他出来）
And he said to them, Nothing will make this sort come out but prayer.

他们离开那地方，经过加利利。耶稣不愿意人知道。
And they went out from there, through Galilee; and it was his desire that no man might have knowledge of it;

于是教训门徒，说，人子将要被交在人手里，他们要杀害他。被杀以后，过三天他要复活。
For he was giving his disciples teaching, and saying to them, The Son of man is given up into the hands of men, and they will put him to death; and when he is dead, after three days he will come back from the dead.

门徒却不明白这话，又不敢问他。
But the saying was not clear to them, and they were in fear of questioning him about it.

他们来到迦百农。耶稣在屋里问门徒说，你们在路上议论的是什么。
And they came to Capernaum: and when he was in the house, he put the question to them, What were you talking about on the way?

门徒不作声，因为他们在路上彼此争论谁为大。
But they said nothing: because they had had an argument between themselves on the way, about who was the greatest.

耶稣坐下，叫十二个门徒来，说，若有人愿意作首先的，他必作众人末后的，作众人的用人。
And seating himself, he made the twelve come to him; and he said to them, If any man has the desire to be first, he will be last of all and servant of all.

于是领过一个小孩子来，叫他站在门徒中间。又抱起他来，对他们说，
And he took a little child, and put him in the middle of them; and taking him in his arms, he said to them,

凡为我名，接待一个像这小孩子的就是接待我。凡接待我的，不是接待我，乃是接待那差我来的。
Whoever will give honour to one such little child in my name, gives honour to me: and whoever gives honour to me, gives honour not to me, but to him who sent me.

约翰对耶稣说，夫子，我们看见一个人，奉你的名赶鬼，我们就禁止他，因为他不跟从我们。
John said to him, Master, we saw one driving out evil spirits in your name: and we said that he might not, because he is not one of us.

耶稣说，不要禁止他。因为没有人奉我名行异能，反倒轻易毁谤我。
But Jesus said, Say not so: for there is no man who will do a great work in my name, and be able at the same time to say evil of me.

不敌挡我们的，就是帮助我们的。
He who is not against us is for us.

凡因你们是属基督，给你们一杯水喝的，我实在告诉你们，他不能不得赏赐。
Whoever gives you a cup of water, because you are Christ's, truly I say to you, he will in no way be without his reward.

凡使这信我的一个小子跌倒的，倒不如把大磨石拴在这人的颈项上，扔在海里。
And whoever is a cause of trouble to one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him if a great stone was put round his neck and he was dropped into the sea.

倘若你一只手叫你跌倒，就把它砍下来。
And if your hand is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off; it is better for you to go into life with one hand than to have two hands and go into hell, into the eternal fire.

你缺了肢体进入永生，强如有两只手落到地狱，入那不灭的火里去。
[]

倘若你一只脚叫你跌倒，就把它砍下来。
And if your foot is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off: it is better for you to go into life with one foot than to have two feet and go into hell.

你瘸腿进入永生，强如有两只脚被丢在地狱里。
[]

倘若你一只眼叫你跌倒，就去掉它。你只有一只眼进入神的国，强如有两只眼被丢在地狱里。
And if your eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out: it is better for you to go into the kingdom of God with one eye than, having two eyes, to go into hell,

在那里虫是不死的，火是不灭的。
Where their worm is ever living and the fire is not put out.

因为必用火当盐，腌各人。（有古卷在此有凡祭物必用盐腌）
Everyone will be salted with fire.

盐本是好的，若失了味，可用什么叫它再咸呢？你们里头应当有盐，彼此和睦。
Salt is good; but if the taste goes from it, how will you make it salt again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another.

耶稣从那里起身，来到犹太的境界，并约但河外。众人又聚集到他那里，他又照常教训他们。
And he got up, and went into the country of Judaea on the other side of Jordan: and great numbers of people came together to him again; and, as was his way, he gave them teaching.

有法利赛人来问他说，人休妻可以不可以，意思要试探他。
And Pharisees came to him, testing him with the question, Is it right for a man to put away his wife?

耶稣回答说，摩西吩咐你们的是什么。
And he said to them in answer, What did Moses say you were to do?

他们说，摩西许人写了休书便可以休妻。
And they said to him, Moses let us give her a statement in writing, and be free from her.

耶稣说，摩西因为你们的心硬，所以写这条例给你们。
But Jesus said to them, Because of your hard hearts he gave you this law.

但从起初创造的时候，神造人是造男造女。
But from the first, male and female made he them.

因此人要离开父母，与妻子连合，二人成为一体。
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother, and be joined to his wife;

既然如此，夫妻不再是两个人，乃是一体的了。
And the two will become one flesh; so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.

所以神配合的，人不可分开。
Let not that which has been joined together by God be parted by man.

到了屋里，门徒就问他这事。
And in the house the disciples put questions to him again about this thing.

耶稣对他们说，凡休妻另娶的，就是犯奸淫，辜负他的妻子。
And he said to them, Whoever puts away his wife and takes another, is false to his wife;

妻子若离弃丈夫另嫁，也是犯奸淫了。
And if she herself puts away her husband and takes another, she is false to her husband.

有人带着小孩子来见耶稣，要耶稣摸他们，门徒便责备那些人。
And they took to him little children, so that he might put his hands on them: and the disciples said sharp words to them.

耶稣看见就恼怒，对门徒说，让小孩子到我这里来，不要禁止他们。因为在神国的，正是这样的人。
And when Jesus saw it, he was angry, and said to them, Let the little children come to me, and do not keep them away; for of such is the kingdom of God.

我实在告诉你们，凡要承受神国的，若不像小孩子，断不能进去。
Truly I say to you, Whoever does not put himself under the kingdom of God like a little child, will not come into it at all.

于是抱着小孩子，给他们按手，为他们祝福。
And he took them in his arms, and gave them a blessing, putting his hands on them.

耶稣出来行路的时候，有一个人跑来，跪在他面前问他说，良善的夫子，我当作什么事，才可以承受永生。
And while he was going out into the way, a man came running to him, and went down on his knees, saying, Good Master, what have I to do so that I may have eternal life?

耶稣对他说，你为什么称我是良善的。除了神一位之外，再没有良善的。
And Jesus said to him, Why do you say I am good? no one is good but one, and that is God.

诫命你是晓得的，不可杀人，不可奸淫，不可偷盗，不可作假见证，不可亏负人，当孝敬父母。
You have knowledge of what is said in the law, Do not put any one to death, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness, Do not get money by deceit, Give honour to your father and mother.

他对耶稣说，夫子，这一切我从小都遵守了。
And he said to him, Master, all these laws I have kept from the time when I was young.

耶稣看着他，就爱他，对他说，你还缺少一件。去变卖你所有的，分给穷人，就必有财宝在天上。你还要来跟从我。
And Jesus, looking on him and loving him, said, There is one thing needed: go, get money for your goods, and give it to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven: and come with me.

他听见这话，脸上就变了色，忧忧愁愁地走了。因为他的产业很多。
But his face became sad at the saying, and he went away sorrowing: for he was one who had much property.

耶稣周围一看，对门徒说，有钱财的人进神的国是何等的难哪。
And Jesus, looking round about, said to his disciples, How hard it is for those who have wealth to come into the kingdom of God!

门徒希奇他的话。耶稣又对他们说，小子，倚靠钱财的人进神的国，是何等的难哪。
And the disciples were full of wonder at his words. But Jesus said to them again, Children, how hard it is for those who put faith in wealth to come into the kingdom of God!

骆驼穿过针的眼，比财主进神的国，还容易呢。
It is simpler for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a man of wealth to come into the kingdom of God.

门徒就分外希奇，对他说，这样谁能得救呢？
And they were greatly surprised, saying to him, Who then may have salvation?

耶稣看着他们说，在人是不能，在神却不然。因为神凡事都能。
Jesus, looking on them, said, With men it is impossible, but not with God: for all things are possible with God.

彼得就对他说，看哪，我们已经撇下所有的跟从你了。
Peter said to him, See, we have given up everything, and come after you.

耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，人为我和福音，撇下房屋，或是弟兄，姐妹，父母，儿女，田地。
Jesus said, Truly I say to you, There is no man who has given up house, or brothers, or sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or land, because of me and the good news,

没有不在今世得百倍的，就是房屋，弟兄，姐妹，母亲，儿女，田地，并且要受逼迫。在来世必得永生。
Who will not get a hundred times as much now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and land--though with great troubles; and, in the world to come, eternal life.

然而有许多在前的将要在后，在后的将要在前。
But a great number who are first will be last: and those who are last will be first.

他们行路上耶路撒冷去。耶稣在前头走，门徒就希奇，跟从的人也害怕。耶稣又叫过十二个门徒来，把自己将要遭遇的事，告诉他们说，
And they were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going before them: and they were full of wonder; but those who came after him were in fear. And again he took the twelve, and gave them word of the things which were to come on him,

看哪，我们上耶路撒冷去，人子将要被交给祭司长和文士，他们要定他死罪，交给外邦人。
Saying, See, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be given up to the chief priests and the scribes; and they will give an order for his death, and will give him up to the Gentiles:

他们要戏弄他，吐唾沫在他脸上，鞭打他，杀害他。过了三天，他要复活。
And they will make sport of him, and put shame on him, and give him cruel blows, and will put him to death; and after three days he will come back from the dead.

西庇太的儿子雅各，约翰进前来，对耶稣说，夫子，我们无论求你什么，愿你给我们作。
And there came to him James and John, the sons of Zebedee, saying to him, Master, will you give us whatever may be our request?

耶稣说，要我给你们作什么。
And he said to them, What would you have me do for you?

他们说，赐我们在你的荣耀里，一个坐在你右边，一个坐在你左边。
And they said to him, Let us be seated, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.

耶稣说，你们不知道所求的是什么。我所喝的杯。你们能喝吗？我所受的洗，你们能受吗？
But Jesus said to them, You have no knowledge of what you are saying. Are you able to take of my cup? or to undergo the baptism which I am to undergo?

他们说，我们能。耶稣说，我所喝的杯，你们也要喝。我所受的洗，你们也要受。
And they said to him, We are able. And Jesus said to them, You will take of the cup from which I take; and the baptism which I am about to undergo you will undergo:

只是坐在我的左右，不是我可以赐的。乃是为谁预备的，就赐给谁。
But to be seated at my right hand or at my left is not for me to give: but it is for those for whom it has been made ready.

那十个门徒听见，就恼怒雅各，约翰。
And hearing this, the ten became very angry with James and John.

耶稣叫他们来，对他们说，你们知道，外邦人有尊为君王的，治理他们。有大臣操权管束他们。
And Jesus made them come to him, and said to them, You see that those who are made rulers over the Gentiles are lords over them, and their great ones have authority over them.

只是在你们中间，不是这样。你们中间，谁愿为大，就必作你们的用人。
But it is not so among you: but whoever has a desire to become great among you, let him be your servant:

在你们中间，谁愿为首，就必作众人的仆人。
And whoever has a desire to be first among you, let him be servant of all.

因为人子来，并不是要受人的服事，乃是要服事人，并且要舍命，作多人的赎价。
For truly the Son of man did not come to have servants, but to be a servant, and to give his life for the salvation of men.

到了耶利哥。耶稣同门徒并许多人出耶利哥的时候，有一个讨饭的瞎子，是底买的儿子巴底买，坐在路旁。
And they came to Jericho: and when he was going out of Jericho, with his disciples and a great number of people, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind man, was seated by the wayside, with his hand out for money.

他听见是拿撒勒的耶稣，就喊着说，大卫的子孙耶稣阿，可怜我吧。
And when it came to his ears that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he gave a cry, and said, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me.

有许多人责备他，不许他作声，他却越发大声喊着说，大卫的子孙哪，可怜我吧。
And some of them, turning in protest, gave him an order to be quiet: but he went on crying out all the more, Son of David, have mercy on me.

耶稣就站住，说，叫过他来。他们就叫那瞎子，对他说，放心，起来，他叫你啦。
And Jesus came to a stop and said, Let him come. And crying out to the blind man, they said to him, Be comforted: come, he has sent for you.

瞎子就丢下衣服，跳起来，走到耶稣那里。
And he, putting off his coat, got up quickly, and came to Jesus.

耶稣说，要我为你作什么。瞎子说，拉波尼，我要能看见。（拉波尼就是夫子）
And Jesus said to him, What would you have me do to you? And the blind man said, Master, make me able to see.

耶稣说，你去吧。你的信救了你了。瞎子立刻看见了，就在路上跟随耶稣。
And Jesus said to him, Go on your way; your faith has made you well. And straight away he was able to see, and went after him in the way.

耶稣和门徒将近耶路撒冷，到了伯法其和伯大尼，在橄榄山那里。耶稣就打发两个门徒，
And when they came near to Jerusalem, to Beth-phage and Bethany, at the Mountain of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,

对他们说，你们往对面村子里去。一进去的时候，必看见一匹驴驹拴在那里，是从来没有人骑过的。可以解开牵来。
And said to them, Go into the little town opposite: and when you come to it, you will see a young ass with a cord round his neck, on which no man has ever been seated; let him loose, and come back with him.

若有人对你们说，为什么作这事。你们就说，主要用它。那人必立时让你们牵来。
And if anyone says to you, Why are you doing this? say, The Lord has need of him and will send him back straight away.

他们去了，便看见一匹驴驹，拴在门外街道上，就把它解开。
And they went away and saw a young ass by the door outside in the open street; and they were getting him loose.

在那里站着的人，有几个说，你们解驴驹作什么。
And some of those who were there said to them, What are you doing, taking the ass?

门徒照着耶稣所说的回答，那些人就任凭他们牵去了。
And they said to them the words which Jesus had said; and they let them go.

他们把驴驹牵到耶稣那里，把自己的衣服搭在上面，耶稣就骑上。
And they took the young ass to Jesus, and put their clothing on him, and he got on his back.

有许多人，把衣服铺在路上，也有人把田间的树枝砍下来，铺在路上。
And a great number put down their clothing in the way; and others put down branches which they had taken from the fields.

前行后随的人，都喊着说，和散那，（和散那原有求救的意思，在此乃是称颂的话）奉主名来的，是应当称颂的。
And those who went in front, and those who came after, were crying, Glory: A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord:

那将要来的我祖大卫之国，是应当称颂的。高高在上，和散那。
A blessing on the coming kingdom of our father David: Glory in the highest.

耶稣进了耶路撒冷，入了圣殿，周围看了各样物件。天色已晚，就和十二个门徒出城往伯大尼去了。
And he went into Jerusalem into the Temple; and after looking round about on all things, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.

第二天，他们从伯大尼出来。耶稣饿了，
And on the day after, when they had come out from Bethany, he was in need of food.

远远地看见一棵无花果树，树上有叶子，就往那里去，或者在树上可以找着什么。到了树下，竟找不着什么，不过有叶子。因为不是收无花果的时候。
And seeing a fig-tree in the distance with leaves, he went to see if by chance it had anything on it: and when he came to it, he saw nothing but leaves, for it was not the time for the fruit.

耶稣就对树说，从今以后，永没有人吃你的果子。他的门徒也听见了。
And he said to it, Let no man take fruit from you for ever. And his disciples took note of his words.

他们来到耶路撒冷，耶稣进入圣殿，赶出殿里作买卖的人，推倒兑换银钱之人的桌子，和卖鸽子之人的凳子。
And they came to Jerusalem; and he went into the Temple, and sent out those who were trading there, overturning the tables of the money-changers and the seats of those who were offering doves for money;

也不许人拿着器具从殿里经过。
And he would not let any man take a vessel through the Temple.

便教训他们说，经上不是记着说，我的殿必称为万国祷告的殿吗？你们倒使它成为贼窝了。
And he gave them teaching, and said to them, Is it not in the Writings, My house is to be named a house of prayer for all the nations? but you have made it a hole of thieves.

祭司长和文士听见这话就想法子要除灭耶稣。却又怕他，因为众人都希奇他的教训。
And it came to the ears of the chief priests and scribes, and they took thought how they might put him to death; being in fear of him, because all the people were full of wonder at his teaching.

每天晚上，耶稣出城去。
And every evening he went out of the town.

早晨，他们从那里经过，看见无花果树连根都枯干了。
And when they were going by in the morning, they saw the fig-tree dead from the roots.

彼得想起耶稣的话来，就对他说，拉比，请看，你所咒诅的无花果树，已经枯干了。
And Peter, having a memory of it, said to him, Master, see, the tree which was cursed by you is dead.

耶稣回答说，你们当信服神。
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Have God's faith.

我实在告诉你们，无论何人对这座山说，你挪开此地投在海里。他若心里不疑惑，只信他所说的必成，就必给他成了。
Truly I say to you, Whoever says to this mountain, Be taken up and be put into the sea; and has no doubt in his heart, but has faith that what he says will come about, he will have his desire.

所以我告诉你们，凡你们祷告祈求的，无论是什么，只要信是得着的，就必得着。
For this reason I say to you, Whatever you make a request for in prayer, have faith that it has been given to you, and you will have it.

你们站着祷告的时候，若想起有人得罪你们，就当饶恕他，好叫你们在天上的父，也饶恕你们的过犯。
And whenever you make a prayer, let there be forgiveness in your hearts, if you have anything against anyone; so that you may have forgiveness for your sins from your Father who is in heaven.

你们若不饶恕人，你们在天上的父，也不饶恕你们的过犯。（有古卷无此节）
[]

他们又来到耶路撒冷。耶稣在殿里行走的时候，祭司长和文士并长老进前来，
And they came again to Jerusalem: and while he was walking in the Temple, there came to him the chief priests and the scribes and those in authority:

问他说，你仗着什么权柄作这些事？给你这权柄的是谁呢？
And they said to him, By what authority do you do these things? or who gave you authority to do these things?

耶稣对他们说，我要问你们一句话，你们回答我，我就告诉你们，我仗着什么权柄作这些事。
And Jesus said to them, I will put to you one question; give me an answer, and I will say by what authority I do these things.

约翰的洗礼，是从天上来的是从人间来的呢？你们可以回答我。
The baptism of John, was it from heaven or from men? give me an answer.

他们彼此商议说，我们若说从天上来，他必说，这样，你们为什么不信他呢？
And they gave thought to it among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did you not have faith in him?

若说从人间来，却又怕百姓。因为众人真以约翰为先知。
But if we say, From men--they were in fear of the people, because all took John to be truly a prophet.

于是回答耶稣说，我们不知道。耶稣说，我也不告诉你们，我仗着什么权柄作这些事。
And they said in answer to Jesus, We have no idea. And Jesus said to them, And I will not say to you by what authority I do these things.

耶稣就用比喻对他们说，有人栽了一个葡萄园，周围圈上篱笆，挖了一个压酒池，盖了一座楼，租给园户，就往外国去了。
And he gave them teaching in the form of stories. A man had a vine-garden planted, and put a wall about it, and made a place for crushing out the wine, and put up a tower, and let it out to field-workers, and went into another country.

到了时候，打发一个仆人到园户那里，要从园户收葡萄园的果子。
And when the time came, he sent a servant to get from the workmen some of the fruit of the garden.

园户拿住他，打了他，叫他空手回去。
And they took him, and gave him blows, and sent him away with nothing.

再打发一个仆人到他们那里。他们打伤他的头，并且凌辱他。
And again he sent to them another servant; and they gave him wounds on the head, and were very cruel to him.

又打发一个仆人去。他们就杀了他。后又打发好些仆人去。有被他们打的，有被他们杀的。
And he sent another; and they put him to death: and a number of others, whipping some, and putting some to death.

园主还有一位，是他的爱子，末后又打发他去，意思说，他们必尊敬我的儿子。
He still had one, a dearly loved son: he sent him last to them, saying, They will have respect for my son.

不料，那些园户彼此说，这是承受产业的。来吧，我们杀他，产业就归我们了。
But those workmen said among themselves, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property; come, let us put him to death, and the heritage will be ours.

于是拿住他，杀了他，把他丢在园外。
And they took him and put him to death, pushing his body out of the garden.

这样，葡萄园的主人要怎样办呢？他要来除灭那些园户，将葡萄园转给别人。
What then will the master of the garden do? He will come and put the workmen to death, and will give the garden into the hands of others.

经上写着说匠人所弃的石头，已作了房角的头块石头。
Have you not seen this which is in the Writings: The stone which the builders put on one side, the same was made the chief stone of the building:

这是主所作的，在我们眼中看为希奇。这经你们没有念过吗？
This was the Lord's doing, and it is a wonder in our eyes?

他们看出这比喻是指着他们说的，就想要捉拿他，只是惧怕百姓。于是离开他走了。
And they made attempts to take him; but they were in fear of the people, because they saw that the story was against them; and they went away from him.

后来他们打发几个法利赛人和几个希律党的人，到耶稣那里，要就着他的话陷害他。
Then they sent to him certain of the Pharisees and the Herodians, so that they might make use of his words to take him by a trick.

他们来了，就对他说，夫子，我们知道你是诚实的，什么人你都不徇情面。因为你不看人的外貌，乃是诚诚实实传神的道。纳税给该撒可以不可以。
And when they had come, they said to him, Master, we are certain that you are true, and have no fear of anyone: you have no respect for a man's position, but you are teaching the true way of God: Is it right to give taxes to Caesar or not?

我们该纳不该纳。耶稣知道他们的假意，就对他们说，你们为什么试探我。拿一个银钱来给我看。
Are we to give or not to give? But he, conscious of their false hearts, said to them, Why do you put me to the test? give me a penny, so that I may see it.

他们就拿了来。耶稣说，这像和这号是谁的。他们说，是该撒的。
And they gave him one. And he said to them, Whose is this image and name on it? And they said to him, Caesar's.

耶稣说，该撒的物当归给该撒，神的物当归给神。他们就很希奇他。
And Jesus said to them, Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's. And they were full of wonder at him.

撒都该人常说，没有复活的事。他们来问耶稣说，
And there came to him Sadducees, who say there is no coming back from the dead; and they put a question to him, saying,

夫子，摩西为我们写着说，人若死了，撇下妻子，没有孩子，他兄弟当娶他的妻，为哥哥生子立后。
Master, in the law Moses says, If a man's brother comes to his end, and has a wife still living and no child, it is right for his brother to take his wife, and get a family for his brother.

有弟兄七人，第一个娶了妻，死了，没有留下孩子。
There were seven brothers: and the first took a wife, and at his death there were no offspring;

第二个娶了她，也死了，没有留下孩子。第三个也是这样。
And the second took her, and at his death there were no offspring; and the third the same:

那七个人都没有留下孩子。末了，那妇人也死了。
And all the seven had no seed. Last of all the woman herself came to her death.

当复活的时候，她是哪一个的妻子呢？因为他们七个人都娶过她。
In the future life, when they come back from the dead, whose wife will she be? for the seven had her for a wife.

耶稣说，你们所以错了，岂不是因为不明白圣经，不晓得神的大能吗？
Jesus said to them, Is not this the reason for your error, that you have no knowledge of the holy Writings or of the power of God?

人从死里复活，也不娶，也不嫁，乃像天上的使者一样。
When they come back from the dead, they do not get married, but are like the angels in heaven.

论到死人复活，你们没有念过摩西的书，荆棘篇上所载的吗？神对摩西说，我是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神。
But as to the dead coming back to life; have you not seen in the book of Moses, about the burning thorn-tree, how God said to him, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

神不是死人的神，乃是活人的神。你们是大错了。
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living: you are greatly in error.

有一个文士来，听见他们辩论，晓得耶稣回答得好，就问他说，诫命中哪是第一要紧的呢？
And one of the scribes came, and hearing their argument together, and seeing that he had given them a good answer, put the question to him, Which law is the first of all?

耶稣回答说，第一要紧的，就是说，以色列阿，你要听。主我们神，是独一的主。
Jesus said in answer, The first is, Give ear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord;

你要尽心，尽性，尽意，尽力，爱主你的神。
And you are to have love for the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.

其次，就是说，要爱人如己。再没有比这两条诫命更大的了。
The second is this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself. There is no other law greater than these.

那文士对耶稣说，夫子说，神是一位，实在不错。除了他以外，再没有别的神。
And the scribe said to him, Truly, Master, you have well said that he is one, and there is no other but he:

并且尽心，尽智，尽力爱他，又爱人如己，就比一切燔祭，和各样祭祀，好得多。
And to have love for him with all the heart, and with all the mind, and with all the strength, and to have the same love for his neighbour as for himself, is much more than all forms of offerings.

耶稣见他回答的有智慧，就对他说，你离神的国不远了。从此以后，没有人敢再问他什么。
And when Jesus saw that he gave a wise answer, he said to him, You are not far from the kingdom of God. And every man after that was in fear of questioning him any more.

耶稣在殿里教训人，就问他们说，文士怎么说，基督是大卫的子孙呢？
And Jesus, when he was teaching in the Temple, said, How do the scribes say that the Christ is the Son of David?

大卫被圣灵感动说，主对我主说，你坐在我的右边，等我使你仇敌作你的脚凳。
David himself said in the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put those who are against you under your feet.

大卫既自己称他为主，他怎么又是大卫的子孙呢？众人都喜欢听他。
David himself gives him the name of Lord; and how then is he his son? And the common people gave ear to him gladly.

耶稣在教训之间，说，你们要防备文士，他们好穿长衣游行，喜爱人在街市上问他们的安，
And in his teaching he said, Be on your watch against the scribes, whose pleasure it is to go about in long robes and be respected in the market-places,

又喜爱会堂里的高位筵席上的首座。
And to have the chief seats in the Synagogues and the first places at feasts;

他们侵吞寡妇的家产，假意作很长的祷告。这些人要受更重的刑罚。
Who take away the property of widows, and before the eyes of men make long prayers; these will be judged more hardly.

耶稣对银库坐着，看众人怎样投钱入库。有好些财主，往里投了若干的钱。
And he took a seat by the place where the money was kept, and saw how the people put money into the boxes: and a number who had wealth put in much.

有一个穷寡妇来，往里投了两个小钱，就是一个大钱。
And there came a poor widow, and she put in two little bits of money, which make a farthing.

耶稣叫门徒来，说，我实在告诉你们，这穷寡妇投入库里的，比众人所投的更多。
And he made his disciples come to him, and said to them, Truly I say to you, This poor widow has put in more than all those who are putting money into the box:

因为他们都是自己有余，拿出来投在里头。但这寡妇是自己不足，把她一切养生的都投上了。
Because they all put in something out of what they had no need for; but she out of her need put in all she had, even all her living.

耶稣从殿里出来的时候，有一个门徒对他说，夫子，请看，这是何等的石头，何等的殿宇。
And when he was going out of the Temple, one of his disciples said to him, Master, see, what stones and what buildings!

耶稣对他说，你看见这大殿宇吗？将来在这里没有一块石头留在石头上，不被拆毁了。
And Jesus said to him, Do you see these great buildings? there is not one stone here resting on another which will not be overturned.

耶稣在橄榄山上对圣殿而坐。彼得，雅各，约翰，和安得烈，暗暗地问他说，
And while he was seated on the Mountain of Olives opposite the Temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew said to him privately,

请告诉我们，什么时候有这些事呢？这一切事，将成的时候，有什么预兆呢？
Say when these things will be, and what will be the sign when these things are all about to be done.

耶稣说，你们要谨慎，免得有人迷惑你们。
And Jesus said to them, Take care that you are not tricked by anyone.

将来有好些人冒我的名来，说，我是基督。并且要迷惑许多人。
People will come in my name, saying, I am he; and a number will be turned from the true way.

你们听见打仗，和打仗的风声，不要惊慌。这些事是必须有的，只是末期还没有到。
And when you have news of wars and talk of wars, do not be troubled; these things have to be, but it is still not the end.

民要攻打民，国要攻打国，多处必有地震，饥荒。这都是灾难的起头。（灾难原文作生产之难）
Nation will go to war with nation, and kingdom with kingdom: there will be earth-shocks in different places; there will be times when there is no food; these things are the first of the troubles.

但你们要谨慎。因为人要把你们交给公会，并且你们在会堂里要受鞭打。又为我的缘故，站在诸侯与君王面前，对他们作见证。
But take care: for they will give you up to the Sanhedrins; and in Synagogues you will be whipped; and you will be taken before rulers and kings because of me, for a sign to them.

然而福音必须先传给万民。
And the good news has first to be given to all the nations.

人把你们拉去交官的时候，不要预先思虑说什么。到那时候，赐给你们什么话，你们就说什么，因为说话的不是你们，乃是圣灵。
And when you are taken and given up to be judged, do not be troubled about what to say: but whatever is given to you in that hour, say: because it is not you who say it, but the Holy Spirit.

弟兄要把弟兄，父亲要把儿子，送到死地。儿女要起来与父母为敌，害死他们。
And brother will give up brother to death, and the father his child; and children will go against their fathers and mothers, and put them to death.

并且你们要为我的名，被众人恨恶，惟有忍耐到底的，必然得救。
And you will be hated by all men, because of my name; but he who goes through to the end will have salvation.

你们看见那行毁坏可憎的，站在不当站的地方。（读这经的人，须要会意）那时在犹太的，应当逃到山上。
But when you see the unclean thing which makes destruction, in the place where it has no right to be (let this be clear to the reader), then let those who are in Judaea go quickly to the mountains:

在房上的，不要下来，也不要进去拿家里的东西。
And let him who is on the house-top not go down, or go in, to take anything out of his house:

在田里的，也不要回去取衣裳。
And let not him who is in the field go back to take his coat.

当那些日子，怀孕的和奶孩子的有祸了。
And it will be hard for women who are with child and for her who has a baby at the breast in those days.

你们应当祈求，叫这些事不在冬天临到。
And say a prayer that it may not be in the winter.

因为在那些日子必有灾难，自从神创造万物直到如今，并没有这样的灾难。后来也必没有。
For in those days there will be sorrow, such as there has not been from the time when God made the world till now, and will not ever be again.

若不是主减少那日子，凡有血气的，总没有一个得救的。只是为主的选民，他将那日子减少了。
And if the Lord had not made the time short, no flesh would have been kept from destruction; but because of the saints he has made the time short.

那时若有人对你们说，看哪，基督在这里。或说，基督在那里。你们不要信。
And then if any man says to you, See, here is Christ; or, See, there; have no faith in it:

因为假基督，假先知，将要起来，显神迹奇事。倘若能行，就把选民迷惑了。
Because there will be false Christs and false prophets, and they will give signs and wonders in the hope of turning even the saints from the true way.

你们要谨慎。看哪，凡事我都预先告诉你们了。
But take care; see, I have made all things clear to you before the time.

在那些日子，那灾难以后，日头要变黑了，月亮也不放光，
But in those days, after that time of trouble, the sun will be made dark and the moon will not give her light,

众星要从天上坠落，天势都要震动。
And the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers which are in the heavens will be moved.

那时他们（马太二十四章三十节作地上的万族）要看见人子有大能力，大荣耀，驾云降临。
And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory.

他要差遣天使，把他的选民，从四方，从地极直到天边，都招聚了来。（方原文作风）
And then he will send out the angels, and will get together his saints from the four winds, from the farthest part of the earth to the farthest part of heaven.

你们可以从无花果树学个比方。当树枝发嫩长叶的时候，你们就知道夏天近了。
Take an example from the fig-tree: when its branches become soft and put out their leaves, you see that the summer is near;

这样，你们几时看见这些事成就，也该知道人子近了，（人子或作神的国）正在门口了。
Even so, when you see these things taking place, you may be certain that he is near, even at the doors.

我实在告诉你们，这世代还没有过去，这些事都要成就。
Truly, I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all these things are complete.

天地要废去。我的话却不能废去。
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.

但那日子，那时辰，没有人知道，连天上的使者也不知道，子也不知道，惟有父知道。
But of that day or that hour no one has knowledge, not even the angels in heaven, or the Son, but the Father.

你们要谨慎，儆醒祈祷，因为你们不晓得那日期几时来到。
Take care, keep watch with prayer: for you are not certain when the time will be.

这事正如一个人离开本家，寄居外邦，把权柄交给仆人，分派各人当作的工，又吩咐看门的儆醒。
It is as when a man who is in another country for a time, having gone away from his house, and given authority to his servants and to everyone his work, gives the porter an order to keep watch.

所以你们要儆醒，因为你们不知道家主什么时候来，或晚上，或半夜，或鸡叫，或早晨。
So you are to keep watch: because you are not certain when the master of the house is coming, in the evening, or in the middle of the night, or at the cock's cry, or in the morning;

恐怕他忽然来到，看见你们睡着了。
For fear that, coming suddenly, he sees you sleeping.

我对你们所说的话，也是对众人说，要儆醒。
And what I say to you, I say to all, Keep watch.

过两天是逾越节，又是除酵节。祭司长和文士，想法子怎么用诡计捉拿耶稣杀他。
It was now two days before the feast of the Passover and the unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes made designs how they might take him by deceit and put him to death:

只是说，当节的日子不可，恐怕百姓生乱。
But they said, Not while the feast is going on, for fear there may be trouble among the people.

耶稣在伯大尼长大麻疯的西门家里坐席的时候，有一个女人，拿着一玉瓶至贵的真哪哒香膏来，打破玉瓶，把膏浇在耶稣的头上。
And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, seated at table, there came a woman with a bottle of perfumed oil of great price; and when the bottle was broken she put the perfume on his head.

有几个人心中很不喜悦，说，何用这样枉费香膏呢？
But some of them were angry among themselves, saying, For what purpose has this oil been wasted?

这香膏可以卖三十多两银子周济穷人。他们就向那女人生气。
We might have got more than three hundred pence for it, and given the money to the poor. And they said things against her among themselves.

耶稣说，由她吧。为什么难为她呢？她在我身上作的是一件美事。
But Jesus said, Let her be; why are you troubling her? she has done a kind act to me.

因为常有穷人和你们同在，要向他们行善，随时都可以。只是你们不常有我。
The poor you have ever with you, and whenever you have the desire you may do them good: but me you have not for ever.

她所作的，是尽她所能的。她是为我安葬的事，把香膏预先浇在我身上。
She has done what she was able: she has put oil on my body to make it ready for its last resting-place.

我实在告诉你们，普天之下，无论在什么地方传这福音，也要述说这女人所作的以为记念。
And truly I say to you, Wherever the good news goes out through all the earth, what this woman has done will be talked of in memory of her.

十二门徒之中有一个加略人犹大，去见祭司长，要把耶稣交给他们。
And Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, so that he might give him up to them.

他们听见就欢喜，又应许给他银子。他就寻思如何得便，把耶稣交给他们。
And hearing what he said, they were glad, and gave him their word to make him a payment of money. And he took thought how he might best give him up to them.

除酵节的第一天，就是宰逾越羊羔的那一天，门徒对耶稣说，你吃逾越节的筵席，要我们往哪里去预备呢？
And on the first day of unleavened bread, when the Passover lamb is put to death, his disciples said to him, Where are we to go and make ready for you to take the Passover meal?

耶稣就打发两个门徒，对他们说，你们进城去，必有人拿着一瓶水，迎面而来。你们就跟着他。
And he sent two of his disciples, and said to them, Go into the town, and there will come to you a man with a vessel of water: go after him;

他进那家去，你们就对那家的主人说，夫子说，客房在哪里？我与门徒好在那里吃逾越节的筵席。
And wherever he goes in, say to the owner of the house, The Master says, Where is my guest-room, where I may take the Passover with my disciples?

他必指给你们摆设整齐的一间大楼，你们就在那里为我们预备。
And he will take you up himself to a great room with a table and seats: there make ready for us.

门徒出去，进了城，所遇见的，正如耶稣所说的。他们就预备了逾越节的筵席
And the disciples went out and came into the town, and saw that it was as he had said: and they made ready the Passover.

到了晚上，耶稣和十二个门徒都来了。
And when it was evening he came with the twelve.

他们坐席正吃的时候，耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，你们中间有一个与我同吃的人要卖我了。
And while they were seated taking food, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, One of you will be false to me, one who is taking food with me.

他们就忧愁起来，一个一个地问他说，是我吗？
They were sad, and said to him one by one, Is it I?

耶稣对他们说，是十二个门徒中同我蘸手在盘子里的那个人。
And he said to them, It is one of the twelve, one who is putting his bread with me into the same plate.

人子必要去世，正如经上指着他所写的。但卖人子的人有祸了，那人不生在世上倒好。
The Son of man goes, even as the Writings say of him: but cursed is that man through whom the Son of man is given up! It would have been well for that man if he had never been given birth.

他们吃的时候，耶稣拿起饼来，祝了福，就掰开递给他们说，你们拿着吃。这是我的身体。
And while they were taking food, he took bread, and after blessing it, he gave the broken bread to them, and said, Take it: this is my body.

又拿起杯来，祝谢了，递给他们。他们都喝了。
And he took a cup, and when he had given praise, he gave it to them: and they all had a drink from it.

耶稣说，这是我立约的血，为多人流出来的。
And he said to them, This is my blood of the testament, which is given for men.

我实在告诉你们，我不再喝这葡萄汁，直到我在神的国里，喝新的那日子。
Truly I say to you, I will take no more of the fruit of the vine till the day when I take it new in the kingdom of God.

他们唱了诗，就出来，往橄榄山去。
And after a song of praise to God they went out to the Mountain of Olives.

耶稣对他们说，你们都要跌倒了。因为经上记着说，我要击打牧人，羊就分散了。
And Jesus said to them, You will all be turned away from me: for it is in the Writings, I will put the keeper of the sheep to death, and the sheep will be put to flight.

但我复活以后，要在你们以先往加利利去。
But after I have come back from the dead, I will go before you into Galilee.

彼得说，众人虽然跌倒，我总不能。
But Peter said to him, Though the others may be turned away from you, I will not.

耶稣对他说，我实在告诉你，就在今天夜里，鸡叫两遍以先，你要三次不认我。
And Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you that you, today, even this night, before the cock's second cry, will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.

彼得却极力地说，我就是必须和你同死，也总不能不认你。众门徒都是这样说。
But he said with passion, If I have to be put to death with you, I will not be false to you. And they all said the same.

他们来到一个地方，名叫客西马尼。耶稣对门徒说，你们坐在这里，等我祷告。
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he said to his disciples, Be seated here while I say a prayer.

于是带着彼得，雅各，约翰同去，就惊恐起来，极其难过。
And he took with him Peter and James and John, and grief and great trouble came on him.

对他们说，我心里甚是忧伤，几乎要死。你们在这里，等候儆醒。
And he said to them, My soul is very sad, even to death: be here a little time, and keep watch.

他就稍往前走，俯伏在地祷告说，倘若可行，便叫那时候过去。
And he went forward a little, and falling down on the earth, made request that, if possible, the hour might go from him.

他说，阿爸，父阿，在你凡事都能。求你将这杯撤去。然而不要从我的意思，只要从你的意思。
And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to you; take away this cup from me: but even so let not my pleasure, but yours be done.

耶稣回来，见他们睡着了，就对彼得说，西门，你睡觉吗？不能儆醒片时吗？
And he came, and saw them sleeping, and said to Peter, Simon, are you sleeping? were you not able to keep watch one hour?

总要儆醒祷告，免得入了迷惑。你们心灵固然愿意，肉体却软弱了。
Keep watch with prayer, so that you may not be put to the test; the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is feeble.

耶稣又去祷告，说的话还是与先前一样。
And again he went away, and said a prayer, using the same words.

又来见他们睡着了，因为他们的眼睛甚是困倦。他们也不知道怎么回答。
And again he came and saw them sleeping, because their eyes were very tired; and they had nothing to say in answer.

第三次来，对他们说，现在你们仍然睡觉安歇吧。（吧或作吗）够了，时候到了。看哪，人子被卖在罪人手里了。
And he came the third time, and said to them, Go on sleeping now and take your rest: it is enough; the hour has come; see, the Son of man is given up into the hands of evil men.

起来，我们走吧。看哪，那卖我的人近了。
Get up, let us be going; see, he who gives me up is near.

说话之间，忽然那十二个门徒里的犹大来了，并有许多人带着刀棒，从祭司长和文士并长老那里与他同来。
And straight away, while he was still talking, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great band with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and the scribes and those in authority.

卖耶稣的人曾给他们一个暗号，说，我与谁亲嘴，谁就是他。你们把他拿住，牢牢靠靠的带去。
Now he who had been false to him had given them a sign, saying, The one to whom I give a kiss, that is he; take him, and get him away safely.

犹大来了，随即到耶稣跟前说，拉比，便与他亲嘴。
And when he had come, he went straight to him and said, Master; and gave him a kiss.

他们就下手拿住他。
And they put their hands on him, and took him.

旁边站着的人，有一个拔出刀来，将大祭司的仆人砍了一刀，削掉了他一个耳朵。
But a certain one of those who were near took out his sword, and gave the servant of the high priest a blow, cutting off his ear.

耶稣对他们说，你们带着刀棒，出来拿我，如同拿强盗吗？
And Jesus said to them, Have you come out as against a thief, with swords and sticks to take me?

我天天教训人，同你们在殿里，你们并没有拿我。但这事成就，为要应验经上的话。
I was with you every day in the Temple teaching, and you did not take me; but this is done so that the Writings may come true.

门徒都离开他逃走了。
And they all went away from him in fear.

有一个少年人，赤身披着一块麻布，跟随耶稣，众人就捉拿他。
And a certain young man went after him, with only a linen cloth about his body; and they put their hands on him;

他却丢了麻布，赤身逃走了。
But he got away unclothed, without the linen cloth.

他们把耶稣带到大祭司那里。又有众祭司长和长老并文士，都来和大祭司一同聚集。
And they took Jesus away to the high priest; and there came together with him all the chief priests and those in authority and the scribes.

彼得远远地跟着耶稣，一直进入大祭司的院里，和差役一同坐在火光里烤火。
And Peter had come after him at a distance, even into the house of the high priest; and he was seated with the captains, warming himself in the light of the fire.

祭司长和全公会寻找见证控告耶稣，要治死他。却寻不着。
Now the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin were looking for witness against Jesus so that they might put him to death; and they were unable to get any.

因为有好些人作假见证告他，只是他们的见证，各不相合。
For a number gave false witness against him and their witness was not in agreement.

又有几个人站起来，作假见证告他说，
Then some got up and gave false witness against him, saying,

我们听见他说，我要拆毁这人手所造的殿，三日内就另造一座不是人手所造的。
He said in our hearing, I will put an end to this Temple which is made with hands, and in three days I will make another without hands.

他们就是这么作见证，也是各不相合。
And even so their witness was not in agreement.

大祭司起来，站在中间，问耶稣说，你什么都不回答吗？这些人作见证告你的是什么呢？
And the high priest got up in the middle of them, and said to Jesus, Do you say nothing in answer? what is it which these say against you?

耶稣却不言语，一句也不回答。大祭司又问他说，你是那当称颂者的儿子基督不是。
But he kept quiet and said nothing. Again the high priest questioning him said, Are you the Christ, the son of the Holy One?

耶稣说，我是。你们必看见人子，坐在那权能者的右边，驾着天上的云降临。
And Jesus said, I am: and you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.

大祭司就撕开衣服，说，我们何必再用见证人呢？
And the high priest, violently parting his robes, said, What more need have we of witnesses?

你们已经听见他这僭妄的话了。你们的意见如何？他们都定他该死的罪。
His words against God have come to your ears: what is your opinion? And they all said it was right for him to be put to death.

就有人吐唾沫在他脸上，又蒙着他的脸，用拳头打他，对他说，你说预言吧。差役接过他来用手掌打他。
And some put shame on him and, covering his face, gave him blows and said to him, Now say what is to come: and the captains took him and gave him blows with their hands.

彼得在下边，院子里，来了大祭司的一个使女。
And while Peter was down in the open square of the building, one of the servant-girls of the high priest came;

见彼得烤火，就看着他说，你素来也是同拿撒勒人耶稣一伙的。
And seeing Peter warming himself by the fire, she gave him a look, and said, You were with this Nazarene, even Jesus.

彼得却不承认，说，我不知道，也不明白你说的是什么。于是出来，到了前院。鸡就叫了。
But he said, I have no knowledge of him, or of what you are saying: and he went out into the doorway; and there came the cry of a cock.

那使女看见他，又对旁边站着的人说，这也是他们一党的。
And the girl saw him, and said again to those who were near, This is one of them.

彼得又不承认。过了不多的时候，旁边站着的人又对彼得说，你真是他们一党的。因为你是加利利人。
But again he said it was not so. And after a little time, again those who were near said to Peter, Truly you are one of them; for you are a Galilaean.

彼得就发咒起誓地说，我不认得你们说的这个人。
But, with curses and oaths, he said, I have no knowledge of the man about whom you are talking.

立时鸡叫了第二遍。彼得想起耶稣对他所说的话，鸡叫两遍以先，你要三次不认我。思想起来，就哭了。
And in the same minute, the cock gave a second cry. And it came to Peter's mind how Jesus had said to him, Before the cock's second cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me. And at this thought he was overcome with weeping.

一到早晨，祭司长和长老文士全公会的人大家商议，就把耶稣捆绑解去，交给彼拉多。
And the first thing in the morning the chief priests, with those in authority and the scribes and all the Sanhedrin, had a meeting, and put cords round Jesus, and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate.

彼拉多问他说，你是犹太人的王吗？耶稣回答说，你说的是。
And Pilate put a question to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And he, answering, said to him, You say so.

祭司长告他许多的事。
And the chief priests said a number of things against him.

彼拉多又问他说，你看，他们告你这么多的事，你什么都不回答吗？
And Pilate again put a question, Do you say nothing in answer? see how much evil they say you have done.

耶稣仍不回答，以致彼拉多觉得希奇。
But Jesus gave no more answers, so that Pilate was full of wonder.

每逢这节期，巡抚照众人所求的，释放一个囚犯给他们。
Now at the feast every year he let one prisoner go free at their request.

有一个人名叫巴拉巴，和作乱的人一同捆绑。他们作乱的时候，曾杀过人。
And there was one named Barabbas, in prison with those who had gone against the government and in the fight had taken life.

众人上去求巡抚，照常例给他们办。
And the people went up, requesting him to do as he had done for them in other years.

彼拉多说，你们要我释放犹太人的王给你们吗？
And Pilate said in answer to them, Is it your desire that I let the King of the Jews go free?

他原晓得祭司长是因为嫉妒才把耶稣解了来。
For he saw that the chief priests had given him up through envy.

只是祭司长挑唆众人，宁可释放巴拉巴给他们。
But the people were moved by the chief priests to make him let Barabbas go free.

彼拉多又说，那么样你们所称为犹太人的王，我怎么办他呢？
And Pilate again said in answer to them, What then am I to do to him to whom you give the name of the King of the Jews?

他们又喊着说，把他钉十字架。
And they said again loudly, To the cross with him!

彼拉多说，为什么呢？他作了什么恶事呢？他们便极力地喊着说，把他钉十字架。
And Pilate said to them, Why, what evil has he done? But their cry was the louder, To the cross!

彼拉多要叫众人喜悦，就释放巴拉巴给他们，将耶稣鞭打了，交给人钉十字架。
And Pilate, desiring to do what was pleasing to the people, let Barabbas go free, and gave up Jesus, when he had been whipped, to be put to death on the cross.

兵丁把耶稣带进衙门院里。叫齐了全营的兵。
And the men of the army took him away into the square in front of the building which is the Praetorium, and they got together all the band.

他们给他穿上紫袍，又用荆棘编作冠冕给他戴上。
And they put a purple robe on him, and twisting a crown of thorns, they put it on him;

就庆贺他说，恭喜犹太人的王阿。
And, as if honouring him, they said, Long life to the King of the Jews!

又拿一根苇子，打他的头，吐唾沫在他脸上屈膝拜他。
And they gave him blows on the head with a stick and put shame on him and, going down on their knees, gave him worship.

戏弄完了，就给他脱了紫袍，仍穿上他自己的衣服，带他出去，要钉十字架。
And when they had made sport of him, they took the purple robe off him and put his clothing on him. And they took him out to put him to death on the cross.

有一个古利奈人西门，就是亚力山大和鲁孚的父亲，从乡下来，经过那地方。他们就勉强他同去，好背着耶稣的十字架。
And they made one, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, who was going by, coming from the country, go with them, so that he might take his cross.

他们带耶稣到了各各他地方，（各各他翻出来，就是髑髅地）
And they took him to the place named Golgotha, which is, Dead Man's Head.

拿没药调和的酒给耶稣，他却不受。
And they gave him wine mixed with myrrh; but he did not take it.

于是将他钉在十字架上，拈阄分他的衣服，看是谁得什么。
And he was nailed to the cross; and they made a division of his clothing among them, putting to the decision of chance what everyone was to take.

钉他在十字架上，是巳初的时候。
And it was the third hour when they put him on the cross.

在上面有他的罪状，写的是犹太人的王。
And the statement of his crime was put in writing on the cross, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

他们又把两个强盗，和他同钉十字架。一个在右边，一个在左边。（有古卷在此有
And they put two thieves on crosses with him, one on his right side, and one on his left.

这就应了经上的话说，他被列在罪犯之中）
[]

从那里经过的人辱骂他，摇着头说，咳，你这拆毁圣殿，三日又建造起来的。
And those who went by made sport of him, shaking their heads, and saying, Ha! you who give the Temple to destruction, and put it up again in three days,

可以救自己从十字架上下来吧。
Keep yourself from death, and come down from the cross.

祭司长和文士也是这样戏弄他，彼此说，他救了别人，不能救自己。
In the same way the chief priests, laughing at him among themselves with the scribes, said, A saviour of others, he has no salvation for himself.

以色列的王基督，现在可以从十字架上下来，叫我们看见，就信了。那和他同钉的人也是讥诮他。
Let the Christ, the King of Israel, come down now from the cross, so that we may see and have belief. And those who were put on crosses with him said evil things against him.

从午正到申初遍地都黑暗了。
And when the sixth hour had come, it was dark over all the land till the ninth hour.

申初的时候，耶稣大声喊着说，以罗伊，以罗伊，拉马撒巴各大尼？翻出来，就是，我的神，我的神，为什么离弃我？
And at the ninth hour, Jesus said in a loud voice, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, My God, my God, why are you turned away from me?

旁边站着的人，有的听见就说，看哪，他叫以利亚呢。
And some of those who were near, hearing it, said, See, he is crying to Elijah.

有一个人跑去，把海绒蘸满了醋，绑在苇子上，送给他喝，说，且等着，看以利亚来不来把他取下。
And one of them went quickly and, getting a sponge full of bitter wine, put it on a rod, and gave it to him for drink, saying, Let be; let us see if Elijah will come to take him down.

耶稣大声喊叫，气就断了。
And Jesus gave a loud cry, and gave up his spirit.

殿里的幔子，从上到下裂为两半。
And the curtain of the Temple was parted in two from end to end.

对面站着的百夫长，看见耶稣这样喊叫断气，（有古卷无喊叫二字）就说，这人真是神的儿子。
And when the captain, who was near, saw how he gave up his spirit, he said, Truly this man was a son of God.

还有些妇女，远远地观看。内中有抹大拉的马利亚，又有小雅各和约西的母亲马利亚，并有撒罗米。
And there were women watching from a distance: among them were Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome,

就是耶稣在加利利的时候，跟随他，服事他的那些人，还有同耶稣上耶路撒冷的好些妇女在那里观看。
Who went with him when he was in Galilee and took care of him; and a number of other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.

到了晚上，因为这是预备日，就是安息日的前一日，
And when it was evening, because it was the time of getting ready, that is, the day before the Sabbath,

有亚利马太的约瑟前来，他是尊贵的议士，也是等候神国的。他放胆进去见彼拉多，求耶稣的身体。
There came Joseph of Arimathaea, a responsible man in high honour, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God; and he went in to Pilate without fear, and made a request for the body of Jesus.

彼拉多诧异耶稣已经死了。便叫百夫长来，问他耶稣死了久不久。
And Pilate was surprised that he was dead; and, sending for the captain, he put a question to see if he had been dead for long.

既从百夫长得知实情，就把耶稣的尸首赐给约瑟。
And when he had news of it from the captain, he let Joseph have the body.

约瑟买了细麻布，把耶稣取下来，用细麻布裹好，安放在磐石中凿出来的坟墓里。又滚过一块石头来挡住墓门。
And he got a linen cloth and, taking him down, put the linen cloth round him, and put him in a place for the dead which had been cut out of a rock; and a stone was rolled against the door.

抹大拉的马利亚，和约西的母亲马利亚。都看见安放他的地方。
And Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, saw where he was put.

过了安息日，抹大拉的马利亚，和雅各的母亲马利亚，并撒罗米，买了香膏，要去膏耶稣的身体。
And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of James, and Salome, got spices, so that they might come and put them on him.

七日的第一日清早，出太阳的时候，她们来到坟墓那里。
And very early after dawn on the first day of the week, they came at the time of the coming up of the sun to the place where the body had been put.

彼此说，谁给我们把石头从墓门滚开呢？
And they were saying among themselves, Who will get the stone rolled away from the door for us?

那石头原来很大，她们抬头一看，却见石头已经滚开了。
And looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back; and it was of great size.

她们进了坟墓，看见一个少年人坐在右边，穿着白袍。就甚惊恐。
And when they went in, they saw a young man seated on the right side, dressed in a white robe; and they were full of wonder.

那少年人对她们说，不要惊恐。你们寻找那钉十字架的拿撒勒人耶稣。他已经复活了，不在这里。请看安放他的地方。
And he said to them, Do not be troubled: you are looking for Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been put to death on the cross; he has come back from the dead; he is not here: see, the place where they put him!

你们可以去告诉他的门徒和彼得说，他在你们以先往加利利去。在那里你们要见他，正如他从前所告诉你们的。
But go, say to his disciples and to Peter, He goes before you into Galilee: there you will see him, as he said to you.

她们就出来，从坟墓那里逃跑。又发抖，又惊奇，什么也不告诉人。因为她们害怕。
And they went out quickly from the place, because fear and great wonder had come on them: and they said nothing to anyone, because they were full of fear that ...

在七日的第一日清早，耶稣复活了，就先向抹大拉的马利亚显现。耶稣从她身上曾赶出七个鬼。
Now when he came back from the dead early on the first day of the week, he went first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had sent out seven evil spirits.

她去告诉那向来跟随耶稣的人。那时他们正哀恸哭泣。
She went and gave news of it to those who had been with him, while they were sorrowing and weeping.

他们听见耶稣活了，被马利亚看见，却是不信。
And they, when it came to their ears that he was living, and had been seen by her, had no belief in it.

这事以后，门徒中间有两个人，往乡下去。走路的时候，耶稣变了形像向他们显现，
And after these things he was seen in another form by two of them, while they were walking on their way into the country.

他们就去告诉其余的门徒。其余的门徒，也是不信。
And they went away and gave news of it to the rest; and they had no belief in what was said.

后来，十一个门徒坐席的时候，耶稣向他们显现，责备他们不信，心里刚硬。因为他们不信那些在他复活以后看见他的人。
And later he was seen by the eleven themselves while they were taking food; and he said sharp words to them because they had no faith and their hearts were hard, and because they had no belief in those who had seen him after he had come back from the dead.

他又对他们说，你们往普天下去，传福音给万民听。（万民原文作凡受造的）
And he said to them, Go into all the world, and give the good news to everyone.

信而受洗的必然得救。不信的必被定罪。
He who has faith and is given baptism will get salvation; but he who has not faith will be judged.

信的人必有神迹随着他们，就是奉我的名赶鬼。说新方言。
And these signs will be with those who have faith: in my name they will send out evil spirits; and they will make use of new languages;

手能拿蛇。若喝了什么毒物，也必不受害。手按病人，病人就必好了。
They will take up snakes, and if there is poison in their drink, it will do them no evil; they will put their hands on those who are ill, and they will get well.

主耶稣和他们说完了话，后来被接到天上，坐在神的右边。
So then the Lord Jesus, after he had said these words to them, was taken up into heaven and took his seat at the right hand of God.

门徒出去，到处宣传福音，主和他们同工，用神迹随着，证实所传的道。阿们。
And they went out, preaching everywhere, the Lord working with them, and giving witness to the word by the signs which came after. So be it.

