马太福音 Matthew


亚伯拉罕的后裔，大卫的子孙，耶稣基督的家谱。（后裔子孙原文都作儿子下同）
The book of the generations of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.

亚伯拉罕生以撒。以撒生雅各。雅各生犹大和他的弟兄。
The son of Abraham was Isaac; and the son of Isaac was Jacob; and the sons of Jacob were Judah and his brothers;

犹大从他玛氏生法勒斯和谢拉。法勒斯生希斯仑。希斯仑生亚兰。
And the sons of Judah were Perez and Zerah by Tamar; and the son of Perez was Hezron; and the son of Hezron was Ram;

亚兰生亚米拿达。亚米拿达生拿顺。拿顺生撒门。
And the son of Ram was Amminadab; and the son of Amminadab was Nahshon; and the son of Nahshon was Salmon;

撒门从喇合氏生波阿斯。波阿斯从路得氏生俄备得。俄备得生耶西。
And the son of Salmon by Rahab was Boaz; and the son of Boaz by Ruth was Obed; and the son of Obed was Jesse;

耶西生大卫王。大卫从乌利亚的妻子生所罗门。
And the son of Jesse was David the king; and the son of David was Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah;

所罗门生罗波安。罗波安生亚比雅。亚比雅生亚撒。
And the son of Solomon was Rehoboam; and the son of Rehoboam was Abijah; and the son of Abijah was Asa;

亚撒生约沙法。约沙法生约兰。约兰生乌西亚。
And the son of Asa was Jehoshaphat; and the son of Jehoshaphat was Joram; and the son of Joram was Uzziah;

乌西亚生约坦。约坦生亚哈斯。亚哈斯生希西家。
And the son of Uzziah was Jotham; and the son of Jotham was Ahaz; and the son of Ahaz was Hezekiah;

希西家生玛拿西。玛拿西生亚们。亚们生约西亚。
And the son of Hezekiah was Manasseh; and the son of Manasseh was Amon; and the son of Amon was Josiah;

百姓被迁到巴比伦的时候，约西亚生耶哥尼雅和他的弟兄。
And the sons of Josiah were Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the taking away to Babylon.

迁到巴比伦之后，耶哥尼雅生撒拉铁。撒拉铁生所罗巴伯。
And after the taking away to Babylon, Jechoniah had a son Shealtiel; and Shealtiel had Zerubbabel;

所罗巴伯生亚比玉。亚比玉生以利亚敬。以利亚敬生亚所。
And Zerubbabel had Abiud; and Abiud had Eliakim; and Eliakim had Azor;

亚所生撒督。撒督生亚金。亚金生以律。
And Azor had Zadok; and Zadok had Achim; and Achim had Eliud;

以律生以利亚撒。以利亚撒生马但。马但生雅各。
And Eliud had Eleazar; and Eleazar had Matthan; and Matthan had Jacob;

雅各生约瑟，就是马利亚的丈夫。那称为基督的耶稣，是从马利亚生的。
And the son of Jacob was Joseph the husband of Mary, who gave birth to Jesus, whose name is Christ.

这样，从亚伯拉罕到大卫，共有十四代。从大卫到迁至巴比伦的时候，也有十四代。从迁至巴比伦的时候到基督，又有十四代。
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David to the taking away to Babylon, fourteen generations; and from the taking away to Babylon to the coming of Christ, fourteen generations.

耶稣基督降生的事，记在下面。他母亲马利亚已经许配了约瑟，还没有迎娶，马利亚就从圣灵怀了孕。
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was in this way: when his mother Mary was going to be married to Joseph, before they came together the discovery was made that she was with child by the Holy Spirit.

她丈夫约瑟是个义人，不愿意明明地羞辱她，想要暗暗地把她休了。
And Joseph, her husband, being an upright man, and not desiring to make her a public example, had a mind to put her away privately.

正思念这事的时候，有主的使者向他梦中显现，说大卫的子孙约瑟，不要怕，只管娶过你的妻子马利亚来。因她所怀的孕，是从圣灵来的。
But when he was giving thought to these things, an angel of the Lord came to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, son of David, have no fear of taking Mary as your wife; because that which is in her body is of the Holy Spirit.

她将要生一个儿子。你要给他起名叫耶稣。因他要将自己的百姓从罪恶里救出来。
And she will give birth to a son; and you will give him the name Jesus; for he will give his people salvation from their sins.

这一切的事成就，是要应验主借先知所说的话，
Now all this took place so that the word of the Lord by the prophet might come true,

说，必有童女，怀孕生子，人要称他的名为以马内利。（以马内利翻出来，就是神与我们同在。）
See, the virgin will be with child, and will give birth to a son, and they will give him the name Immanuel, that is, God with us.

约瑟醒了，起来，就遵着主使者的吩咐，把妻子娶过来。
And Joseph did as the angel of the Lord had said to him, and took her as his wife;

只是没有和她同房，等她生了儿子，（有古卷作等她生了头胎的儿子）就给他起名叫耶稣。
And he had no connection with her till she had given birth to a son; and he gave him the name Jesus.

当希律王的时候，耶稣生在犹太的伯利恒。有几个博士从东方来到耶路撒冷，说，
Now when the birth of Jesus took place in Beth-lehem of Judaea, in the days of Herod the king, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,

那生下来作犹太人之王的在哪里？我们在东方看见他的星，特来拜他。
Saying, Where is the King of the Jews whose birth has now taken place? We have seen his star in the east and have come to give him worship.

希律王听见了，就心里不安。耶路撒冷合城的人，也都不安。
And when it came to the ears of Herod the king, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.

他就召齐了祭司长和民间的文士，问他们说，基督当生在何处。
And he got together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, questioning them as to where the birth-place of the Christ would be.

他们回答说，在犹太的伯利恒。因为有先知记着说，
And they said to him, In Beth-lehem of Judaea; for so it is said in the writings of the prophet,

犹大地的伯利恒阿，你在犹大诸城中，并不是最小的。因为将来有一位君王，要从你那里出来，牧养我以色列民。
You Beth-lehem, in the land of Judah, are not the least among the chiefs of Judah: out of you will come a ruler, who will be the keeper of my people Israel.

当下希律暗暗地召了博士来，细问那星是什么时候出现的。
Then Herod sent for the wise men privately, and put questions to them about what time the star had been seen.

就差他们往伯利恒去，说，你们去仔细寻访那小孩子。寻到了，就来报信，我也好去拜他。
And he sent them to Beth-lehem and said, Go and make certain where the young child is; and when you have seen him, let me have news of it, so that I may come and give him worship.

他们听见王的话，就去了。在东方所看见的那星，忽然在他们前头行，直行到小孩子的地方，就在上头停住了。
And after hearing the king, they went on their way; and the star which they saw in the east went before them, till it came to rest over the place where the young child was.

他们看见那星，就大大地欢喜。
And when they saw the star they were full of joy.

进了房子，看见小孩子和他母亲马利亚，就俯伏拜那小孩子，揭开宝盒，拿黄金，乳香，没药为礼物献给他。
And they came into the house, and saw the young child with Mary, his mother; and falling down on their faces they gave him worship; and from their store they gave him offerings of gold, perfume, and spices.

博士因为在梦中被主指示，不要回去见希律，就从别的路回本地去了。
And it was made clear to them by God in a dream that they were not to go back to Herod; so they went into their country by another way.

他们去后，有主的使者向约瑟梦中显现，说，起来，带着小孩子同他母亲，逃往埃及，住在那里，等我吩咐你。因为希律必寻找小孩子要除灭他。
And when they had gone, an angel of the Lord came to Joseph in a dream, saying, Get up and take the young child and his mother, and go into Egypt, and do not go from there till I give you word; for Herod will be searching for the young child to put him to death.

约瑟就起来，夜间带着小孩子和他母亲往埃及去。
So he took the young child and his mother by night, and went into Egypt;

住在那里，直到希律死了。这是要应验主借先知所说的话，说，我从埃及召出我的儿子来。
And was there till the death of Herod; so that the word of the Lord through the prophet might come true, Out of Egypt have I sent for my son.

希律见自己被博士愚弄，就大大发怒，差人将伯利恒城里，并四境所有的男孩，照着他向博士仔细查问的时候，凡两岁以里的，都杀尽了。
Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, was very angry; and he sent out, and put to death all the male children in Beth-lehem and in all the parts round about it, from two years old and under, acting on the knowledge which he had got with care from the wise men.

这就应了先知耶利米的话，说，
Then the word of Jeremiah the prophet came true,

在拉玛听见号啕大哭的声音，是拉结哭她儿女，不肯受安慰，因为他们都不在了。
In Ramah there was a sound of weeping and great sorrow, Rachel weeping for her children, and she would not be comforted for their loss.

希律死了以后，有主的使者，在埃及向约瑟梦中显现，说，
But when Herod was dead, an angel of the Lord came in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,

起来，带着小孩子和他母亲往以色列地去。因为要害小孩子性命的人已经死了。
Saying, Get up and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: because they who were attempting to take the young child's life are dead.

约瑟就起来，把小孩子和他母亲带到以色列地去。
And he got up, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.

只因听见亚基老接着他父亲希律作了犹太王，就怕往那里去。又在梦中被主指示，便往加利利境内去了。
But when it came to his ears that Archelaus was ruling over Judaea in the place of his father Herod, he was in fear of going there; and God having given him news of the danger in a dream, he went out of the way into the country parts of Galilee.

到了一座城，名叫拿撒勒，就住在那里。这是要应验先知所说，他将称为拿撒勒人的话了。
And he came and was living in a town named Nazareth: so that the word of the prophets might come true, He will be named a Nazarene.

那时，有施洗的约翰出来，在犹太的旷野传道，说，
And in those days John the Baptist came preaching in the waste land of Judaea,

天国近了，你们应当悔改。
Saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin; for the kingdom of heaven is near.

这人就是先知以赛亚所说的，他说，在旷野有人声喊着说，预备主的道，修直他的路。
For this is he of whom Isaiah the prophet said, The voice of one crying in the waste land, Make ready the way of the Lord, make his roads straight.

这约翰身穿骆驼毛的衣服，腰束皮带，吃的是蝗虫野蜜。
Now John was clothed in camel's hair, with a leather band about him; and his food was locusts and honey.

那时，耶路撒冷和犹太全地，并约但河一带地方的人，都出去到约翰那里。
Then Jerusalem and all Judaea went out to him, and all the people from near Jordan;

承认他们的罪，在约但河里受他的洗。
And they were given baptism by him in the river Jordan, saying openly that they had done wrong.

约翰看见许多法利赛人和撒都该人，也来受洗，就对他们说，毒蛇的种类，谁指示你们逃避将来的忿怒呢？
But when he saw a number of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, Offspring of snakes, at whose word are you going in flight from the wrath to come?

你们要结出果子来，与悔改的心相称。
Let your change of heart be seen in your works:

不要自己心里说，有亚伯拉罕为我们的祖宗。我告诉你们，神能从这些石头中给亚伯拉罕兴起子孙来。
And say not to yourselves, We have Abraham for our father; because I say to you that God is able from these stones to make children for Abraham.

现在斧子已经放在树根上，凡不结好果子的树，就砍下来，丢在火里。
And even now the axe is put to the root of the trees; every tree then which does not give good fruit is cut down, and put into the fire.

我是用水给你们施洗，叫你们悔改。但那在我以后来的，能力比我更大，我就是给他提鞋，也不配。他要用圣灵与火给你们施洗。
Truly, I give baptism with water to those of you whose hearts are changed; but he who comes after me is greater than I, whose shoes I am not good enough to take up: he will give you baptism with the Holy Spirit and with fire:

他手里拿着簸箕，要扬净他的场，把麦子收在仓里，把糠用不灭的火烧尽了。
In whose hand is the instrument with which he will make clean his grain; he will put the good grain in his store, but the waste will be burned up in the fire which will never be put out.

当下，耶稣从加利利来到约但河，见了约翰，要受他的洗。
Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan, to be given baptism by him.

约翰想要拦住他，说，我当受你的洗，你反倒上我这里来吗？
But John would have kept him back, saying, It is I who have need of baptism from you, and do you come to me?

耶稣回答说，你暂且许我。因为我们理当这样尽诸般的义。（或作礼）于是约翰许了他。
But Jesus made answer, saying to him, Let it be so now: because so it is right for us to make righteousness complete. Then he gave him baptism.

耶稣受了洗，随即从水里上来。天忽然为他开了，他就看见神的灵，仿佛鸽子降下，落在他身上。
And Jesus, having been given baptism, straight away went up from the water; and, the heavens opening, he saw the Spirit of God coming down on him as a dove;

从天上有声音说，这是我的爱子，我所喜悦的。
And a voice came out of heaven, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

当时，耶稣被圣灵引到旷野，受魔鬼的试探。
Then Jesus was sent by the Spirit into the waste land to be tested by the Evil One.

他禁食四十昼夜，后来就饿了。
And after going without food for forty days and forty nights, he was in need of it.

那试探人的进前来对他说，你若是神的儿子，可以吩咐这些石头变成食物。
And the Evil One came and said to him, If you are the Son of God, give the word for these stones to become bread.

耶稣却回答说，经上记着说，人活着，不是单靠食物，乃是靠神口里所出的一切话。
But he made answer and said, It is in the Writings, Bread is not man's only need, but every word which comes out of the mouth of God.

魔鬼就带他进了圣城，叫他站在殿顶上，（顶原文作翅）
Then the Evil One took him to the holy town; and he put him on the highest point of the Temple and said to him,

对他说，你若是神的儿子，可以跳下去。因为经上记着说，主要为你吩咐他的使者，用手托着你，免得你的脚碰在石头上。
If you are the Son of God, let yourself go down; for it is in the Writings, He will give his angels care over you; and, In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.

耶稣对他说，经上又记着说，不可试探主你的神。
Jesus said to him, Again it is in the Writings, You may not put the Lord your God to the test.

魔鬼又带他上了一座最高的山，将世上的万国，与万国的荣华，都指给他看，
Again, the Evil One took him up to a very high mountain, and let him see all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them;

对他说，你若俯伏拜我，我就把这一切都赐给你。
And he said to him, All these things will I give you, if you will go down on your face and give me worship.

耶稣说，撒但退去吧。（撒但就是抵挡的意思，乃魔鬼的别名）因为经上记着说，当拜主你的神，单要事奉他。
Then said Jesus to him, Away, Satan: for it is in the Writings, Give worship to the Lord your God and be his servant only.

于是魔鬼离了耶稣，有天使来伺候他。
Then the Evil One went away from him, and angels came and took care of him.

耶稣听见约翰下了监，就退到加利利去。
Now when it came to his ears that John had been put in prison, he went away to Galilee;

后又离开拿撒勒，往迦百农去，就住在那里。那地方靠海，在西布伦和拿弗他利的边界上。
And going away from Nazareth, he came and made his living-place in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the country of Zebulun and Naphtali:

这是要应验先知以赛亚的话，
So that the word of the prophet Isaiah might come true,

说，西布伦地，拿弗他利地，就是沿海的路，约但河外，外邦人的加利利地。
The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, by the way of the sea, the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,

那坐在黑暗里的百姓，看见了大光，坐在死荫之地的人，有光发现照着他们。
The people who were in the dark saw a great light, and to those in the land of the shade of death did the dawn come up.

从那时候耶稣就传起道来，说，天国近了，你们应当悔改。
From that time Jesus went about preaching and saying, Let your hearts be turned from sin, for the kingdom of heaven is near.

耶稣在加利利海边行走，看见弟兄二人，就是那称呼彼得的西门，和他兄弟安得烈，在海里撒网。他们本是打鱼的。
And when he was walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon, whose other name was Peter, and Andrew, his brother, who were putting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.

耶稣对他们说，来跟从我，我要叫你们得人如得鱼一样。
And he said to them, Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men.

他们就立刻舍了网，跟从了他。
And straight away they let go the nets and went after him.

从那里往前走，又看见弟兄二人，就是西庇太的儿子雅各，和他兄弟约翰，同他们的父亲西庇太在船上补网。耶稣就招呼他们。
And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, in the boat with their father, stitching up their nets; and he said, Come.

他们立刻舍了船，别了父亲，跟从了耶稣。
And they went straight from the boat and their father and came after him.

耶稣走遍加利利，在各会堂里教训人，传天国的福音，医治百姓各样的病症。
And Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and making well those who were ill with any disease among the people.

他的名声就传遍了叙利亚。那里的人把一切害病的，就是害各样疾病，各样疼痛的，和被鬼附的，癫痫的，瘫痪的，都带了来，耶稣就治好了他们。
And news of him went out through all Syria; and they took to him all who were ill with different diseases and pains, those having evil spirits and those who were off their heads, and those who had no power of moving. And he made them well.

当下，有许多人从加利利，低加波利，耶路撒冷，犹太，约但河外，来跟着他。
And there went after him great numbers from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judaea and from the other side of Jordan.

耶稣看见这许多的人，就上了山，既已坐下，门徒到他跟前来。
And seeing great masses of people he went up into the mountain; and when he was seated his disciples came to him.

他就开口教训他们说，
And with these words he gave them teaching, saying,

虚心的人有福了，因为天国是他们的。
Happy are the poor in spirit: for the kingdom of heaven is theirs.

哀恸的人有福了，因为他们必得安慰。
Happy are those who are sad: for they will be comforted.

温柔的人有福了，因为他们必承受地土。
Happy are the gentle: for the earth will be their heritage.

饥渴慕义的人有福了，因为他们必得饱足。
Happy are those whose heart's desire is for righteousness: for they will have their desire.

怜恤人的人有福了，因为他们必蒙怜恤。
Happy are those who have mercy: for they will be given mercy.

清心的人有福了，因为他们必得见神。
Happy are the clean in heart: for they will see God.

使人和睦的人有福了，因为他们必称为神的儿子。
Happy are the peacemakers: for they will be named sons of God.

为义受逼迫的人有福了，因为天国是他们的。
Happy are those who are attacked on account of righteousness: for the kingdom of heaven will be theirs.

人若因我辱骂你们，逼迫你们，捏造各样坏话毁谤你们，你们就有福了。
Happy are you when men give you a bad name, and are cruel to you, and say all evil things against you falsely, because of me.

应当欢喜快乐，因为你们在天上的赏赐是大的。在你们以前的先知，人也是这样逼迫他们。
Be glad and full of joy; for great is your reward in heaven: for so were the prophets attacked who were before you.

你们是世上的盐。盐若失了味，怎能叫他再咸呢？以后无用，不过丢在外面，被人践踏了。
You are the salt of the earth; but if its taste goes from the salt, how will you make it salt again? it is then good for nothing but to be put out and crushed under foot by men.

你们是世上的光。城造在山上，是不能隐藏的。
You are the light of the world. A town put on a hill may be seen by all.

人点灯，不放在斗底下，是放在灯台上，就照亮一家的人。
And a burning light is not put under a vessel, but on its table; so that its rays may be shining on all who are in the house.

你们的光也当这样照在人前，叫他们看见你们的好行为，便将荣耀归给你们在天上的父。
Even so let your light be shining before men, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father in heaven.

莫想我来要废掉律法和先知。我来不是要废掉，乃是要成全。
Let there be no thought that I have come to put an end to the law or the prophets. I have not come for destruction, but to make complete.

我实在告诉你们，就是到天地都废去了，律法的一点一画也不能废去，都要成全。
Truly I say to you, Till heaven and earth come to an end, not the smallest letter or part of a letter will in any way be taken from the law, till all things are done.

所以无论何人废掉这诫命中最小的一条，又教训人这样作，他在天国要称为最小的。但无论何人遵行这诫命，又教训人遵行，他在天国要称为大的。
Whoever then goes against the smallest of these laws, teaching men to do the same, will be named least in the kingdom of heaven; but he who keeps the laws, teaching others to keep them, will be named great in the kingdom of heaven.

我告诉你们，你们的义，若不胜于文士和法利赛人的义，断不能进天国。
For I say to you, If your righteousness is not greater than the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never go into the kingdom of heaven.

你们听见有吩咐古人的话，说，不可杀人，又说，凡杀人的，难免受审判。
You have knowledge that it was said in old times, You may not put to death; and, Whoever puts to death will be in danger of being judged:

只是我告诉你们，凡向弟兄动怒的，难免受审判。（有古卷在凡字下添无缘无故地五字）凡骂弟兄是拉加的，难免公会的审断。凡骂弟兄是魔利的，难免地狱的火。
But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be in danger of being judged; and he who says to his brother, Raca, will be in danger from the Sanhedrin; and whoever says, You foolish one, will be in danger of the hell of fire.

所以你在祭坛上献礼物的时候，若想起弟兄向你怀怨，
If then you are making an offering at the altar and there it comes to your mind that your brother has something against you,

就把礼物留在坛前，先去同弟兄和好，然后来献礼物。
While your offering is still before the altar, first go and make peace with your brother, then come and make your offering.

你同告你的对头还在路上，就赶紧与他和息。恐怕他把你送给审判官，审判官交付衙役，你就下在监里了。
Come to an agreement quickly with him who has a cause against you at law, while you are with him on the way, for fear that he may give you up to the judge and the judge may give you to the police and you may be put into prison.

我实在告诉你，若有一文钱没有还清，你断不能从那里出来。
Truly I say to you, You will not come out from there till you have made payment of the very last farthing.

你们听见有话说，不可奸淫。
You have knowledge that it was said, You may not have connection with another man's wife:

只是我告诉你们，凡看见妇女就动淫念的，这人心里已经与她犯奸淫了。
But I say to you that everyone whose eyes are turned on a woman with desire has had connection with her in his heart.

若是你的右眼叫你跌倒，就剜出来丢掉。宁可失去百体中的一体，不叫全身丢在地狱里。
And if your right eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out and put it away from you; because it is better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go into hell.

若是右手叫你跌倒，就砍下来丢掉。宁可失去百体中的一体，不叫全身下入地狱。
And if your right hand is a cause of trouble to you, let it be cut off and put it away from you; because it is better to undergo the loss of one part, than for all your body to go into hell.

又有话说，人若休妻，就当给她休书。
Again, it was said, Whoever puts away his wife has to give her a statement in writing for this purpose:

只是我告诉你们，凡休妻的，若不是为淫乱的缘故，就是叫她作淫妇了。人若娶这被休的妇人，也是犯奸淫了。
But I say to you that everyone who puts away his wife for any other cause but the loss of her virtue, makes her false to her husband; and whoever takes her as his wife after she is put away, is no true husband to her.

你们又听见有吩咐古人的话，说，不可背誓，所起的誓，总要向主谨守。
Again, you have knowledge that it was said in old times, Do not take false oaths, but give effect to your oaths to the Lord:

只是我告诉你们，什么誓都不可起，不可指着天起誓，因为天是神的座位。
But I say to you, Take no oaths at all: not by the heaven, because it is the seat of God;

不可指着地起誓，因为地是他的脚凳。也不可指着耶路撒冷起誓，因为耶路撒冷是大君的京城。
Or by the earth, because it is the resting-place for his foot; or by Jerusalem, because it is the town of the great King.

又不可指着你的头起誓，因为你不能使一根头发变黑变白了。
You may not take an oath by your head, because you are not able to make one hair white or black.

你们的话，是，就说是，不是，就说不是。若再多说，就是出于那恶者。（或作是从恶里出来的）
But let your words be simply, Yes or No: and whatever is more than these is of the Evil One.

你们听见有话说，以眼还眼，以牙还牙。
You have knowledge that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:

只是我告诉你们，不要与恶人作对。有人打你的右脸，连左脸也转过来由他打。
But I say to you, Do not make use of force against an evil man; but to him who gives you a blow on the right side of your face let the left be turned.

有人想要告你，要拿你的里衣，连外衣也由他拿去。
And if any man goes to law with you and takes away your coat, do not keep back your robe from him.

有人强逼你走一里路，你就同他走二里。
And whoever makes you go one mile, go with him two.

有求你的，就给他。有向你借贷的，不可推辞。
Give to him who comes with a request, and keep not your property from him who would for a time make use of it.

你们听见有话说，当爱你的邻舍，恨你的仇敌。
You have knowledge that it was said, Have love for your neighbour, and hate for him who is against you:

只是我告诉你们，要爱你们的仇敌。为那逼迫你们的祷告。
But I say to you, Have love for those who are against you, and make prayer for those who are cruel to you;

这样，就可以作你们天父的儿子。因为他叫日头照好人，也照歹人，降雨给义人，也给不义的人。
So that you may be the sons of your Father in heaven; for his sun gives light to the evil and to the good, and he sends rain on the upright man and on the sinner.

你们若单爱那爱你们的人。有什么赏赐呢？就是税吏不也是这样行吗？
For if you have love for those who have love for you, what credit is it to you? do not the tax-farmers the same?

你们若单请你弟兄的安，比人有什么长处呢？就是外邦人不也是这样行吗？
And if you say, Good day, to your brothers only, what do you do more than others? do not even the Gentiles the same?

所以你们要完全，象你们的天父完全一样。
Be then complete in righteousness, even as your Father in heaven is complete.

你们要小心，不可将善事行在人的面前，故意叫他们看见。若是这样，就不能得你们天父的赏赐了。
Take care not to do your good works before men, to be seen by them; or you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.

所以你施舍的时候，不可在你前面吹号，像那假冒为善的人，在会堂里和街道上所行的，故意要得人的荣耀。我实在告诉你们，他们已经得了他们的赏赐。
When then you give money to the poor, do not make a noise about it, as the false-hearted men do in the Synagogues and in the streets, so that they may have glory from men. Truly, I say to you, They have their reward.

你施舍的时候，不要叫左手知道右手所作的。
But when you give money, let not your left hand see what your right hand does:

要叫你施舍的事行在暗中，你父在暗中察看，必然报答你。（有古卷作必在明处报答你）
So that your giving may be in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.

你们祷告的时候，不可像那假冒为善的人，爱站在会堂里和十字路口上祷告，故意叫人看见。我实在告诉你们，他们已经得了他们的赏赐。
And when you make your prayers, be not like the false-hearted men, who take pleasure in getting up and saying their prayers in the Synagogues and at the street turnings so that they may be seen by men. Truly I say to you, They have their reward.

你祷告的时候，要进你的内屋，关上门，祷告你在暗中的父，你父在暗中察看，必然报答你。
But when you make your prayer, go into your private room, and, shutting the door, say a prayer to your Father in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.

你们祷告，不可像外邦人，用许多重复话。他们以为话多了必蒙垂听。
And in your prayer do not make use of the same words again and again, as the Gentiles do: for they have the idea that God will give attention to them because of the number of their words.

你们不可效法他们。因为你们没有祈求以先，你们所需用的，你们的父早已知道了。
So be not like them; because your Father has knowledge of your needs even before you make your requests to him.

所以你们祷告，要这样说，我们在天上的父，愿人都尊你的名为圣。
Let this then be your prayer: Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy.

愿你的国降临，愿你的旨意行在地上，如同行在天上。
Let your kingdom come. Let your pleasure be done, as in heaven, so on earth.

我们日用的饮食，今日赐给我们。
Give us this day bread for our needs.

免我们的债，如同我们免了人的债。
And make us free of our debts, as we have made those free who are in debt to us.

不叫我们遇见试探，救我们脱离凶恶，（或作脱离恶者）因为国度，权柄，荣耀，全是你的，直到永远，阿们。（有古卷无因为至阿们等字）
And let us not be put to the test, but keep us safe from the Evil One.

你们饶恕人的过犯，你们的天父也必饶恕你们的过犯。
For if you let men have forgiveness for their sins, you will have forgiveness from your Father in heaven.

你们不饶恕人的过犯，你们的天父也必不饶恕你们的过犯。
But if you do not let men have forgiveness for their sins, you will not have forgiveness from your Father for your sins.

你们禁食的时候，不可像那假冒为善的人，脸上带着愁容。因为他们把脸弄得难看，故意叫人看出他们是禁食。我实在告诉你们，他们已经得了他们的赏赐。
And when you go without food, be not sad-faced as the false-hearted are. For they go about with changed looks, so that men may see that they are going without food. Truly I say to you, They have their reward.

你禁食的时候，要梳头洗脸，
But when you go without food, put oil on your head and make your face clean;

不叫人看出你禁食来，只叫你暗中的父看见。你父在暗中察看，必然报答你。
So that no one may see that you are going without food, but your Father in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will give you your reward.

不要为自己积攒财宝在地上，地上有虫子咬，能锈坏，也有贼挖窟窿来偷。
Make no store of wealth for yourselves on earth, where it may be turned to dust by worms and weather, and where thieves may come in by force and take it away.

只要积攒财宝在天上，天上没有虫子咬，不能锈坏，也没有贼挖窟窿来偷。
But make a store for yourselves in heaven, where it will not be turned to dust and where thieves do not come in to take it away:

因为你的财宝在哪里，你的心也在哪里。
For where your wealth is, there will your heart be.

眼睛就是身上的灯。你的眼睛若了亮，全身就光明。
The light of the body is the eye; if then your eye is true, all your body will be full of light.

你的眼睛若昏花，全身就黑暗。你里头的光若黑暗了，那黑暗是何等大呢。
But if your eye is evil, all your body will be dark. If then the light which is in you is dark, how dark it will be!

一个人不能事奉两个主。不是恶这个爱那个，就是重这个轻那个。你们不能又事奉神，又事奉玛门。（玛门是财利的意思）
No man is able to be a servant to two masters: for he will have hate for the one and love for the other, or he will keep to one and have no respect for the other. You may not be servants of God and of wealth.

所以我告诉你们，不要为生命忧虑吃什么，喝什么。为身体忧虑穿什么。生命不胜于饮食吗？身体不胜于衣裳吗？
So I say to you, Take no thought for your life, about food or drink, or about clothing for your body. Is not life more than food, and the body more than its clothing?

你们看那天上的飞鸟，也不种，也不收，也不积蓄在仓里，你们的天父尚且养活它。你们不比飞鸟贵重得多吗？
See the birds of heaven; they do not put seeds in the earth, they do not get in grain, or put it in store-houses; and your Father in heaven gives them food. Are you not of much more value than they?

你们哪一个能用思虑使寿数多加一刻呢？（或作使身量多加一肘呢）
And which of you by taking thought is able to make himself a cubit taller?

何必为衣裳忧虑呢？你想野地里的百合花，怎么长起来，它也不劳苦，也不纺线。
And why are you troubled about clothing? See the flowers of the field, how they come up; they do no work, they make no thread:

然而我告诉你们，就是所罗门极荣华的时候，他所穿戴的，还不如这花一朵呢。
But I say to you that even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one of these.

你们这小信的人哪，野地里的草今天还在，明天就丢在炉里，神还给它这样的妆饰，何况你们呢。
But if God gives such clothing to the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is put into the oven, will he not much more give you clothing, O you of little faith?

所以不要忧虑，说，吃什么？喝什么？穿什么？
Then do not be full of care, saying, What are we to have for food or drink? or, With what may we be clothed?

这都是外邦人所求的。你们需用的这一切东西，你们的天父是知道的。
Because the Gentiles go in search of all these things: for your Father in heaven has knowledge that you have need of all these things:

你们要先求他的国和他的义。这些东西都要加给你们了。
But let your first care be for his kingdom and his righteousness; and all these other things will be given to you in addition.

所以不要为明天忧虑。因为明天自有明天的忧虑。一天的难处一天当就够了。
Then have no care for tomorrow: tomorrow will take care of itself. Take the trouble of the day as it comes.

你们不要论断人，免得你们被论断。
Be not judges of others, and you will not be judged.

因为你们怎样论断人，也必怎样被论断。你们用什么量器量给人，也必用什么量器量给你们。
For as you have been judging, so you will be judged, and with your measure will it be measured to you.

为什么看见你弟兄眼中有刺，却不想自己眼中有梁木呢？
And why do you take note of the grain of dust in your brother's eye, but take no note of the bit of wood which is in your eye?

你自己眼中有梁木，怎能对你弟兄说，容我去掉你眼中的刺呢？
Or how will you say to your brother, Let me take out the grain of dust from your eye, when you yourself have a bit of wood in your eye?

你这假冒为善的人，先去掉自己眼中的梁木，然后才能看得清楚，去掉你弟兄眼中的刺。
You false one, first take out the bit of wood from your eye, then will you see clearly to take out the grain of dust from your brother's eye.

不要把圣物给狗，也不要把你们的珍珠丢在猪前，恐怕它践踏了珍珠，转过来咬你们。
Do not give that which is holy to the dogs, or put your jewels before pigs, for fear that they will be crushed under foot by the pigs whose attack will then be made against you.

你们祈求，就给你们。寻找，就寻见。叩门，就给你们开门。
Make a request, and it will be answered; what you are searching for you will get; give the sign, and the door will be open to you:

因为凡祈求的，就得着。寻找的，就寻见。叩门的，就给他开门。
Because to everyone who makes a request, it will be given; and he who is searching will get his desire, and to him who gives the sign, the door will be open.

你们中间，谁有儿子求饼，反给他石头呢？
Or which of you, if his son makes a request for bread, will give him a stone?

求鱼，反给他蛇呢？
Or if he makes a request for a fish, will give him a snake?

你们虽然不好，尚且知道拿好东西给儿女，何况你们在天上的父，岂不更把好东西给求他的人吗？
If you, then, being evil, are able to give good things to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who make requests to him?

所以无论何事，你们愿意人怎样待你们，你们也要怎样待人。因为这就是律法和先知的道理。
All those things, then, which you would have men do to you, even so do you to them: because this is the law and the prophets.

你们要进窄门。因为引到灭亡，那门是宽的，路是大的，进去的人也多。
Go in by the narrow door; for wide is the door and open is the way which goes to destruction, and great numbers go in by it.

引到永生，那门是窄的，路是小的，找着的人也少。
For narrow is the door and hard the road to life, and only a small number make discovery of it.

你们要防备假先知。他们到你们这里来，外面披着羊皮，里面却是残暴的狼。
Be on the watch for false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inside they are cruel wolves.

凭着他们的果子，就可以认出他们来。荆棘上岂能摘葡萄呢？蒺藜里岂能摘无花果呢？
By their fruits you will get knowledge of them. Do men get grapes from thorns or figs from thistles?

这样，凡好树都结好果子，惟独坏树结坏果子。
Even so, every good tree gives good fruit; but the bad tree gives evil fruit.

好树不能结坏果子，坏树不能结好果子。
It is not possible for a good tree to give bad fruit, and a bad tree will not give good fruit.

凡不结好果子的树，就砍下来，丢在火里。
Every tree which does not give good fruit is cut down and put in the fire.

所以凭着他们的果子，就可以认出他们来。
So by their fruits you will get knowledge of them.

凡称呼我主阿，主阿的人，不能都进天国。惟独遵行我天父旨意的人，才能进去。
Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, will go into the kingdom of heaven; but he who does the pleasure of my Father in heaven.

当那日必有许多人对我说，主阿，主阿，我们不是奉你的名传道，奉你的名赶鬼，奉你的名行许多异能吗？
A great number will say to me on that day, Lord, Lord, were we not prophets in your name, and did we not by your name send out evil spirits, and by your name do works of power?

我就明明地告诉他们说，我从来不认识你们，你们这些作恶的人，离开我去吧。
And then will I say to them, I never had knowledge of you: go from me, you workers of evil.

所以凡听见我这话就去行的，好比一个聪明人，把房子盖在磐石上。
Everyone, then, to whom my words come and who does them, will be like a wise man who made his house on a rock;

雨淋，水冲，风吹，撞着那房子，房子总不倒塌。因为根基立在磐石上。
And the rain came down and there was a rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house, but it was not moved; because it was based on the rock.

凡听见我这话不去行的，好比一个无知的人，把房子盖在沙土上。
And everyone to whom my words come and who does them not, will be like a foolish man who made his house on sand;

雨淋，水冲，风吹，撞着那房子，房子就倒塌了。并且倒塌得很大。
And the rain came down and there was a rush of waters and the winds were driving against that house; and it came down and great was its fall.

耶稣讲完了这些话，众人都希奇他的教训。
And it came about, when Jesus had come to the end of these words, that the people were surprised at his teaching,

因为他教训他们，正像有权柄的人，不像他们的文士。
for he was teaching as one having authority, and not as their scribes.

耶稣下了山，有许多人跟着他。
And when he had come down from the mountain, great numbers of people came after him.

有一个长大麻疯的来拜他说，主若肯，必能叫我洁净了。
And a leper came and gave him worship, saying, Lord, if it is your pleasure, you have power to make me clean.

耶稣伸手摸他说，我肯，你洁净了吧。他的大麻疯立刻就洁净了。
And he put his hand on him, saying, It is my pleasure; be clean. And straight away he was made clean.

耶稣对他说，你切不可告诉人。只要去把身体给祭司察看，献上摩西所吩咐的礼物，对众人作证据。
And Jesus said to him, See that you say nothing about this to anyone; but go and let the priest see you and make the offering which was ordered by Moses, for a witness to them.

耶稣进了迦百农，有一个百夫长进前来，求他说，
And when Jesus was come into Capernaum, a certain captain came to him with a request,

主阿，我的仆人害瘫痪病，躺在家里，甚是疼苦。
Saying, Lord, my servant is ill in bed at the house, with no power in his body, and in great pain.

耶稣说，我去医治他。
And he said to him, I will come and make him well.

百夫长回答说，主阿，你到我舍下，我不敢当。只要你说一句话，我的仆人就必好了。
And the captain in answer said, Lord, I am not good enough for you to come under my roof; but only say the word, and my servant will be made well.

因为我在人的权下，也有兵在我以下。对这个说，去，他就去。对那个说，来，他就来。对我的仆人说，你作这事，他就去作。
Because I myself am a man under authority, having under me fighting men; and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he does it.

耶稣听见就希奇，对跟从的人说，我实在告诉你们，这么大的信心，就是在以色列中，我也没有遇见过。
And when these words came to the ears of Jesus he was surprised, and said to those who came after him, Truly I say to you, I have not seen such great faith, no, not in Israel.

我又告诉你们，从东从西，将有许多人来，在天国里与亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各，一同坐席。
And I say to you that numbers will come from the east and the west, and will take their seats with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven:

惟有本国的子民，竟被赶到外边黑暗里去。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
But the sons of the kingdom will be put out into the dark, and there will be weeping and cries of pain.

耶稣对百夫长说，你回去吧。照你的信心，给你成全了。那时，他的仆人就好了。
And Jesus said to the captain, Go in peace; as your faith is, so let it be done to you. And the servant was made well in that hour.

耶稣到了彼得家里，见彼得的岳母害热病躺着。
And when Jesus had come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother in bed, very ill.

耶稣把她的手一摸，热就退了。她就起来服事耶稣。
And he put his hand on hers and the disease went from her, and she got up and took care of his needs.

到了晚上，有人带着许多被鬼附的，来到耶稣跟前，他只用一句话，就把鬼都赶出去。并且治好了一切有病的人。
And in the evening, they took to him a number of people who had evil spirits; and he sent the spirits out of them with a word, and made well all who were ill;

这是要应验先知以赛亚的话，说，他代替我们的软弱，担当我们的疾病。
So that the word of Isaiah the prophet might come true: He himself took our pains and our diseases.

耶稣见许多人围着他，就吩咐渡到那边去。
Now when Jesus saw a great mass of people about him, he gave an order to go to the other side.

有一个文士来，对他说，夫子，你无论往哪里去，我要跟从你。
And there came a scribe and said to him, Master, I will come after you wherever you go.

耶稣说，狐狸有洞，天空的飞鸟有窝，人子却没有枕头的地方。
And Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have a resting-place; but the Son of man has nowhere to put his head.

又有一个门徒对耶稣说，主阿，容我先回去埋葬我的父亲。
And another of the disciples said to him, Lord, let me first go and give the last honours to my father.

耶稣说，任凭死人埋葬他们的死人，你跟从我吧。
But Jesus said to him, Come after me; and let the dead take care of their dead.

耶稣上了船，门徒跟着他。
And when he had got into a boat, his disciples went after him.

海里忽然起了暴风，甚至船被波浪掩盖。耶稣却睡着了。
And there came up a great storm in the sea, so that the boat was covered with the waves: but he was sleeping.

门徒来叫醒了他，说，主阿，救我们，我们丧命啦。
And they came to him, and, awaking him, said, Help, Lord; destruction is near.

耶稣说，你们这小信的人哪，为什么胆怯呢？于是起来，斥责风和海，风和海就大大地平静了。
And he said to them, Why are you full of fear, O you of little faith? Then he got up and gave orders to the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.

众人希奇说，这是怎样的人，连风和海也听从他了。
And the men were full of wonder, saying, What sort of man is this, that even the winds and the sea do his orders?

耶稣既渡到那边去，来到加大拉人的地方，就有两个被鬼附的人，从坟茔里出来迎着他，极其凶猛，甚至没有人能从那条路上经过。
And when he had come to the other side, to the country of the Gadarenes, there came out to him from the place of the dead, two who had evil spirits, so violent that no man was able to go that way.

他们喊着说，神的儿子，我们与你有什么相干。时候还没有到，你就上这里来叫我们受苦吗？
And they gave a loud cry, saying, What have we to do with you, you Son of God? Have you come here to give us punishment before the time?

离他们很远，有一大群猪吃食。
Now there was, some distance away, a great herd of pigs taking their food.

鬼就央求耶稣说，若把我们赶出去，就打发我们进入猪群吧。
And the evil spirits made strong prayers to him, saying, If you send us out, let us go into the herd of pigs.

耶稣说，去吧。鬼就出来，进入猪群。全群忽然闯下山崖，投在海里淹死了。
And he said to them, Go. And they came out, and went into the pigs; and the herd went rushing down a sharp slope into the sea and came to their end in the water.

放猪的就逃跑进城，将这一切事，和被鬼附的人所遭遇的，都告诉人。
And their keepers went in flight to the town and gave an account of everything, and of the men who had the evil spirits.

合城的人，都出来迎见耶稣。既见了，就央求他离开他们的境界。
And all the town came out to Jesus; and seeing him they made request that he would go away from their part of the country.

耶稣上了船，渡过海，来到自己的城里。
And he got into a boat and went across and came to his town.

有人用褥子抬着一个瘫子，到耶稣跟前来。耶稣见他们的信心，就对瘫子说，小子，放心吧。你的罪赦了。
And they took to him a man stretched on a bed who had no power of moving; and Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man who was ill, Son, take heart; you have forgiveness for your sins.

有几个文士心里说，这个人说僭妄的话了。
And some of the scribes said among themselves, This man has no respect for God.

耶稣知道他们的心意，就说，你们为什么心里怀着恶念呢？
And Jesus, having knowledge of what was in their minds, said, Why are your thoughts evil?

或说，你的罪赦了。或说，你起来行走。哪一样容易呢？
For which is the simpler, to say, You have forgiveness for your sins; or to say, Get up and go?

但要叫你们知道人子在地上有赦罪的权柄，就对瘫子说，起来，拿你的褥子回家去吧。
But so that you may see that on earth the Son of man has authority for the forgiveness of sins, (then said he to the man who was ill,) Get up, and take up your bed, and go to your house.

那人就起来，回家去了。
And he got up and went away to his house.

众人看见都惊奇，就归荣耀与神。因为他将这样的权柄赐给人。
But when the people saw it they were full of fear, and gave glory to God who had given such authority to men.

耶稣从那里往前走，看见一个人名叫马太，坐在税关上，就对他说，你跟从我来。他就起来跟从了耶稣。
And when Jesus was going from there, he saw a man whose name was Matthew, seated at the place where taxes were taken; and he said to him, Come after me. And he got up and went after him.

耶稣在屋里坐席的时候，有好些税吏和罪人来，与耶稣和他的门徒一同坐席。
And it came about, when he was in the house taking food, that a number of tax-farmers and sinners came and took their places with Jesus and his disciples.

法利赛人看见，就对耶稣的门徒说，你们的先生为什么和税吏并罪人一同吃饭呢？
And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, Why does your Master take food with tax-farmers and sinners?

耶稣听见，就说，康健的人用不着医生，有病的人才用得着。
But on hearing this he said, Those who are well have no need of a medical man, but those who are ill.

经上说，我喜爱怜恤，不喜爱祭祀。这句话的意思，你们且去揣摩。我来，本不是召义人，乃是召罪人。
But go and take to heart the sense of these words, My desire is for mercy, not offerings: for I have come not to get the upright, but sinners.

那时，约翰的门徒来见耶稣说，我们和法利赛人常常禁食，你的门徒倒不禁食，这是为什么呢？
Then the disciples of John came to him, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees frequently go without food, but your disciples do not?

耶稣对他们说，新郎和陪伴之人同在的时候，陪伴之人岂能哀恸呢？但日子将到，新郎要离开他们，那时候他们就要禁食。
And Jesus said to them, Will the friends of the newly-married man be sad as long as he is with them? But the days will come when he will be taken away from them, and then will they go without food.

没有人把新布补在旧衣服上。因为所补上的，反带坏了那衣服，破得就更大了。
And no man puts a bit of new cloth on an old coat, for by pulling away from the old, it makes a worse hole.

也没有人把新酒装在旧皮袋里。若是这样，皮袋就裂开，酒漏出来，连皮袋也坏了。惟独把新酒装在新皮袋里，两样就都保全了。
And men do not put new wine into old wine-skins; or the skins will be burst and the wine will come out, and the skins are of no more use: but they put new wine into new wine-skins, and so the two will be safe.

耶稣说这话的时候，有一个管会堂的来拜他说，我女儿刚才死了，求你去按手在她身上，她就必活了。
While he was saying these things to them, there came a ruler and gave him worship, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but come and put your hand on her, and she will come back to life.

耶稣便起来，跟着他去，门徒也跟了去。
And Jesus got up and went after him, and so did his disciples.

有一个女人，患了十二年的血漏来到耶稣背后，摸他的衣裳？？子。
And a woman, who for twelve years had had a flow of blood, came after him, and put her hand on the edge of his robe:

因为她心里说，我只摸他的衣裳，就必痊愈。
Because, she said to herself, if I may but put my hand on his robe, I will be made well.

耶稣转过来看见她，就说，女儿，放心，你的信救了你。从那时候，女人就痊愈了。
But Jesus, turning and seeing her, said, Daughter, take heart; your faith has made you well. And the woman was made well from that hour.

耶稣到了管会堂的家里，看见有吹手，又有许多人乱嚷。
And when Jesus came into the ruler's house and saw the players with their instruments and the people making a noise,

就说，退去吧。这闺女不是死了，是睡着了。他们就嗤笑他。
He said, Make room; for the girl is not dead, but sleeping. And they were laughing at him.

众人既被撵出，耶稣就进去，拉着闺女的手，闺女便起来了。
But when the people were sent out, he went in and took her by the hand; and the girl got up.

于是这风声传遍了那地方。
And the news of it went out into all that land.

耶稣从那里往前走，有两个瞎子跟着他，喊叫说，大卫的子孙，可怜我们吧。
And when Jesus went on from there, two blind men came after him, crying out, Have mercy on us, you Son of David.

耶稣进了房子，瞎子就来到他跟前，耶稣说，你们信我能作这事吗？他们说，主阿，我们信。
And when he had come into the house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus said to them, Have you faith that I am able to do this? They said to him, Yes, Lord.

耶稣就摸他们的眼睛，说，照着你们的信给你们成全了吧。
Then he put his hand on their eyes, saying, As your faith is, let it be done to you.

他们的眼睛就开了。耶稣切切地嘱咐他们说，你们要小心，不可叫人知道。
And their eyes were made open. And Jesus said to them sharply, Let no man have knowledge of it.

他们出去，竟把他的名声传遍了那地方。
But they went out and gave news of him in all that land.

他们出去的时候，有人将鬼所附的一个哑吧，带到耶稣跟前来。
And while they were going away, there came to him a man without the power of talking, and with an evil spirit.

鬼被赶出去，哑吧就说出话来。众人都希奇说，在以色列中，从来没有见过这样的事。
And when the evil spirit had been sent out, the man had the power of talking: and they were all surprised, saying, Such a thing has never been seen in Israel.

法利赛人却说，他是靠着鬼王赶鬼。
But the Pharisees said, By the ruler of evil spirits, he sends evil spirits out of men.

耶稣走遍各城各乡，在会堂里教训人，宣讲天国的福音，又医治各样的病症。
And Jesus went about all the towns and small places, teaching in their Synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and making well all sorts of disease and pain.

他看见许多的人，就怜悯他们。因为他们困苦流离，如同羊没有牧人一般。
But when he saw all the people he was moved with pity for them, because they were troubled and wandering like sheep without a keeper.

于是对门徒说，要收的庄稼多，作工的人少。
Then he said to his disciples, There is much grain but not enough men to get it in.

所以你们当求庄稼的主，打发工人出去，收他的庄稼。
Make prayer, then, to the Lord of the grain-fields, that he may send out workers to get in his grain.

耶稣叫了十二个门徒来，给他们权柄，能赶逐污鬼，并医治各样的病症。
And he got together his twelve disciples and gave them the power of driving out unclean spirits, and of making well all sorts of disease and pain.

这十二使徒的名，头一个叫西门，又称彼得，还有他兄弟安得烈。西庇太的儿子雅各，和雅各的兄弟约翰。
Now the names of the twelve are these: The first, Simon, who is named Peter, and Andrew, his brother; James, the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother;

腓力，和巴多罗买，多马，和税吏马太，亚勒腓的儿子雅各，和达太。
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew, the tax-farmer; James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;

奋锐党的西门，还有卖耶稣的加略人犹大。
Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who was false to him.

耶稣差这十二个人去，吩咐他们说，外邦人的路，你们不要走。撒玛利亚人的城，你们不要进。
These twelve Jesus sent out and gave them orders, saying, Do not go among the Gentiles, or into any town of Samaria,

宁可往以色列家迷失的羊那里去。
But go to the wandering sheep of the house of Israel,

随走随传，说，天国近了。
And, on your way, say, The kingdom of heaven is near.

医治病人，叫死人复活，叫长大麻疯的洁净，把鬼赶出去。你们白白地得来，也要白白地舍去。
Make well those who are ill, give life to the dead, make lepers clean, send evil spirits out of men; freely it has been given to you, freely give.

腰袋里，不要带金银铜钱。
Take no gold or silver or copper in your pockets;

行路不要带口袋，不要带两件褂子，也不要带鞋和拐杖。因为工人得饮食，是应当的。
Take no bag for your journey and do not take two coats or shoes or a stick: for the workman has a right to his food.

你们无论进那一城，那一村，要打听那里谁是好人，就住在他家，直住到走的时候。
And into whatever town or small place you go, make search there for someone who is respected, and make his house your resting-place till you go away.

进他家里去，要请他的安。
And when you go in, say, May peace be on this house.

那家若配得平安，你们所求的平安，就必临到那家。若不配得，你们所求的平安仍归你们。
And if the house is good enough, let your peace come on it: but if not, let your peace come back to you.

凡不接待你们，不听你们话的人，你们离开那家，或是那城的时候，就把脚上的尘土跺下去。
And whoever will not take you in, or give ear to your words, when you go out from that house or that town, put off its dust from your feet.

我实在告诉你们，当审判的日子，所多玛和蛾摩拉所受的，比那城还容易受呢。
Truly I say to you, It will be better for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of God's judging than for that town.

我差你们去，如同羊进入狼群。所以你们要灵巧像蛇，驯良像鸽子。
See, I send you out as sheep among wolves. Be then as wise as snakes, and as gentle as doves.

你们要防备人。因为他们要把你们交给公会，也要在会堂里鞭打你们。
But be on the watch against men: for they will give you up to the Sanhedrins, and in their Synagogues they will give you blows;

并且你们要为我的缘故，被送到诸侯君王面前，对他们和外邦人作见证。
And you will come before rulers and kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles.

你们被交的时候，不要思虑怎样说话或说什么话。到那时候，必赐给你们当说的话。
But when you are given up into their hands, do not be troubled about what to say or how to say it: for in that hour what you are to say will be given to you;

因为不是你们自己说的，乃是你们父的灵在你们里头说的。
Because it is not you who say the words, but the Spirit of your Father in you.

弟兄要把弟兄，父亲要把儿子，送到死地。儿女要与父母为敌，害死他们。
And brother will give up brother to death, and the father his child: and children will go against their fathers and mothers, and put them to death.

并且你们要为我的名，被众人恨恶，惟有忍耐到底的，必然得救。
And you will be hated by all men because of my name: but he who is strong to the end will have salvation.

有人在这城里逼迫你们，就逃到那城里去。我实在告诉你们，以色列的城邑，你们还没有走遍，人子就到了。
But when they are cruel to you in one town, go in flight to another: for truly, I say to you, You will not have gone through the towns of Israel before the Son of man comes.

学生不能高过先生，仆人不能高过主人。
A disciple is not greater than his master, or a servant than his lord.

学生和先生一样，仆人和主人一样，也就罢了。人既骂家主是别西卜，何况他的家人呢？（别西卜是鬼王的名）
It is enough for the disciple that he may be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have given the name Beelzebub to the master of the house, how much more to those of his house!

所以不要怕他们。因为掩盖的事，没有不露出来的。隐藏的事，没有不被人知道的。
Have, then, no fear of them: because nothing is covered which will not come to light, or secret which will not be made clear.

我在暗中告诉你们的，你们要在明处说出来。你们耳中所听的，要在房上宣扬出来。
What I say to you in the dark, say in the light: and what comes to your ear secretly, say publicly from the house-tops.

那杀身体不能杀灵魂的，不要怕他们。惟有能把身体和灵魂都灭在地狱里的，正要怕他。
And have no fear of those who put to death the body, but are not able to put to death the soul. But have fear of him who has power to give soul and body to destruction in hell.

两个麻雀，不是卖一分银子吗？若是你们的父不许，一个也不能掉在地上。
Are not sparrows two a farthing? and not one of them comes to an end without your Father:

就是你们的头发，也都被数过了。
But the hairs of your head are all numbered.

所以不要惧怕。你们比许多麻雀还贵重。
Then have no fear; you are of more value than a flock of sparrows.

凡在人面前认我的，我在我天上的父面前，也必认他。
To everyone, then, who gives witness to me before men, I will give witness before my Father in heaven.

凡在人面前不认我的，我在我天上的父面前，也必不认他。
But if anyone says before men that he has no knowledge of me, I will say that I have no knowledge of him before my Father in heaven.

你们不要想我来，是叫地上太平。我来并不是叫地上太平，乃是叫地上动刀兵。
Do not have the thought that I have come to send peace on the earth; I came not to send peace but a sword.

因为我来，是叫人与父亲生疏，女儿与母亲生疏，媳妇与婆婆生疏。
For I have come to put a man against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law:

人的仇敌，就是自己家里的人。
And a man will be hated by those of his house.

爱父母过于爱我的，不配作我的门徒，爱儿女过于爱我的，不配作我的门徒。
He who has more love for his father or mother than for me is not good enough for me; he who has more love for son or daughter than for me is not good enough for me.

不背着他的十字架跟从我的，也不配作我的门徒。
And he who does not take his cross and come after me is not good enough for me.

得着生命的，将要失丧生命。为我失丧生命的，将要得着生命。
He who has the desire to keep his life will have it taken from him, and he who gives up his life because of me will have it given back to him.

人接待你们，就是接待我。接待我，就是接待那差我来的。
He who gives honour to you gives honour to me; and he who gives honour to me gives honour to him who sent me.

人因为先知的名接待先知，必得先知所得的赏赐，人因为义人的名接待义人，必得义人所得的赏赐。
He who gives honour to a prophet, in the name of a prophet, will be given a prophet's reward; and he who gives honour to an upright man, in the name of an upright man, will be given an upright man's reward.

无论何人，因为门徒的名，只把一杯凉水给这小子里的一个喝，我实在告诉你们，这人不能不得赏赐。
And whoever gives to one of these little ones a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he will not go without his reward.

耶稣吩咐完了十二个门徒，就离开那里，往各城去传道教训人。
And it came about that when Jesus had come to the end of giving these orders to his twelve disciples, he went away from there, teaching and preaching in their towns.

约翰在监里听见基督所作的事，就打发两个门徒去，
Now when John had news in prison of the works of the Christ, he sent his disciples

问他说，那将要来的是你吗？还是我们等候别人呢？
To say to him, Are you he who is to come, or are we waiting for another?

耶稣回答说，你们去，把所听见所看见的事告诉约翰。
And Jesus, answering, said to them, Go and give news to John of the things which you are seeing and hearing:

就是瞎子看见，瘸子行走，长大麻疯的洁净，聋子听见。死人复活，穷人有福音传给他们。
The blind see; those who were not able to, are walking; lepers are made clean; those who were without hearing, now have their ears open; the dead come to life again, and the poor have the good news given to them.

凡不因我跌倒的，就有福了。
And a blessing will be on him who has no doubts about me.

他们走的时候，耶稣就对众人讲论约翰说，你们从前出到旷野，是要看什么呢？要看风吹动的芦苇吗？
And when they were going away, Jesus, talking of John, said to all the people, What went you out into the waste land to see? a tall stem moving in the wind?

你们出去，到底是要看什么，要看穿细软衣服的人吗？那穿细软衣服的人，是在王宫里。
But what went you out to see? a man delicately clothed? Those who have fair robes are in kings' houses.

你们出去，究竟是为什么，是要看先知吗？我告诉你们，是的，他比先知大多了。
But why did you go out? to see a prophet? Yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.

经上记着说，我要差遣我的使者在你前面，预备道路。所说的就是这个人。
This is he of whom it has been said, See, I send my servant before your face, who will make ready your way before you.

我实在告诉你们，凡妇人所生的，没有一个兴起来大过施洗约翰的。然而天国里最小的，比他还大。
Truly I say to you, Among the sons of women there has not been a greater than John the Baptist: but he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

从施洗约翰的时候到如今，天国是努力进入的，努力的人就得着了。
And from the days of John the Baptist till now, the kingdom of heaven is forcing its way in, and men of force take it.

因为众先知和律法说预言，到约翰为止。
For all the prophets and the law were in force till John.

你们若肯领受，这人就是那应当来的以利亚。
And if you are able to see it, this is Elijah who was to come.

有耳可听的，就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear.

我可用什么比这世代呢？好像孩童坐在街市上，招呼同伴，说，
But what comparison may I make of this generation? It is like children seated in the market-places, crying out to one another,

我们向你们吹笛，你们不跳舞。我们向你们举哀，你们不捶胸。
We made music for you and you did not take part in the dance; we gave cries of sorrow and you made no signs of grief.

约翰来了，也不吃，也不喝，人就说他是被鬼附着的。
For John came, taking no food or drink, and they say, He has an evil spirit.

人子来了，也吃，也喝，人又说他是贪食好酒的人，是税吏和罪人的朋友。但智慧之子，总以智慧为是。（有古卷作但智慧在行为上就显为是）
The Son of man has come feasting, and they say, See, a lover of food and wine, a friend of tax-farmers and sinners! And wisdom is judged to be right by her works.

耶稣在诸城中行了许多异能，那些城的人终不悔改，就在那时候责备他们说，
Then he went on to say hard things to the towns where most of his works of power were done, because they had not been turned from their sins.

哥拉汛哪，你有祸了，伯赛大啊，你有祸了，因为在你们中间所行的异能，若行在推罗西顿，他们早已披麻蒙灰悔改了。
Unhappy are you, Chorazin! Unhappy are you, Beth-saida! For if the works of power which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have been turned from their sins in days gone by, clothing themselves in haircloth and putting dust on their heads.

但我告诉你们，当审判的日子，推罗、西顿所受的，比你们还容易受呢。
But I say to you, It will be better for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judging, than for you.

迦百农阿，你已经升到天上。（或作你将要升到天上吗）将来必坠落阴间。因为在你那里所行的异能，若行在所多玛，它还可以存到今日。
And you, Capernaum, were you not to be lifted up to heaven? you will go down into hell: for if the works of power which were done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have been here to this day.

但我告诉你们，当审判的日子，所多玛所受的，比你还容易受呢。
But I say to you that it will be better for the land of Sodom in the day of judging, than for you.

那时，耶稣说，父阿，天地的主，我感谢你，因为你将这些事，向聪明通达人，就藏起来，向婴孩，就显出来。
At that time Jesus made answer and said, I give praise to you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have kept these things secret from the wise and the men of learning, and have made them clear to little children.

父阿，是的，因为你的美意本是如此。
Yes, Father, for so it was pleasing in your eyes.

一切所有的，都是我父交付我的。除了父，没有人知道子。除了子和子所愿意指示的，没有人知道父。
All things have been given to me by my Father; and no one has knowledge of the Son, but the Father; and no one has knowledge of the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will make it clear.

凡劳苦担重担的人，可以到我这里来，我就使你们得安息。
Come to me, all you who are troubled and weighted down with care, and I will give you rest.

我心里柔和谦卑，你们当负我的轭，学我的样式，这样，你们心里就必得享安息。
Take my yoke on you and become like me, for I am gentle and without pride, and you will have rest for your souls;

因为我的轭是容易的，我的担子是轻省的。
For my yoke is good, and the weight I take up is not hard.

那时，耶稣在安息日，从麦地经过。他的门徒饿了，就掐起麦穗来吃。
At that time Jesus went through the fields on the Sabbath day; and his disciples, being in need of food, were taking the heads of grain.

法利赛人看见，就对耶稣说，看哪，你的门徒作安息日不可作的事了。
But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, See, your disciples do that which it is not right to do on the Sabbath.

耶稣对他们说，经上记着大卫和跟从他的人饥饿之时所作的事，你们没有念过吗？
But he said to them, Have you no knowledge of what David did when he had need of food, and those who were with him?

他怎么进了神的殿，吃了陈设饼，这饼不是他和跟从他的人可以吃得，惟独祭司才可以吃。
How he went into the house of God and took for food the holy bread which it was not right for him or for those who were with him to take, but only for the priests?

再者，律法上所记的，当安息日，祭司在殿里犯了安息日，还是没有罪，你们没有念过吗？
Or is it not said in the law, how the Sabbath is broken by the priests in the Temple and they do no wrong?

但我告诉你们，在这里有一人比殿更大。
But I say to you that a greater thing than the Temple is here.

我喜爱怜恤，不喜爱祭祀。你们若明白这话的意思，就不将无罪的，当作有罪的了。
But if these words had been in your minds, My desire is for mercy and not for offerings, you would not have been judging those who have done no wrong.

因为人子是安息日的主。
For the Son of man is lord of the Sabbath.

耶稣离开那地方，进了一个会堂。
And he went from there into their Synagogue:

那里有一个人，枯干了一只手。有人问耶稣说，安息日治病，可以不可以。意思是要控告他。
And there was a man with a dead hand. And they put a question to him, saying, Is it right to make a man well on the Sabbath day? so that they might have something against him.

耶稣说，你们中间谁有一只羊，当安息日掉在坑里，不把他抓住拉上来呢？
And he said to them, Which of you, having a sheep, if it gets into a hole on the Sabbath day, will not put out a helping hand and get it back?

人比羊何等贵重呢。所以在安息日作善事是可以的。
Of how much more value is a man than a sheep! For this reason it is right to do good on the Sabbath day.

于是对那人说，伸出手来。他把手一伸，手就复了原，和那只手一样。
Then said he to the man, Put out your hand. And he put it out, and it was made as well as the other.

法利赛人出去，商议怎样可以除灭耶稣。
But the Pharisees went out and made designs against him, how they might put him to death.

耶稣知道了，就离开那里，有许多人跟着他，他把其中有病的人都治好了。
And Jesus, having knowledge of this, went away from there, and a great number went after him; and he made them all well,

又嘱咐他们，不要给他传名。
Ordering them not to give people word of him:

这是要应验先知以赛亚的话，说，
So that what was said by Isaiah the prophet might come true,

看哪，我的仆人，我所拣选，所亲爱，心里所喜悦的，我要将我的灵赐给他，他必将公理传给外邦。
See my servant, the man of my selection, my loved one in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit on him, and he will make my decision clear to the Gentiles.

他不争竞，不喧嚷。街上也没有人听见他的声音。
His coming will not be with fighting or loud cries; and his voice will not be lifted up in the streets.

压伤的芦苇，他不折断。将残的灯火，他不吹灭。等他施行公理，叫公理得胜。
The crushed stem will not be broken by him; and the feebly burning light will he not put out, till he has made righteousness overcome all.

外邦人都要仰望他的名。
And in his name will the Gentiles put their hope.

当下有人将一个被鬼附着，又瞎又哑的人，带到耶稣那里。耶稣就医治他，甚至那哑吧又能说话，又能看见。
Then they took to him one with an evil spirit, who was blind and had no power of talking: and he made him well so that he had the power of talking and seeing.

众人都惊奇，说，这不是大卫的子孙吗？
And all the people were surprised and said, Is not this the Son of David?

但法利赛人听见，就说，这个人赶鬼，无非是靠着鬼王别西卜啊。
But the Pharisees, hearing of it, said, This man only sends evil spirits out of men by Beelzebub, the ruler of evil spirits.

耶稣知道他们的意念，就对他们说，凡一国自相分争，就成为荒场，一城一家自相分争，必站立不住。
And having knowledge of their thoughts he said to them, Every kingdom having division in itself is made waste, and every town or house having division in itself will come to destruction.

若撒但赶逐撒但，就是自相分争，他的国怎能站得住呢？
And if Satan sends out Satan, he makes war against himself; how then will he keep his kingdom?

我若靠着别西卜赶鬼，你们的子弟赶鬼，又靠着谁呢？这样，他们就要断定你们的是非。
And if I by Beelzebub send evil spirits out of men, by whom do your sons send them out? So let them be your judges.

我若靠着神的灵赶鬼，这就是神的国临到你们了。
But if I by the Spirit of God send out evil spirits, then is the kingdom of God come on you.

人怎能进壮士家里，抢夺他的家具呢？除非先捆住那壮士，才可以抢夺他的家财。
Or how may one go into a strong man's house and take his goods, if he does not first put cords round the strong man? and then he may take his goods.

不与我相合的，就是敌我的，不同我收聚的，就是分散的。
Whoever is not with me is against me; and he who does not take part with me in getting people together, is driving them away.

所以我告诉你们，人一切的罪，和亵渎的话，都可得赦免。惟独亵渎圣灵，总不得赦免。
So I say to you, Every sin and every evil word against God will have forgiveness; but for evil words against the Spirit there will be no forgiveness.

凡说话干犯人子的，还可得赦免。惟独说话干犯圣灵的，今世来世总不得赦免。
And whoever says a word against the Son of man, will have forgiveness; but whoever says a word against the Holy Spirit, will not have forgiveness in this life or in that which is to come.

你们或以为树好，果子也好。树坏，果子也坏。因为看果子，就可以知道树。
Make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree bad, and its fruit bad; for by its fruit you will get knowledge of the tree.

毒蛇的种类，你们既是恶人，怎能说出好话来呢？因为心里所充满的，口里就说出来。
You offspring of snakes, how are you, being evil, able to say good things? because out of the heart's store come the words of the mouth.

善人从他心里所存的善，就发出善来。恶人从他心里所存的恶，就发出恶来。
The good man out of his good store gives good things; and the evil man out of his evil store gives evil things.

我又告诉你们，凡人所说的闲话，当审判的日子，必要句句供出来。
And I say to you that in the day when they are judged, men will have to give an account of every foolish word they have said.

因为要凭你的话定你为义，也要凭你的话，定你有罪。
For by your words will your righteousness be seen, and by your words you will be judged.

当时有几个文士和法利赛人，对耶稣说，夫子，我们愿意你显个神迹给我们看。
Then some of the scribes and Pharisees, hearing this, said to him, Master, we are looking for a sign from you.

耶稣回答说，一个邪恶淫乱的世代求看神迹。除了先知约拿的神迹以外，再没有神迹给他们看。
But he, answering, said to them, An evil and false generation is looking for a sign; and no sign will be given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonah:

约拿三日三夜在大鱼肚腹中，人子也要这样三日三夜在地里头。
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the stomach of the great fish, so will the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

当审判的时候，尼尼微人，要起来定这世代的罪，因为尼尼微人听了约拿所传的，就悔改了。看哪，在这里有一人比约拿更大。
The men of Nineveh will come up in the day of judging and give their decision against this generation: because they were turned from their sins at the preaching of Jonah; and now a greater than Jonah is here.

当审判的时候，南方的女王，要起来定这世代的罪，因为她从地极而来，要听所罗门的智慧话。看哪，在这里有一人比所罗门更大。
The queen of the South will come up in the day of judging and give her decision against this generation: for she came from the ends of the earth to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon; and now a greater than Solomon is here.

污鬼离了人身，就在无水之地，过来过去，寻求安歇之处，却寻不着。
But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of a man, goes through dry places looking for rest, and getting it not.

于是说，我要回到我所出来的屋里去。到了，就看见里面空闲，打扫干净，修饰好了。
Then he says, I will go back into my house from which I came out; and when he comes, he sees that there is no one in it, but that it has been made fair and clean.

便去另带了七个比自己更恶的鬼来，都进去住在那里。那人末后的景况，比先前更不好了。这邪恶的世代，也要如此。
Then he goes and takes with him seven other spirits worse than himself, and they go in and make it their living-place: and the last condition of that man is worse than the first. Even so will it be with this evil generation.

耶稣还对众人说话的时候，不料，他母亲和他弟兄站在外边，要与他说话。
While he was still talking to the people, his mother and his brothers came, desiring to have talk with him.

有人告诉他说，看哪，你母亲和你弟兄站在外边，要与你说话。
And one said to him, See, your mother and your brothers are outside, desiring to have talk with you.

他却回答那人说，谁是我的母亲。谁是我的弟兄。
But he in answer said to him who gave the news, Who is my mother and who are my brothers?

就伸手指着门徒说，看哪，我的母亲，我的弟兄。
And he put out his hand to his disciples and said, See, my mother and my brothers!

凡遵行我天父旨意的人，就是我的弟兄姐妹和母亲了。
For whoever does the pleasure of my Father in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

当那一天，耶稣从房子里出来，坐在海边。
On that day Jesus went out of the house and was seated by the seaside.

有许多人到他那里聚集，他只得上船坐下。众人都站在岸上。
And great numbers of people came together to him, so that he got into a boat; and the people took up their position by the sea.

他用比喻对他们讲许多道理，说，有一个撒种的出去撒种。
And he gave them teaching in the form of a story, saying, A man went out to put seed in the earth;

撒的时候，有落在路旁的，飞鸟来吃尽了。
And while he did so, some seeds were dropped by the wayside, and the birds came and took them for food:

有落在土浅石头地上的。土既不深，发苗最快。
And some of the seed went among the stones, where it had not much earth, and straight away it came up because the earth was not deep:

日头出来一晒，因为没有根，就枯干了。
And when the sun was high, it was burned; and because it had no root it became dry and dead.

有落在荆棘里的。荆棘长起来，把它挤住了。
And some seeds went among thorns, and the thorns came up and they had no room for growth:

又有落在好土里的，就结实，有一百倍的，有六十倍的，有三十倍的。
And some, falling on good earth, gave fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.

有耳可听的，就应当听。
He who has ears, let him give ear.

门徒进前来，问耶稣说，对众人讲话，为什么用比喻呢？
And the disciples came and said to him, Why do you say things to them in the form of stories?

耶稣回答说，因为天国的奥秘，只叫你们知道，不叫他们知道。
And he said to them in answer, To you is given the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

凡有的，还要加给他，叫他有余。凡没有的，连他所有的，也要夺去。
Because whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have more; but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.

所以我用比喻对他们讲，是因他们看也看不见，听也听不见，也不明白。
For this reason I put things into the form of stories; because they see without seeing, and give ear without hearing, and the sense is not clear to them.

在他们身上，正应了以赛亚的预言说，你们听是要听见，却不明白。看是要看见，却不晓得。
And for them the words of Isaiah have come true, Though you give ear, you will not get knowledge; and seeing, you will see, but the sense will not be clear to you:

因为这百姓油蒙了心，耳朵发沉，眼睛闭着。恐怕眼睛看见，耳朵听见，心里明白，回转过来，我就医治他们。
For the heart of this people has become fat and their ears are slow in hearing and their eyes are shut; for fear that they might see with their eyes and give hearing with their ears and become wise in their hearts and be turned again to me, so that I might make them well.

但你们的眼睛是有福的，因为看见了。你们的耳朵也是有福的，因为听见了。
But a blessing be on your eyes, because they see; and on your ears, because they are open.

我实在告诉你们，从前有许多先知和义人，要看你们所看的，却没有看见。要听你们所听的，却没有听见。
For truly, I say to you that prophets and upright men had a desire to see the things which you see, and saw them not; and to have knowledge of the words which have come to your ears, and they had it not.

所以你们当听这撒种的比喻。
Give ear, then, to the story of the man who put the seed in the earth.

凡听见天国道理不明白的，那恶者就来，把所撒在他心里的夺了去。这就是撒在路旁的了。
When the word of the kingdom comes to anyone, and the sense of it is not clear to him, then the Evil One comes, and quickly takes away that which was put in his heart. He is the seed dropped by the wayside.

撒在石头地上的，就是人听了道，当下欢喜领受。
And that which went on the stones, this is he who, hearing the word, straight away takes it with joy;

只因心里没有根，不过是暂时的。及至为道遭了患难，或是受了逼迫，立刻就跌倒了。
But having no root in himself, he goes on for a time; and when trouble comes or pain, because of the word, he quickly becomes full of doubts.

撒在荆棘里的，就是人听了道，后来有世上的思虑，钱财的迷惑，把道挤住了，不能结实。
And that which was dropped among the thorns, this is he who has the word; and the cares of this life, and the deceits of wealth, put a stop to the growth of the word and it gives no fruit.

撒在好地上的，就是人听道明白了，后来结实，有一百倍的，有六十倍的，有三十倍的。
And the seed which was put in good earth, this is he who gives ear to the word, and gets the sense of it; who gives fruit, some a hundred, some sixty, some thirty times as much.

耶稣又设个比喻对他们说，天国好像人撒好种在田里。
And he gave them another story, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a man who put good seed in his field:

及至人睡觉的时候，有仇敌来，将稗子撒在麦子里，就走了。
But while men were sleeping, one who had hate for him came and put evil seeds among the grain, and went away.

到长苗吐穗的时候，稗子也显出来。
But when the green stem came up and gave fruit, the evil plants were seen at the same time.

田主的仆人来告诉他说，主阿，你不是撒好种在田里吗？从哪里来的稗子呢？
And the servants of the master of the house came and said to him, Sir, did you not put good seed in your field? how then has it evil plants?

主人说，这是仇敌作的。仆人说，你要我们去薅出来吗？
And he said, Someone has done this in hate. And the servants say to him, Is it your pleasure that we go and take them up?

主人说，不必，恐怕薅稗子，连麦子也拔出来。
But he says, No, for fear that by chance while you take up the evil plants, you may be rooting up the grain with them.

容这两样一齐长，等着收割。当收割的时候，我要对收割的人说，先将稗子薅出来，捆成捆，留着烧。惟有麦子，要收在仓里。
Let them come up together till the getting in of the grain; and then I will say to the workers, Take up first the evil plants, and put them together for burning: but put the grain into my store-house.

他又设个比喻对他们说，天国好像一粒芥菜种，有人拿去种在田里。
He put another story before them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took and put in his field:

这原是百种里最小的。等到长起来，却比各样的菜都大，且成了树。天上的飞鸟来宿在他的枝上。
Which is smaller than all seeds; but when it has come up it is greater than the plants, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and make their resting-places in its branches.

他又对他们讲个比喻说，天国好像面酵，有妇人拿来，藏在三斗面里，直等全团都发起来。
Another story he gave to them: The kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took, and put in three measures of meal, till it was all leavened.

这都是耶稣用比喻对众人说的话。若不用比喻，就不对他们说什么。
All these things Jesus said to the people in the form of stories; and without a story he said nothing to them:

这是要应验先知的话说，我要开口用比喻，把创世以来所隐藏的事发明出来。
That it might come true which was said by the prophet, Opening my mouth, I will give out stories; I will give knowledge of things kept secret from before all time.

当下耶稣离开众人，进了房子。他的门徒进前来说，请把田间稗子的比喻，讲给我们听。
Then he went away from the people, and went into the house; and his disciples came to him, saying, Make clear to us the story of the evil plants in the field.

他回答说，那撒好种的，就是人子。
And he made answer and said, He who puts the good seed in the earth is the Son of man;

田地，就是世界。好种，就是天国之子。稗子，就是那恶者之子。
And the field is the world; and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom; and the evil seeds are the sons of the Evil One;

撒稗子的仇敌，就是魔鬼。收割的时候，就是世界的末了。收割的人，就是天使。
And he who put them in the earth is Satan; and the getting in of the grain is the end of the world; and those who get it in are the angels.

将稗子薅出来，用火焚烧。世界的末了，也要如此。
As then the evil plants are got together and burned with fire, so will it be in the end of the world.

人子要差遣使者，把一切叫人跌倒的，和作恶的，从他国里挑出来，
The Son of man will send out his angels, and they will take out of his kingdom everything which is a cause of error, and all those who do wrong,

丢在火炉里。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
And will put them into the fire; there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

那时义人在他们父的国里，要发出光来，像太阳一样。有耳可听的，就应当听。
Then will the upright be shining as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him give ear.

天国好像宝贝藏在地里。人遇见了，就把它藏起来。欢欢喜喜地去变卖一切所有的买这块地。
The kingdom of heaven is like a secret store of wealth in a field, which a man came across and put back again; and in his joy he goes and gives all he has, to get that field.

天国又好像买卖人，寻找好珠子。
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a trader searching for beautiful jewels.

遇见一颗重价的珠子，就去变卖他一切所有的，买了这颗珠子。
And having come across one jewel of great price, he went and gave all he had in exchange for it.

天国又好像网撒在海里，聚拢各样水族。
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net, which was put into the sea and took in every sort of fish:

网既满了，人就拉上岸来。坐下，拣好的收在器具里，将不好的丢弃了。
When it was full, they took it up on the sands; and seated there they put the good into vessels, but the bad they put away.

世界的末了，也要这样。天使要出来，从义人中，把恶人分别出来，
So will it be in the end of the world: the angels will come and take out the bad from the good,

丢在火炉里。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
And will put them into the fire: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

耶稣说，这一切的话，你们都明白了吗？他们说，我们明白了。
Are all these things now clear to you? They say to him, Yes.

他说，凡文士受教作天国的门徒，就像一个家主，从他库里拿出新旧的东西来。
And he said to them, For this reason every scribe who has become a disciple of the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house, who gives out from his store things new and old.

耶稣说完了这些比喻，就离开那里，
And when Jesus had come to the end of these stories he went away from there.

来到自己的家乡，在会堂里教训人，甚至他们都希奇说，这人从哪里有这等智慧，和异能呢？
And coming into his country, he gave them teaching in their Synagogue, so that they were greatly surprised and said, Where did this man get this wisdom and these works of power?

这不是木匠的儿子吗？他母亲不是叫马利亚吗？他弟兄们不是叫雅各，约西，（有古卷作约瑟），西门，犹大吗？
Is not this the woodworker's son? is not his mother named Mary? and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?

他妹妹们不是都在我们这里吗？这人从哪里有这一切的事呢？
And his sisters, are they not all with us? from where, then, has he all these things?

他们就厌弃他。（厌弃他原文作因他跌倒）耶稣对他们说，大凡先知，除了本地本家之外，没有不被人尊敬的。
And they were bitter against him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is nowhere without honour but in his country and among his family.

耶稣因为他们不信，就在那里不多行异能了。
And the works of power which he did there were small in number because they had no faith.

那时，分封的王希律听见耶稣的名声，
At that time news of Jesus came to Herod the king;

就对臣仆说，这是施洗的约翰从死里复活，所以这些异能从他里面发出来。
And he said to his servants, This is John the Baptist; he has come back from the dead, and so these powers are working in him.

起先希律为他兄弟腓力的妻子希罗底的缘故，把约翰拿住锁在监里。
For Herod had taken John and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.

因为约翰曾对他说，你娶这妇人是不合理的。
Because John had said to him, It is not right for you to have her.

希律就想要杀他，只是怕百姓。因为他们以约翰为先知。
And he would have put him to death, but for his fear of the people, because in their eyes John was a prophet.

到了希律的生日，希罗底的女儿，在众人面前跳舞，使希律欢喜。
But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias was dancing before them, and Herod was pleased with her.

希律就起誓，应许随她所求的给她。
So he gave her his word with an oath to let her have whatever she might make request for.

女儿被母亲所使，就说，请把施洗约翰的头，放在盘子里拿来给我。
And she, at her mother's suggestion, said, Give me here on a plate the head of John the Baptist.

王便忧愁，但因他所起的誓，又因同席的人，就吩咐给她。
And the king was sad; but because of his oaths and because of his guests, he gave the order for it to be given to her;

于是打发人去，在监里斩了约翰。
And he sent and had John's head cut off in the prison.

把头放在盘子里，拿来给了女子。女子拿去给她母亲。
And his head was put on a plate and given to the girl; and she took it to her mother.

约翰的门徒来，把尸首领去，埋葬了。就去告诉耶稣。
And his disciples came, and took up his body and put it in the earth; and they went and gave Jesus news of what had taken place.

耶稣听见了，就上船从那里独自退到野地里去。众人听见，就从各城里步行跟随他。
Now when it came to the ears of Jesus, he went away from there in a boat, to a waste place by himself: and the people hearing of it, went after him on foot from the towns.

耶稣出来，见有许多的人，就怜悯他们，治好了他们的病人。
And he came out and saw a great number of people and he had pity on them, and made well those of them who were ill.

天将晚的时候，门徒进前来说，这是野地，时候已经过了。请叫众人散开，他们好往村子里去，自己买吃的。
And when evening had come, the disciples came to him, saying, This place is waste land, and the time is now past; send the people away so that they may go into the towns and get themselves food.

耶稣说，不用他们去，你们给他们吃吧。
But Jesus said to them, There is no need for them to go away; give them food yourselves.

门徒说，我们这里只有五个饼，两条鱼。
And they say to him, We have here but five cakes of bread and two fishes.

耶稣说，拿过来给我。
And he said, Give them to me.

于是吩咐众人坐在草地上。就拿着这五个饼，两条鱼，望着天，祝福，掰开饼，递给门徒。门徒又递给众人。
And he gave orders for the people to be seated on the grass; and he took the five cakes of bread and the two fishes and, looking up to heaven, he said words of blessing, and made division of the food, and gave it to the disciples, and the disciples gave it to the people.

他们都吃，并且吃饱了。把剩下的零碎收拾起来，装满了十二个篮子。
And they all took of the food and had enough: and they took up twelve baskets full of broken bits which were not used.

吃的人，除了妇女孩子，约有五千。
And those who had food were about five thousand men, in addition to women and children.

耶稣随即催门徒上船，先渡到那边去，等他叫众人散开。
And straight away he made the disciples get into the boat and go before him to the other side, till he had sent the people away.

散了众人以后，他就独自上山去祷告。到了晚上，只有他一人在那里。
And after he had sent the people away, he went up into the mountain by himself for prayer: and when evening was come, he was there by himself.

那时船在海中，因风不顺，被浪摇撼。
But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, and was troubled by the waves: for the wind was against them.

夜里四更天，耶稣在海面上走，往门徒那里去。
And in the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea.

门徒看见他在海面上走，就惊慌了，说，是个鬼怪。便害怕，喊叫起来。
And when they saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they gave cries of fear.

耶稣连忙对他们说，你们放心。是我，不要怕。
But straight away Jesus said to them, Take heart; it is I, have no fear.

彼得说，主，如果是你，请叫我从水面上走到你那里去。
And Peter, answering, said to him, Lord, if it is you, give me the order to come to you on the water.

耶稣说，你来吧。彼得就从船上下去，在水面上走，要到耶稣那里去。
And he said, Come. And Peter got out of the boat, and walking on the water, went to Jesus.

只因见风甚大，就害怕。将要沉下去，便喊着说，主阿，救我。
But when he saw the wind he was in fear and, starting to go down, he gave a cry, saying, Help, Lord.

耶稣赶紧伸手拉住他，说，你这小信的人哪，为什么疑惑呢？
And straight away Jesus put out his hand and took a grip of him, and said to him, O man of little faith, why were you in doubt?

他们上了船，风就住了。
And when they had got into the boat, the wind went down.

在船上的人都拜他说，你真是神的儿子了。
And those who were in the boat gave him worship, saying, Truly you are the Son of God.

他们过了海，来到革尼撒勒地方。
And when they had gone across, they came to land at Gennesaret.

那里的人，一认出是耶稣，就打发人到周围地方去，把所有的病人，带到他那里。
And when the men of that place had news of him, they sent into all the country round about, and took to him all who were ill,

只求耶稣准他们摸他的衣裳？？子，摸着的人，就都好了。
With the request that they might only put their hands on the edge of his robe: and all those who did so were made well.

那时有法利赛人和文士，从耶路撒冷来见耶稣说，
Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying,

你的门徒为什么犯古人的遗传呢？因为吃饭的时候，他们不洗手。
Why do your disciples go against the teaching of the fathers? for they take food with unwashed hands.

耶稣回答说，你们为什么因着你们的遗传，犯神的诫命呢？
And in answer he said to them, Why do you, yourselves, go against the word of God on account of the teaching which has been handed down to you?

神说，当孝敬父母。又说，咒骂父母的，必治死他。
For God said, Give honour to your father and mother: and, He who says evil of father or mother will be put to death.

你们倒说，无论何人对父母说，我所当奉给你的，已经作了供献。
But you say, If a man says to his father or his mother, That by which you might have had profit from me is given to God;

他就可以不孝敬父母。这就是你们借着遗传，废了神的诫命。
There is no need for him to give honour to his father. And you have made the word of God without effect because of your teaching.

假冒为善的人哪，以赛亚指着你们说的预言，是不错的。他说，
You false ones, well did Isaiah say of you,

这百姓用嘴唇尊敬我，心却远离我。
These people give me honour with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

他们将人的吩咐，当作道理教导人，所以拜我也是枉然。
But their worship is to no purpose, while they give as their teaching the rules of men.

耶稣就叫了众人来，对他们说，你们要听，也要明白。
And he got the people together and said to them, Give ear, and let my words be clear to you:

入口的不能污秽人，出口的乃能污秽人。
Not that which goes into the mouth makes a man unclean, but that which comes out of the mouth.

当时，门徒进前来对他说，法利赛人听见这话，不服，你知道吗？（不服原文作跌倒）
Then the disciples came and said to him, Did you see that the Pharisees were troubled when these words came to their ears?

耶稣回答说，凡栽种的物，若不是我天父栽种的，必要拔出来。
But he said in answer, Every plant which my Father in heaven has not put in the earth, will be taken up by the roots.

任凭他们吧。他们是瞎眼领路的。若是瞎子领瞎子，两个人都要掉在坑里。
Let them be: they are blind guides. And if a blind man is guiding a blind man, the two will go falling into a hole together.

彼得对耶稣说，请将这比喻讲给我们听。
Then Peter said to him, Make the story clear to us.

耶稣说，你们到如今还不明白吗？
And he said, Are you, like them, still without wisdom?

岂不知凡入口的，是运到肚子里，又落在茅厕里吗？
Do you not see that whatever goes into the mouth goes on into the stomach, and is sent out as waste?

惟独出口的，是从心里发出来的，这才污秽人。
But the things which come out of the mouth come from the heart; and they make a man unclean.

因为从心里发出来的，有恶念，凶杀，奸淫，苟合，偷盗，妄证，谤？？。
For out of the heart come evil thoughts, the taking of life, broken faith between the married, unclean desires of the flesh, taking of property, false witness, bitter words:

这都是污秽人的。至于不洗手吃饭，那却不污秽人。
These are the things which make a man unclean; but to take food with unwashed hands does not make a man unclean.

耶稣离开那里，退到推罗西顿的境内去。
And Jesus went away from there into the country of Tyre and Sidon.

有一个迦南妇人，从那地方出来，喊着说，主啊，大卫的子孙，可怜我。我女儿被鬼附得甚苦。
And a woman of Canaan came out from those parts, crying and saying, Have pity on me, O Lord, Son of David; my daughter is greatly troubled with an unclean spirit.

耶稣却一言不答。门徒进前来，求他说，这妇人在我们后头喊叫。请打发她走吧。
But he gave her no answer. And his disciples came and said to him, Send her away, for she is crying after us.

耶稣说，我奉差遣，不过是到以色列家迷失的羊那里去。
But he made answer and said, I was sent only to the wandering sheep of the house of Israel.

那妇人来拜他，说，主啊，帮助我。
But she came and gave him worship, saying, Help, Lord.

他回答说，不好拿儿女的饼，丢给狗吃。
And he made answer and said, It is not right to take the children's bread and give it to the dogs.

妇人说，主啊，不错。但是狗也吃它主人桌子上掉下来的碎渣儿。
But she said, Yes, Lord: but even the dogs take the bits from under their masters' table.

耶稣说，妇人，你的信心是大的。照你所要的，给你成全了吧。从那时候，她女儿就好了。
Then Jesus, answering, said to her, O woman, great is your faith: let your desire be done. And her daughter was made well from that hour.

耶稣离开那地方，来到靠近加利利的海边，就上山坐下。
And Jesus went from there and came to the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and took his seat there.

有许多人到他那里，带着瘸子，瞎子，哑吧，有残疾的，和好些别的病人，都放在他脚前。他就治好了他们。
And there came to him great numbers of people having with them those who were broken in body, or blind, or without voice, or wounded, or ill in any way, and a number of others; they put them down at his feet and he made them well:

甚至众人都希奇。因为看见哑吧说话，残疾的痊愈，瘸子行走，瞎子看见，他们就归荣耀给以色列的神。
So that the people were full of wonder when they saw that those who had no voice were talking, the feeble were made strong, those whose bodies were broken had the power of walking, and the blind were able to see: and they gave glory to the God of Israel.

耶稣叫门徒来说，我怜悯这众人，因为他们同我在这里已经三天，也没有吃的了。我不愿意叫他们饿着回去，恐怕在路上困乏。
And Jesus got his disciples together and said, I have pity for the people, because they have now been with me three days and have no food: and I will not send them away without food, or they will have no strength for the journey.

门徒说，我们在这野地，哪里有这么多的饼，叫这许多人吃饱呢？
And the disciples say to him, How may we get enough bread in a waste place, to give food to such a number of people?

耶稣说，你们有多少饼？他们说，有七个，还有几条小鱼。
And Jesus says to them, How much bread have you? And they said, Seven cakes, and some small fishes.

他就吩咐众人坐在地上。
Then he gave an order to the people to be seated on the earth,

拿着这七个饼和几条鱼，祝谢了，掰开，递给门徒。门徒又递给众人。
And he took the seven cakes of bread and the fishes; and having given praise, he gave the broken bread to the disciples, and the disciples gave it to the people.

众人都吃并且吃饱了。收拾剩下的零碎，装满了七个筐子。
And they all took food, and had enough; and they took up of the broken bits, seven baskets full.

吃的人，除了妇女孩子，共有四千。
And there were four thousand men who took food, together with women and children.

耶稣叫众人散去，就上船，来到马加丹的境界。
And when he had sent the people away, he got into the boat, and came into the country of Magadan.

法利赛人和撒都该人，来试探耶稣，请他从天上显个神迹给他们看。
And the Pharisees and Sadducees came and, testing him, made a request to him to give them a sign from heaven.

耶稣回答说，晚上天发红，你们就说，天必要晴。
But in answer he said to them, At nightfall you say, The weather will be good, for the sky is red.

早晨天发红，又发黑，你们就说，今日必有风雨。你们知道分辨天上的气色，倒不能分辨这时候的神迹。
And in the morning, The weather will be bad today, for the sky is red and angry. You are able to see the face of heaven, but not the signs of the times.

一个邪恶淫乱的世代求神迹，除了约拿的神迹以外，再没有神迹给他看。耶稣就离开他们去了。
An evil and false generation is searching after a sign; and no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah. And he went away from them.

门徒渡到那边去，忘了带饼。
And when the disciples came to the other side they had not taken thought to get bread.

耶稣对他们说，你们要谨慎，防备法利赛人和撒都该人的酵。
And Jesus said to them, Take care to have nothing to do with the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

门徒彼此议论说，这是因为我们没有带饼吧。
And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, We took no bread.

耶稣看出来，就说，你们这小信的人，为什么因为没有饼彼此议论呢？
And Jesus, seeing it, said, O you of little faith, why are you reasoning among yourselves, because you have no bread?

你们还不明白吗？不记得那五个饼，分给五千人，又收拾了多少篮子的零碎吗？
Do you still not see, or keep in mind the five cakes of bread of the five thousand, and the number of baskets you took up?

也不记得那七个饼，分给四千人，又收拾了多少筐子的零碎吗？
Or the seven cakes of bread of the four thousand, and the number of baskets you took up?

我对你们说，要防备法利赛人和撒都该人的酵，这话不是指着饼说的。你们怎么不明白呢？
How is it that you do not see that I was not talking to you about bread, but about keeping away from the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?

门徒这才晓得他说的，不是叫他们防备饼的酵，乃是防备法利赛人和撒都该人的教训。
Then they saw that it was not the leaven of bread which he had in mind, but the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

耶稣到了该撒利亚腓立比的境内，就问门徒说，人说我人子是谁。（有古卷无我字）
Now when Jesus had come into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he said, questioning his disciples, Who do men say that the Son of man is?

他们说，有人说是施洗的约翰。有人说是以利亚。又有人说是耶利米，或是先知里的一位。
And they said, Some say, John the Baptist; some, Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.

耶稣说，你们说我是谁。
He says to them, But who do you say that I am?

西门彼得回答说，你是基督，是永生神的儿子。
And Simon Peter made answer and said, You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.

耶稣对他说，西门巴约拿，你是有福的。因为这不是属血肉的指示你的，乃是我在天上的父指示的。
And Jesus made answer and said to him, A blessing on you, Simon Bar-jonah: because this knowledge has not come to you from flesh and blood, but from my Father in heaven.

我还告诉你，你是彼得，我要把我的教会建造在这磐石上，阴间的权柄，不能胜过他。（权柄原文作门）
And I say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock will my church be based, and the doors of hell will not overcome it.

我要把天国的钥匙给你。凡你在地上所捆绑的，在天上也要捆绑。凡你在地上所释放的，在天上也要释放。
I will give to you the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatever is fixed by you on earth will be fixed in heaven: and whatever you make free on earth will be made free in heaven.

当下，耶稣嘱咐门徒，不可对人说他是基督。
Then he gave orders to the disciples to give no man word that he was the Christ.

从此耶稣才指示门徒，他必须上耶路撒冷去，受长老祭司长文士许多的苦，并且被杀，第三日复活。
From that time Jesus went on to make clear to his disciples how he would have to go up to Jerusalem, and undergo much at the hands of those in authority and the chief priests and scribes, and be put to death, and the third day come again from the dead.

彼得就拉着他，劝他说，主阿，万不可如此，这事必不临到你身上。
And Peter, protesting, said to him, Be it far from you, Lord; it is impossible that this will come about.

耶稣转过来，对彼得说，撒但退我后边去吧。你是绊我脚的。因为你不体贴神的意思，只体贴人的意思。
But he, turning to Peter, said, Get out of my way, Satan: you are a danger to me because your mind is not on the things of God, but on the things of men.

于是耶稣对门徒说，若有人要跟从我，就当舍己，背起他的十字架，来跟从我。
Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any man would come after me, let him give up all, and take up his cross, and come after me.

因为凡要救自己生命的，（生命或作灵魂下同）必丧掉生命。凡为我丧掉生命的，必得着生命。
Because whoever has a desire to keep his life safe will have it taken from him; but whoever gives up his life because of me, will have it given back to him.

人若赚得全世界，赔上自己的生命，有什么益处呢？人还能拿什么换生命呢？
For what profit has a man, if he gets all the world with the loss of his life? or what will a man give in exchange for his life?

人子要在他父的荣耀里，同着众使者降临。那时候，他要照各人的行为报应各人。
For the Son of man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he will give to every man the reward of his works.

我实在告诉你们，站在这里的，有人在没尝死味以前，必看见人子降临在他的国里。
Truly I say to you, There are some of those here who will not have a taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

过了六天，耶稣带着彼得，雅各，和雅各的兄弟约翰，暗暗地上了高山。
And after six days Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John, his brother, and makes them go up with him into a high mountain by themselves.

就在他们面前变了形像。脸面明亮如日头，衣裳洁白如光。
And he was changed in form before them; and his face was shining like the sun, and his clothing became white as light.

忽然有摩西，以利亚，向他们显现，同耶稣说话。
And Moses and Elijah came before their eyes, talking with him.

彼得对耶稣说，主阿，我们在这里真好。你若愿意，我就在这里搭三座棚，一座为你，一座为摩西，一座为以利亚。
And Peter made answer and said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if you will let me, I will make here three tents, one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

说话之间，忽然有一朵光明的云彩遮盖他们。且有声音从云彩里出来说，这是我的爱子，我所喜悦的。你们要听他。
While he was still talking, a bright cloud came over them: and a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased; give ear to him.

门徒听见，就俯伏在地，极其害怕。
And at these words the disciples went down on their faces in great fear.

耶稣进前来，摸他们说，起来，不要害怕。
And Jesus came and put his hand on them and said, Get up and have no fear.

他们举目不见一人，只见耶稣在那里。
And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, but Jesus only.

下山的时候，耶稣吩咐他们说，人子还没有从死里复活，你们不要将所看见的告诉人。
And when they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus gave them orders, saying, Let no man have word of what you have seen, till the Son of man has come again from the dead.

门徒问耶稣说，文士为什么说，以利亚必须先来。
And his disciples, questioning him, said, Why then do the scribes say that Elijah has to come first?

耶稣回答说，以利亚固然先来，并要复兴万事。
And in answer he said, Elijah truly has to come and put all things right:

只是我告诉你们，以利亚已经来了，人却不认识他，竟任意待他。人子也将要这样受他们的害。
But I say to you that Elijah has come, and they had no knowledge of him, but did to him whatever they were pleased to do; the same will the Son of man undergo at their hands.

门徒这才明白耶稣所说的，是指着施洗的约翰。
Then the disciples saw that he was talking to them of John the Baptist.

耶稣和门徒到了众人那里，有一个人来见耶稣，跪下，说，
And when they came to the people, a man went down on his knees to him, saying,

主阿，怜悯我的儿子。他害癫痫的病很苦，屡次跌在火里，屡次跌在水里。
Lord have mercy on my son: for he is off his head, and is in great pain; and frequently he goes falling into the fire, and frequently into the water.

我带他到你门徒那里，他们却不能医治他。
And I took him to your disciples, and they were not able to make him well.

耶稣说，嗳，这又不信又悖谬的世代阿，我在你们这里要到几时呢？我忍耐你们要到几时呢？把他带到我这里来吧。
And Jesus, answering, said, O false and foolish generation, how long will I be with you? how long will I put up with you? let him come here to me.

耶稣斥责那鬼，鬼就出来。从此孩子就痊愈了。
And Jesus gave orders to the unclean spirit, and it went out of him: and the boy was made well from that hour.

门徒暗暗地到耶稣跟前说，我们为什么不能赶出那鬼呢？
Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, Why were we not able to send it out?

耶稣说，是因你们的信心小。我实在告诉你们，你们若有信心像一粒芥菜种，就是对这座山说，你从这边挪到那边，它也必挪去。并且你们没有一件不能作的事了。
And he says to them, Because of your little faith: for truly I say to you, If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, Be moved from this place to that; and it will be moved; and nothing will be impossible to you.

至于这一类的鬼，若不祷告禁食，他就不出来。（或作不能赶他出来）
[]

他们还住在加利利的时候，耶稣对门徒说，人子将要被交在人手里。
And while they were going about in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man will be given up into the hands of men;

他们要杀害他，第三日他要复活。门徒就大大地忧愁。
And they will put him to death, and the third day he will come again from the dead. And they were very sad.

到了迦百农，有收丁税的人来见彼得说，你们的先生不纳丁税吗？（丁税约有半块钱）
And when they had come to Capernaum, those who took the Temple tax came to Peter and said, Does not your master make payment of the Temple tax?

彼得说，纳。他进了屋子，耶稣先向他说，西门，你的意思如何。世上的君王，向谁征收关税丁税。是向自己的儿子呢？是向外人呢？
He says, Yes. And when he came into the house, Jesus said to him, What is your opinion, Simon? from whom do the kings of the earth get payment or tax? from their sons or from other people?

彼得说，是向外人。耶稣说，既然如此，儿子就可以免税了。
And when he said, From other people, Jesus said to him, Then are the sons free.

但恐怕触犯他们，（触犯原文作绊倒）你且往海边去钓鱼，把先钓上来的鱼拿起来，开了它的口，必得一块钱，可以拿去给他们，作你我的税银。
But, so that we may not be a cause of trouble to them, go to the sea, and let down a hook, and take the first fish which comes up; and in his mouth you will see a bit of money: take that, and give it to them for me and you.

当时门徒进前来，问耶稣说，天国里谁是最大的。
In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

耶稣便叫一个小孩子来，使他站在他们当中，
And he took a little child, and put him in the middle of them,

说，我实在告诉你们，你们若不回转，变成小孩子的样式，断不得进天国。
And said, Truly, I say to you, If you do not have a change of heart and become like little children, you will not go into the kingdom of heaven.

所以凡自己谦卑像这小孩子的，他在天国里就是最大的。
Whoever, then, will make himself as low as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

凡为我的名，接待一个像这小孩子的，就是接待我。
And whoever gives honour to one such little child in my name, gives honour to me:

凡使这信我的一个小子跌倒的，倒不如把大磨石拴在这人的颈项上，沉在深海里。
But whoever is a cause of trouble to one of these little ones who have faith in me, it would be better for him to have a great stone fixed to his neck, and to come to his end in the deep sea.

这世界有祸了，因为将人绊倒。绊倒人的事是免不了的，但那绊倒人的有祸了。
A curse is on the earth because of trouble! for it is necessary for trouble to come; but unhappy is that man through whom the trouble comes.

倘若你一只手，或是一只脚，叫你跌倒，就砍下来丢掉。你缺一只手，或是一只脚，进入永生，强如有两手两脚，被丢在永火里。
And if your hand or your foot is a cause of trouble, let it be cut off and put it away from you: it is better for you to go into life with the loss of a hand or a foot than, having two hands or two feet, to go into the eternal fire.

倘若你一只眼叫你跌倒，就把它剜出来丢掉。你只有一只眼进入永生，强如有两只眼被丢在地狱的火里。
And if your eye is a cause of trouble to you, take it out, and put it away from you: it is better for you to go into life with one eye than, having two eyes, to go into the hell of fire.

你们要小心，不可轻看这小子里的一个。我告诉你们，他们的使者在天上，常见我天父的面。（有古卷在此有
Let it not seem to you that one of these little ones is of no value; for I say to you that in heaven their angels see at all times the face of my Father in heaven.

人子来为要拯救失丧的人）
[]

一个人若有一百只羊，一只走迷了路，你们的意思如何。他岂不撇下这九十九只，往山里去找那只迷路的羊吗？
What would you say now? if a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them has gone wandering away, will he not let the ninety-nine be, and go to the mountains in search of the wandering one?

若是找着了，我实在告诉你们，他为这一只羊欢喜，比为那没有迷路的九十九只欢喜还大呢。
And if he comes across it, truly I say to you, he has more joy over it than over the ninety-nine which have not gone out of the way.

你们在天上的父，也是这样不愿意这小子里失丧一个。
Even so it is not the pleasure of your Father in heaven for one of these little ones to come to destruction.

倘若你的弟兄得罪你，你就去趁着只有他和你在一处的时候，指出他的错来。他若听你，你便得了你的弟兄。
And if your brother does wrong to you, go, make clear to him his error between you and him in private: if he gives ear to you, you have got your brother back again.

他若不听，你就另外带一两个人同去，要凭两三个人的口作见证，句句都可定准。
But if he will not give ear to you, take with you one or two more, that by the lips of two or three witnesses every word may be made certain.

若是不听他们，就告诉教会。若是不听教会，就看他像外邦人和税吏一样。
And if he will not give ear to them, let it come to the hearing of the church: and if he will not give ear to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax-farmer.

我实在告诉你们，凡你们在地上所捆绑的，在天上也要捆绑。凡你们在地上所释放的，在天上也要释放。
Truly I say to you, Whatever things are fixed by you on earth will be fixed in heaven: and whatever you make free on earth will be made free in heaven.

我又告诉你们，若是你们中间有两个人在地上，同心合意地求什么事，我在天上的父，必为他们成全。
Again, I say to you, that if two of you are in agreement on earth about anything for which they will make a request, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.

因为无论在哪里，有两三个人奉我的名聚会，那里就有我在他们中间。
For where two or three are come together in my name, there am I among them.

那时彼得进前来，对耶稣说，主阿，我弟兄得罪我，我当饶恕他几次呢？到七次可以吗？
Then Peter came and said to him, Lord, what number of times may my brother do wrong against me, and I give him forgiveness? till seven times?

耶稣说，我对你说，不是到七次，乃是到七十个七次。
Jesus says to him, I say not to you, Till seven times; but, Till seventy times seven.

天国好像一个王，要和他仆人算账。
For this reason the kingdom of heaven is like a king, who went over his accounts with his servants.

才算的时候，有人带了一个欠一千万银子的来。
And at the start, one came to him who was in his debt for ten thousand talents.

因为他没有什么偿还之物，主人吩咐把他和他妻子儿女，并一切所有的都卖了偿还。
And because he was not able to make payment, his lord gave orders for him, and his wife, and his sons and daughters, and all he had, to be given for money, and payment to be made.

那仆人就俯伏拜他说，主阿，宽容我，将来我都要还清。
So the servant went down on his face and gave him worship, saying, Lord, give me time to make payment and I will give you all.

那仆人的主人，就动了慈心，把他释放了，并且免了他的债。
And the lord of that servant, being moved with pity, let him go, and made him free of the debt.

那仆人出来，遇见他的一个同伴，欠他十两银子，便揪着他，掐住他的喉咙，说，你把所欠的还我。
But that servant went out, and meeting one of the other servants, who was in debt to him for one hundred pence, he took him by the throat, saying, Make payment of your debt.

他的同伴就俯伏央求他，说，宽容我吧，将来我必还清。
So that servant went down on his face, requesting him and saying, Give me time and I will make payment to you.

他不肯，竟去把他下在监里，等他还了所欠的债。
And he would not: but went and put him into prison till he had made payment of the debt.

众同伴看见他所作的事，就甚忧愁，去把这事都告诉了主人。
So when the other servants saw what was done they were very sad, and came and gave word to their lord of what had been done.

于是主人叫了他来，对他说，你这恶奴才，你央求我，我就把你所欠的都免了。
Then his lord sent for him and said, You evil servant; I made you free of all that debt, because of your request to me:

你不应当怜恤你的同伴像我怜恤你吗？
Was it not right for you to have mercy on the other servant, even as I had mercy on you?

主人就大怒，把他交给掌刑的，等他还清了所欠的债。
And his lord was very angry, and put him in the hands of those who would give him punishment till he made payment of all the debt.

你们各人若不从心里饶恕你的弟兄，我天父也要这样待你们了。
So will my Father in heaven do to you, if you do not everyone, from your hearts, give forgiveness to his brother.

耶稣说完了这些话，就离开加利利，来到犹太的境界，约但河外。
And it came about that after saying these words, Jesus went away from Galilee, and came into the parts of Judaea on the other side of Jordan.

有许多人跟着他。他就在那里把他们的病人治好了。
And a great number went after him; and he made them well there.

有法利赛人来试探耶稣说，人无论什么缘故，都可以休妻吗？
And certain Pharisees came to him, testing him, and saying, Is it right for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

耶稣回答说，那起初造人的，是造男造女，
And he said in answer, Have you not seen in the Writings, that he who made them at the first made them male and female, and said,

并且说，因此，人要离开父母，与妻子连合，二人成为一体。这经你们没有念过吗？
For this cause will a man go away from his father and mother, and be joined to his wife; and the two will become one flesh?

既然如此，夫妻不再是两个人，乃是一体的了。所以神配合的，人不可分开。
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Then let not that which has been joined by God be parted by man.

法利赛人说，这样，摩西为什么吩咐给妻子休书，就可以休她呢？
They say to him, Why then did Moses give orders that a husband might give her a statement in writing and be free from her?

耶稣说，摩西因为你们的心硬，所以许你们休妻。但起初并不是这样。
He says to them, Moses, because of your hard hearts, let you put away your wives: but it has not been so from the first.

我告诉你们，凡休妻另娶的，若不是为淫乱的缘故，就是犯奸淫了，有人娶那被休的妇人，也是犯奸淫了。
And I say to you, Whoever puts away his wife for any other cause than the loss of her virtue, and takes another, is a false husband: and he who takes her as his wife when she is put away, is no true husband to her.

门徒对耶稣说，人和妻子既是这样，倒不如不娶。
The disciples say to him, If this is the position of a man in relation to his wife, it is better not to be married.

耶稣说，这话不是人都能领受的。惟独赐给谁，谁才能领受。
But he said to them, Not all men are able to take in this saying, but only those to whom it is given.

因为有生来是阉人，也有被人阉的，并有为天国的缘故自阉的。这话谁能领受，就可以领受。
For there are men who, from birth, were without sex: and there are some who were made so by men: and there are others who have made themselves so for the kingdom of heaven. He who is able to take it, let him take it.

那时有人带着小孩子来见耶稣，要耶稣给他们按手祷告。门徒就责备那些人。
Then some people took little children to him, so that he might put his hands on them in blessing: and the disciples said sharp words to them.

耶稣说，让小孩子到我这里来，不要禁止他们。因为在天国的，正是这样的人。
But Jesus said, Let the little ones come to me, and do not keep them away: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

耶稣给他们按手，就离开那地方去了。
And he put his hands on them, and went away.

有一个人来见耶稣说，夫子，（有古卷作良善的夫子）我该作什么善事，才能得永生。
And one came to him and said, Master, what good thing have I to do, so that I may have eternal life?

耶稣对他说，你为什么以善事问我呢？只有一位是善的，（有古卷作你为什么称我是良善的，除了神以外，没有一个良善的）你若要进入永生，就当遵守诫命。
And he said to him, Why are you questioning me about what is good? One there is who is good: but if you have a desire to go into life, keep the rules of the law.

他说，什么诫命。耶稣说，就是不可杀人，不可奸淫，不可偷盗，不可作假见证，
He says to him, Which? And Jesus said, Do not put anyone to death, Do not be untrue in married life, Do not take what is not yours, Do not give false witness,

当孝敬父母。又当爱人如己。
Give honour to your father and your mother: and, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.

那少年人说，这一切我都遵守了。还缺少什么呢？
The young man says to him, All these things have I done: what more is there?

耶稣说，你若愿意作完全人，可去变卖你所有的，分给穷人，就必有财宝在天上，你还要来跟从我。
Jesus said to him, If you have a desire to be complete, go, get money for your property, and give it to the poor, and you will have wealth in heaven: and come after me.

那少年人听见这话，就忧忧愁愁地走了。因为他的产业很多。
But hearing these words the young man went away sorrowing: for he had much property.

耶稣对门徒说，我实在告诉你们，财主进天国是难的。
And Jesus said to his disciples, Truly I say to you, It is hard for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of heaven.

我又告诉你们，骆驼穿过针的眼，比财主进神的国还容易呢。
And again I say to you, It is simpler for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a man with much money to go into the kingdom of God.

门徒听见这话，就希奇得很，说，这样谁能得救呢？
And the disciples, hearing this, were greatly surprised, saying, Who then may have salvation?

耶稣看着他们说，在人这是不能的。在神凡事都能。
And Jesus, looking at them, said, With men this is not possible; but with God all things are possible.

彼得就对他说，看哪，我们已经撇下所有的跟从你，将来我们要得什么呢？
Then Peter said to him, See, we have given up everything and have come after you; what then will we have?

耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，你们这跟从我的人，到复兴的时候，人子坐在他荣耀的宝座上，你们也要坐在十二个宝座上，审判以色列十二个支派。
And Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you that in the time when all things are made new, and the Son of man is seated in his glory, you who have come after me will be seated on twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

凡为我的名撇下房屋，或是弟兄，姐妹，父亲，母亲，（有古卷添妻子），儿女，田地的，必要得着百倍，并且承受永生。
And everyone who has given up houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or child, or land, for my name, will be given a hundred times as much, and have eternal life.

然而有许多在前的将要在后，在后的将要在前。
But a great number who are first will be last, and some who are last will be first.

因为天国好像家主，清早去雇人，进他的葡萄园作工。
For the kingdom of heaven is like the master of a house, who went out early in the morning to get workers into his vine-garden.

和工人讲定一天一钱银子，就打发他们进葡萄园去。
And when he had made an agreement with the workmen for a penny a day, he sent them into his vine-garden.

约在巳初出去，看见市上还有闲站的人。
And he went out about the third hour, and saw others in the market-place doing nothing;

就对他们说，你们也进葡萄园去，所当给的，我必给你们。他们也进去了。
And he said to them, Go into the vine-garden with the others, and whatever is right I will give you. And they went to work.

约在午正和申初又出去，也是这样行。
Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did the same.

约在酉初出去，看见还有人站在那里。就问他们说，你们为什么整天在这里闲站呢？
And about the eleventh hour he went out and saw others doing nothing; and he says to them, Why are you here all the day doing nothing?

他们说，因为没有人雇我们。他说，你们也进葡萄园去。
They say to him, Because no man has given us work. He says to them, Go in with the rest, into the vine-garden.

到了晚上，园主对管事的说，叫工人都来，给他们工钱，从后来的起，到先来的为止。
And when evening came, the lord of the vine-garden said to his manager, Let the workers come, and give them their payment, from the last to the first.

约在酉初雇的人来了，各人得了一钱银子。
And when those men came who had gone to work at the eleventh hour, they were given every man a penny.

及至那先雇的来了，他们以为必要多得。谁知也是各得一钱。
Then those who came first had the idea that they would get more; and they, like the rest, were given a penny.

他们得了，就埋怨家主说，
And when they got it, they made a protest against the master of the house,

我们整天劳苦受热，那后来的只做了一小时，你竟叫他们和我们一样吗？
Saying, These last have done only one hour's work, and you have made them equal to us, who have undergone the hard work of the day and the burning heat.

家主回答其中的一人说，朋友，我不亏负你。你与我讲定的，不是一钱银子吗？
But he in answer said to one of them, Friend, I do you no wrong: did you not make an agreement with me for a penny?

拿你的走吧。我给那后来的和给你一样，这是我愿意的。
Take what is yours, and go away; it is my pleasure to give to this last, even as to you.

我的东西难道不可随我的意思用吗？因为我作好人，你就红了眼吗？
Have I not the right to do as seems good to me in my house? or is your eye evil, because I am good?

这样，那在后的将要在前，在前的将要在后了。（有古卷在此有因为被召的人多，选上的人少）
So the last will be first, and the first last.

耶稣上耶路撒冷去的时候，在路上把十二个门徒带到一边对他们说，
And when Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples on one side, and said to them,

看哪，我们上耶路撒冷去，人子要被交给祭司长和文士。他们要定他死罪。
See, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be given into the hands of the chief priests and scribes; and they will give orders for him to be put to death,

又交给外邦人，将他戏弄，鞭打，钉在十字架上。第三日他要复活。
And will give him up to the Gentiles to be made sport of and to be whipped and to be put to death on the cross: and the third day he will come back again from the dead.

那时，西庇太儿子的母亲，同她两个儿子上前来拜耶稣，求他一件事。
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, giving him worship and making a request of him.

耶稣说，你要什么呢？她说，愿你叫我这两个儿子在你国里，一个坐在你右边，一个坐在你左边。
And he said to her, What is your desire? She says to him, Let my two sons be seated, the one at your right hand, and the other at your left, in your kingdom.

耶稣回答说，你们不知道所求的是什么。我将要喝的杯，你们能喝吗？他们说，我们能。
But Jesus made answer and said, You have no idea what you are requesting. Are you able to take of the cup which I am about to take?

耶稣说，我所喝的杯，你们必要喝。只是坐在我的左右，不是我可以赐的，乃是我父为谁预备的，就赐给谁。
They say to him, We are able. He says to them, Truly, you will take of my cup: but to be seated at my right hand and at my left is not for me to give, but it is for those for whom my Father has made it ready.

那十个门徒听见，就恼怒他们弟兄二人。
And when it came to the ears of the ten, they were angry with the two brothers.

耶稣叫了他们来，说，你们知道外邦人有君王为主治理他们，有大臣操权管束他们。
But Jesus said to them, You see that the rulers of the Gentiles are lords over them, and their great ones have authority over them.

只是在你们中间不可这样。你们中间谁愿为大，就必作你们的用人。
Let it not be so among you: but if anyone has a desire to become great among you, let him be your servant;

谁愿为首，就必作你们的仆人。
And whoever has a desire to be first among you, let him take the lowest place:

正如人子来，不是要受人的服事，乃是要服事人。并且要舍命，作多人的赎价。
Even as the Son of man did not come to have servants, but to be a servant, and to give his life for the salvation of men.

他们出耶利哥的时候，有极多的人跟随他，
And when they were going out from Jericho, a great number went after him.

有两个瞎子坐在路旁，听说是耶稣经过，就喊着说，主阿，大卫的子孙，可怜我们吧。
And two blind men seated by the wayside, when they had the news that Jesus was going by, gave a loud cry, saying, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us.

众人责备他们，不许他们作声。他们却越发喊着说，主阿，大卫的子孙，可怜我们吧。
And the people gave them orders to be quiet; but they went on crying even louder, Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us.

耶稣就站住，叫他们来，说，要我为你们作什么。
And Jesus, stopping, sent for them, and said, What would you have me do to you?

他们说，主阿，要我们的眼睛能看见。
They say to him, Lord, that our eyes may be open.

耶稣就动了慈心，把他们的眼睛一摸，他们立刻看见，就跟从了耶稣。
And Jesus, being moved with pity, put his fingers on their eyes: and straight away they were able to see, and went after him.

耶稣和门徒将近耶路撒冷，到了伯法其在橄榄山那里。
And when they were near Jerusalem, and had come to Beth-phage, to the Mountain of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,

耶稣就打发两个门徒，对他们说，你们往对面村子里去，必看见一匹驴拴在那里，还有驴驹同在一处。你们解开牵到我这里来。
Saying to them, Go into the little town in front of you, and straight away you will see an ass with a cord round her neck, and a young one with her; let them loose and come with them to me.

若有人对你们说什么，你们就说，主要用它。那人必立时让你们牵来。
And if anyone says anything to you, you will say, The Lord has need of them; and straight away he will send them.

这事成就，是要应验先知的话，说，
Now this took place so that these words of the prophet might come true,

要对锡安的居民（原文作女子）说，看哪，你的王来到你这里，是温柔的，又骑着驴，就是骑着驴驹子。
Say to the daughter of Zion, See, your King comes to you, gentle and seated on an ass, and on a young ass.

门徒就照耶稣所吩咐的去行，
And the disciples went and did as Jesus had given them orders,

牵了驴和驴驹来，把自己的衣服搭在上面，耶稣就骑上。
And got the ass and the young one, and put their clothing on them, and he took his seat on it.

众人多半把衣服铺在路上。还有人砍下树枝来铺在路上。
And all the people put their clothing down in the way; and others got branches from the trees, and put them down in the way.

前行后随的众人，喊着说，和散那归于大卫的子孙，（和散那原有求救的意思，在此乃称颂的话）奉主名来的，是应当称颂的。高高在上和散那。
And those who went before him, and those who came after, gave loud cries, saying, Glory to the Son of David: A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord: Glory in the highest.

耶稣既进了耶路撒冷，合城都惊动了，说，这是谁。
And when he came into Jerusalem, all the town was moved, saying, Who is this?

众人说，这是加利利拿撒勒的先知耶稣。
And the people said, This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.

耶稣进了神的殿，赶出殿里一切作买卖的人，推倒兑换银钱之人的桌子，和卖鸽子之人的凳子。
And Jesus went into the Temple and sent out all who were trading there, overturning the tables of the money-changers and the seats of those trading in doves.

对他们说，经上记着说，我的殿必称为祷告的殿。你们倒使它成为贼窝了。
And he said to them, It is in the Writings, My house is to be named a house of prayer, but you are making it a hole of thieves.

在殿里有瞎子瘸子，到耶稣跟前。他就治好了他们。
And the blind and the broken in body came to him in the Temple, and he made them well.

祭司长和文士，看见耶稣所行的奇事，又见小孩子在殿里喊着说，和散那归于大卫的子孙。就甚恼怒，
But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the works of power which he did, and the children crying out in the Temple, Glory to the son of David, they were angry and said to him,

对他说，这些人所说的，你听见了吗？耶稣说，是的，经上说，你从婴孩和吃奶的口中，完全了赞美的话。你们没有念过吗？
Have you any idea what these are saying? And Jesus said to them, Yes: have you not seen in the Writings, From the lips of children and babies at the breast you have made your praise complete?

于是离开他们出城到伯大尼去，在那里住宿。
And he went away from them, and went out of the town to Bethany, and was there for the night.

早晨回城的时候，他饿了。
Now in the morning when he was coming back to the town, he had a desire for food.

看见路旁有一棵无花果树，就走到跟前，在树上找不着什么，不过有叶子。就对树说，从今以后，你永不结果子。那无花果树就立刻枯干了。
And seeing a fig-tree by the wayside, he came to it, and saw nothing on it but leaves only; and he said to it, Let there be no fruit from you from this time forward for ever. And straight away the fig-tree became dry and dead.

门徒看见了，便希奇说，无花果树怎么立刻枯干了呢？
And when the disciples saw it they were surprised, saying, How did the fig-tree become dry in so short a time?

耶稣回答说，我实在告诉你们，你们若有信心，不疑惑，不但能行无花果树上所行的事，就是对这座山说，你挪开此地，投在海里，也必成就。
And Jesus in answer said to them, Truly I say to you, If you have faith, without doubting, not only may you do what has been done to the fig-tree, but even if you say to this mountain, Be taken up and put into the sea, it will be done.

你们祷告，无论求什么，只要信，就必得着。
And all things, whatever you make request for in prayer, having faith, you will get.

耶稣进了殿，正教训人的时候，祭司长和民间的长老来问他说，你仗着什么权柄作这些事？给你这权柄的是谁呢？
And when he had come into the Temple, the chief priests and those in authority over the people came to him while he was teaching, and said, By what authority do you do these things? and who gave you this authority?

耶稣回答说，我也要问你们一句话，你们若告诉我，我就告诉你们我仗着什么权柄作这些事。
And Jesus said to them in answer, I will put one question to you, and if you give me the answer, I will say by what authority I do these things.

约翰的洗礼是从哪里来的？是从天上来的？是从人间来的呢？他们彼此商议说，我们若说从天上来，他必对我们说，这样，你们为什么不信他呢？
The baptism of John, where did it come from? from heaven or from men? And they were reasoning among themselves, saying, If we say, From heaven; he will say to us, Why then did you not have faith in him?

若说从人间来，我们又怕百姓。因为他们都以约翰为先知。
But if we say, From men; we are in fear of the people, because all take John to be a prophet.

于是回答耶稣说，我们不知道。耶稣说，我也不告诉你们我仗着什么权柄作这些事。
And they made answer and said, We have no idea. Then he said to them, And I will not say to you by what authority I do these things.

又说，一个人有两个儿子，他来对大儿子说，我儿，你今天到葡萄园里去作工。
But how does it seem to you? A man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go and do work today in the vine-garden.

他回答说，我不去。以后自己懊悔就去了。
And he said in answer, I will not: but later, changing his decision, he went.

又来对小儿子也是这样说，他回答说，父阿，我去。他却不去。
And he came to the second and said the same. And he made answer and said, I go, sir: and went not.

你们想这两个儿子，是那一个遵行父命呢？他们说，大儿子。耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，税吏和娼妓，倒比你们先进神的国。
Which of the two did his father's pleasure? They say, The first. Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, that tax-farmers and loose women are going into the kingdom of God before you.

因为约翰遵着义路到你们这里来，你们却不信他。税吏和娼妓倒信他。你们看见了，后来还是不懊悔去信他。
For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you had no faith in him, but the tax-farmers and the loose women had faith in him: and you, when you saw it, did not even have regret for your sins, so as to have faith in him.

你们再听一个比喻。有个家主，栽了一个葡萄园，周围圈上篱笆，里面挖了一个压酒池，盖了一座楼，租给园户，就往外国去了。
Give ear to another story. A master of a house made a vine garden, and put a wall round it, and made a place for crushing out the wine, and made a tower, and let it out to field-workers, and went into another country.

收果子的时候近了，就打发仆人，到园户那里去收果子。
And when the time for the fruit came near, he sent his servants to the workmen, to get the fruit.

园户拿住仆人。打了一个，杀了一个，用石头打死一个。
And the workmen made an attack on his servants, giving blows to one, putting another to death, and stoning another.

主人又打发别的仆人去，比先前更多。园户还是照样待他们。
Again, he sent other servants more in number than the first: and they did the same to them.

后来打发他的儿子到他们那里去，意思说，他们必尊敬我的儿子。
But after that he sent his son to them, saying, They will have respect for my son.

不料，园户看见他儿子，就彼此说，这是承受产业的。来吧，我们杀他，占他的产业。
But when the workmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is he who will one day be the owner of the property; come, let us put him to death and take his heritage.

他们就拿住他，推出葡萄园外杀了。
And they took him and, driving him out of the vine-garden, put him to death.

园主来的时候，要怎样处治这些园户呢？
When, then, the lord of the vine-garden comes, what will he do to those workmen?

他们说，要下毒手除灭那些恶人，将葡萄园另租给那按着时候交果子的园户。
They say to him, He will put those cruel men to a cruel death, and will let out the vine-garden to other workmen, who will give him the fruit when it is ready.

耶稣说，经上写着，匠人所弃的石头，已作了房角的头块石头。这是主所作的，在我们眼中看为希奇。这经你们没有念过吗？
Jesus says to them, Did you never see in the Writings, The stone which the builders put on one side, the same has been made the chief stone of the building: this was the Lord's doing, and it is a wonder in our eyes?

所以我告诉你们，神的国，必从你们夺去。赐给那能结果子的百姓。
For this reason I say to you, The kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation producing the fruits of it.

谁掉在这石头上，必要跌碎。这石头掉在谁的身上，就要把谁砸得稀烂。
Any man falling on this stone will be broken, but he on whom it comes down will be crushed to dust.

祭司长和法利赛人，听见他的比喻，就看出他是指着他们说的。
And when his stories came to the ears of the chief priests and the Pharisees, they saw that he was talking of them.

他们想要捉拿他，只是怕众人，因为众人以他为先知。
And though they had a desire to take him, they were in fear of the people, because in their eyes he was a prophet.

耶稣又用比喻对他们说，
And Jesus, talking to them again in stories, said:

天国好比一个王，为他儿子摆设娶亲的筵席。
The kingdom of heaven is like a certain king, who made a feast when his son was married,

就打发仆人去请那些被召的人来赴席。他们却不肯来。
And sent out his servants to get in the guests to the feast: and they would not come.

王又打发别的仆人说，你们告诉那被召的人，我的筵席已经预备好了，牛和肥畜已经宰了，各样都齐备。请你们来赴席。
Again he sent out other servants, with orders to say to the guests, See, I have made ready my feast: my oxen and my fat beasts have been put to death, and all things are ready: come to the feast.

那些人不理就走了。一个到自己田里去。一个作买卖去。
But they gave no attention, and went about their business, one to his farm, another to his trade:

其余的拿住仆人，凌辱他们，把他们杀了。
And the rest put violent hands on his servants, and did evil to them, and put them to death.

王就大怒，发兵除灭那些凶手，烧毁他们的城。
But the king was angry; and he sent his armies, and those who had put his servants to death he gave to destruction, burning down their town with fire.

于是对仆人说，喜筵已经齐备，只是所召的人不配。
Then he said to his servants, The feast is ready but the guests were not good enough.

所以你们要往岔路口上去，凡遇见的，都召来赴席。
Go then to the cross-roads, and get all those whom you see to come to the bride-feast.

那些仆人就出去到大路上，凡遇见的，不论善恶都召聚了来。筵席上就坐满了客。
And those servants went out into the streets, and got together all those whom they came across, bad and good: and the feast was full of guests.

王进来观看宾客，见那里有一个没有穿礼服的。
But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who had not on a guest's robe;

就对他说，朋友，你到这里来，怎么不穿礼服呢？那人无言可答。
And he says to him, Friend, how came you in here not having a guest's robe? And he had nothing to say.

于是王对使唤的人说，捆起他的手脚来，把他丢在外边的黑暗里。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
Then the king said to the servants, Put cords round his hands and feet and put him out into the dark; there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

因为被召的人多，选上的人少。
For out of all to whom the good news has come, only a small number will get salvation.

当时，法利赛人出去商议，怎样就着耶稣的话陷害他。
Then the Pharisees went and had a meeting to see how they might make use of his words to take him.

就打发他们的门徒，同希律党的人，去见耶稣说，夫子，我们知道你是诚实人，并且诚诚实实传神的道，什么人你都不徇情面，因为你不看人的外貌。
And they sent to him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we see that you are true, and that you are teaching the true way of God, and have no fear of anyone, because you have no respect for a man's position.

请告诉我们，你的意见如何。纳税给该撒，可以不可以。
Give us, then, your opinion of this: Is it right to give tax to Caesar, or not?

耶稣看出他们的恶意，就说，假冒为善的人哪，为什么试探我。
But Jesus saw their trick and said, Oh false ones, why are you attempting to put me in the wrong?

拿一个上税的钱给我看。他们就拿一个银钱来给他。
Let me see the tax money. And they gave him a penny.

耶稣说，这像和这号是谁的。
And he said to them, Whose is this image and name on it?

他们说，是该撒的。耶稣说，这样，该撒的物当归给该撒，神的物当归给神。
They say to him, Caesar's. Then he said to them, Give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and to God the things which are God's.

他们听见就希奇，离开他走了。
And hearing it, they were full of wonder, and went away from him.

撒都该人常说没有复活的事。那天，他们来问耶稣说，
On the same day there came to him the Sadducees, who say that there is no coming back from the dead: and they put a question to him, saying,

夫子，摩西说，人若死了，没有孩子，他兄弟当娶他的妻，为哥哥生子立后。
Master, Moses said, If a man, at the time of his death, has no children, let his brother take his wife, and get a family for his brother;

从前在我们这里，有弟兄七人。第一个娶了妻，死了，没有孩子，撇下妻子给兄弟。
Now there were among us seven brothers; and the first was married and at his death, having no seed, gave his wife to his brother;

第二第三直到第七个，都是如此。
In the same way the second and the third, up to the seventh.

末后，妇人也死了。
And last of all the woman came to her end.

这样当复活的时候，她是七个人中，那一个的妻子呢？因为他们都娶过她。
When they come back from the dead, then, whose wife will she be of the seven? because they all had her.

耶稣回答说，你们错了。因为不明白圣经，也不晓得神的大能。
But Jesus said to them in answer, You are in error, not having knowledge of the Writings, or of the power of God.

当复活的时候，人也不娶也不嫁，乃像天上的使者一样。
For when they come back from the dead there are no husbands and wives, but they are as the angels in heaven.

论到死人复活，神在经上向你们所说的，你们没有念过吗？
But about the dead coming back to life, have you no knowledge of what was said to you by God in the Writings:

他说，我是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神。神不是死人的神，乃是活人的神。
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead but of the living.

众人听见这话，就希奇他的教训。
And the people hearing it were surprised at his teaching.

法利赛人听见耶稣堵住了撒都该人的口，他们就聚集。
But the Pharisees, hearing how the mouths of the Sadducees had been stopped, came together;

内中有一个人是律法师，要试探耶稣，就问他说，
And one of them, a teacher of the law, put a question to him, testing him, and saying,

夫子，律法上的诫命，那一条是最大的呢？
Master, which is the chief rule in the law?

耶稣对他说，你要尽心，尽性，尽意，爱主你的神。
And he said to him, Have love for the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.

这是诫命中的第一，且是最大的。
This is the first and greatest rule.

其次也相仿，就是要爱人如己。
And a second like it is this, Have love for your neighbour as for yourself.

这两条诫命，是律法和先知一切道理的总纲。
On these two rules all the law and the prophets are based.

法利赛人聚集的时候，耶稣问他们说，
Now while the Pharisees were together, Jesus put a question to them, saying,

论到基督，你们的意见如何？他是谁的子孙呢？他们回答说，是大卫的子孙。
What is your opinion of the Christ? whose son is he? They say to him, The Son of David.

耶稣说，这样，大卫被圣灵感动，怎么还称他为主。说，
He says to them, How then does David in the Spirit give him the name of Lord, saying,

主对我主说，你坐在我的右边，等我把你仇敌，放在你的脚下。
The Lord said to my Lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put under your feet all those who are against you?

大卫既称他为主，他怎么又是大卫的子孙呢？
If David then gives him the name of Lord, how is he his son?

他们没有一个人能回答一言。从那日以后，也没有人敢再问他什么。
And no one was able to give him an answer, and so great was their fear of him, that from that day no one put any more questions to him.

那时，耶稣对众人和门徒讲论，
Then Jesus said to the people and to his disciples:

说，文士和法利赛人，坐在摩西的位上。
The scribes and the Pharisees have the authority of Moses;

凡他们所吩咐你们的，你们都要谨守，遵行。但不要效法他们的行为。因为他们能说不能行。
All things, then, which they give you orders to do, these do and keep: but do not take their works as your example, for they say and do not.

他们把难担的重担，捆起来搁在人的肩上。但自己一个指头也不肯动。
They make hard laws and put great weights on men's backs; but they themselves will not put a finger to them.

他们一切所作的事，都是要叫人看见。所以将佩戴的经文做宽了，衣裳的？？子做长了。
But all their works they do so as to be seen by men: for they make wide their phylacteries, and the edges of their robes,

喜爱筵席上的首座，会堂里的高位。
And the things desired by them are the first places at feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues,

又喜爱人在街市上问他安，称呼他拉比。（拉比就是夫子）
And words of respect in the market-places, and to be named by men, Teacher.

但你们不要受拉比的称呼。因为只有一位是你们的夫子。你们都是弟兄。
But you may not be named Teacher: for one is your teacher, and you are all brothers.

也不要称呼地上的人为父。因为只有一位是你们的父，就是在天上的父。
And give no man the name of father on earth: because one is your Father, who is in heaven.

也不要受师尊的称呼。因为只有一位是你们的师尊，就是基督。
And you may not be named guides: because one is your Guide, even Christ.

你们中间谁为大，谁就要作你们的用人。
But let the greatest among you be your servant.

凡自高的必降为卑，自卑的必升为高。
And whoever makes himself high will be made low, and whoever makes himself low will be made high.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们正当人前把天国的门关了。自己不进去，正要进去的人，你们也不容他们进去。（有古卷在此有
But a curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! because you are shutting the kingdom of heaven against men: for you do not go in yourselves, and those who are going in, you keep back.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了，因为你们侵吞寡妇的家产，假意作很长的祷告，所以要受更重的刑罚）
[]

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们走遍洋海陆地，勾引一个人入教。既入了教，却使他作地狱之子，比你们还加倍。
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you go about land and sea to get one disciple and, having him, you make him twice as much a son of hell as yourselves.

你们这瞎眼领路的有祸了。你们说，凡指着殿起誓的，这算不得什么。只是凡指着殿中金子起誓的，他就该谨守。
A curse is on you, blind guides, who say, Whoever takes an oath by the Temple, it is nothing; but whoever takes an oath by the gold of the Temple, he is responsible.

你们这无知瞎眼的人哪，什么是大的？是金子呢？还是叫金子成圣的殿呢？
You foolish ones and blind: which is greater, the gold, or the Temple which makes the gold holy?

你们又说，凡指着坛起誓的，这算不得什么。只是凡指着坛上礼物起誓的，他就该谨守。
And, Whoever takes an oath by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever takes an oath by the offering which is on it, he is responsible.

你们这瞎眼的人哪，什么是大的？是礼物呢？还是叫礼物成圣的坛呢？
You blind ones: which is greater, the offering, or the altar which makes the offering holy?

所以人指着坛起誓，就是指着坛和坛上一切所有的起誓。
He, then, who takes an oath by the altar, takes it by the altar and by all things on it.

人指着殿起誓，就是指着殿和那住在殿里的起誓。
And he who takes an oath by the Temple, takes it by the Temple and by him whose house it is.

人指着天起誓，就是指着神的宝座和那坐在上面的起誓。
And he who takes an oath by heaven, takes it by the seat of God, and by him who is seated on it.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们将薄荷，茴香，芹菜，献上十分之一。那律法上更重的事，就是公义，怜悯，信实，反倒不行了。这更重的是你们当行的；那也是不可不行的。
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you make men give a tenth of all sorts of sweet-smelling plants, but you give no thought to the more important things of the law, righteousness, and mercy, and faith; but it is right for you to do these, and not to let the others be undone.

你们这瞎眼领路的，蠓虫你们就滤出来，骆驼你们倒吞下去。
You blind guides, who take out a fly from your drink, but make no trouble over a camel.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们洗净杯盘的外面，里面却盛满了勒索和放荡。
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you make clean the outside of the cup and of the plate, but inside they are full of violent behaviour and uncontrolled desire.

你这瞎眼的法利赛人，先洗净杯盘的里面，好叫外面也干净了。
You blind Pharisee, first make clean the inside of the cup and of the plate, so that the outside may become equally clean.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们好像粉饰的坟墓，外面好看，里面却装满了死人的骨头，和一切的污秽。
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! for you are like the resting-places of the dead, which are made white, and seem beautiful on the outside, but inside are full of dead men's bones and of all unclean things.

你们也是如此，在人前，外面显出公义来，里面却装满了假善和不法的事。
Even so you seem to men to be full of righteousness, but inside you are all false and full of wrongdoing.

你们这假冒为善的文士和法利赛人有祸了。因为你们建造先知的坟，修饰义人的墓，说，
A curse is on you, scribes and Pharisees, false ones! because you put up buildings for housing the dead bodies of the prophets, and make fair the last resting-places of good men, and say,

若是我们在我们祖宗的时候，必不和他们同流先知的血。
If we had been living in the days of our fathers, we would not have taken part with them in the blood of the prophets.

这就是你们自己证明，是杀害先知者的子孙了。
So that you are witnesses against yourselves that you are the sons of those who put the prophets to death.

你们去充满你们祖宗的恶贯吧。
Make full, then, the measure of your fathers.

你们这些蛇类，毒蛇之种阿，怎能逃脱地狱的刑罚呢？
You snakes, offspring of snakes, how will you be kept from the punishment of hell?

所以我差遣先知和智慧人并文士，到你们这里来。有的你们要杀害，要钉十字架。有的你们要在会堂里鞭打，从这城追逼到那城。
For this reason, I send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: some of them you will put to death and put on the cross, and to some of them you will give blows in your Synagogues, driving them from town to town;

叫世上所流义人的血，都归到你们身上。从义人亚伯的血起，直到你们在殿和坛中间所杀的巴拉加的儿子撒迦利亚的血为止。
So that on you may come all the blood of the upright on the earth, from the blood of upright Abel to the blood of Zachariah, son of Barachiah, whom you put to death between the Temple and the altar.

我实在告诉你们，这一切的罪，都要归到这世代了。
Truly I say to you, All these things will come on this generation.

耶路撒冷阿，耶路撒冷阿，你常杀害先知，又用石头打死那奉差遣到你这里来的人。我多次愿意聚集你的儿女，好像母鸡把小鸡聚集在翅膀底下，只是你们不愿意。
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, putting to death the prophets, and stoning those who are sent to her! Again and again would I have taken your children to myself as a bird takes her young ones under her wings, and you would not!

看哪，你们的家成为荒场，留给你们。
See, your house is made waste.

我告诉你们，从今以后，你们不得再见我，直等到你们说，奉主名来的，是应当称颂的。
For I say to you, You will not see me from this time till you say, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord.

耶稣出了圣殿，正走的时候，门徒进前来，把殿宇指给他看。
And Jesus went out of the Temple, and on the way his disciples came to him, pointing out the buildings of the Temple.

耶稣对他们说，你们不是看见这殿宇吗？我实在告诉你们，将来在这里，没有一块石头留在石头上不被拆毁了。
But he, answering, said to them, See you not all these things? truly I say to you that here there will not be one stone resting on another, which will not be pulled down.

耶稣在橄榄山上坐着，门徒暗暗地来说，请告诉我们，什么时候有这些事？你降临和世界的末了，有什么预兆呢？
And while he was seated on the Mountain of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Make clear to us, when will these things be? and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the world?

耶稣回答说，你们要谨慎，免得有人迷惑你们。
And Jesus said to them in answer, Take care that you are not tricked.

因为将来有好些人冒我的名来，说，我是基督，并且要迷惑许多人。
For people will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ; and a number will be turned from the true way through them.

你们也要听见打仗和打仗的风声，总不要惊慌。因为这些事是必须有的。只是末期还没有到。
And news will come to you of wars and talk of wars: do not be troubled, for these things have to be; but it is still not the end.

民要攻打民，国要攻打国。多处必有饥荒，地震。
For nation will be moved against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and men will be without food, and the earth will be shaking in different places;

这都是灾难的起头。（灾难原文作生产之难）。
But all these things are the first of the troubles.

那时，人要把你们陷在患难里，也要杀害你们。你们又要为我的名，被万民恨恶。
Then they will be cruel to you, and will put you to death: and you will be hated by all nations because of my name.

那时，必有许多人跌倒，也要彼此陷害，彼此恨恶。
And numbers of people will be turned from the right way, and will give one another up and have hate for one another.

且有好些假先知起来，迷惑多人。
And a number of false prophets will come, causing error.

只因不法的事增多，许多人的爱心，才渐渐冷淡了。
And because wrongdoing will be increased, the love of most people will become cold.

惟有忍耐到底的，必然得救。
But he who goes through to the end will get salvation.

这天国的福音，要传遍天下，对万民作见证，然后末期才来到。
And this good news of the kingdom will be given through all the world for a witness to all nations; and then the end will come.

你们看见先知但以理所说的，那行毁坏可憎的站在圣地。（读这经的人须要会意）。
When, then, you see in the holy place the unclean thing which makes destruction, of which word was given by Daniel the prophet (let this be clear to the reader),

那时，在犹太的，应当逃到山上。
Then let those who are in Judaea go in flight to the mountains:

在房上的，不要下来拿家里的东西。
Let not him who is on the house-top go down to take anything out of his house:

在田里的，也不要回去取衣裳。
And let not him who is in the field go back to get his coat.

当那些日子，怀孕的和奶孩子的有祸了。
But it will be hard for women who are with child and for those with babies at the breast in those days.

你们应当祈求，叫你们逃走的时候，不遇见冬天，或是安息日。
And say a prayer that your flight may not be in the winter, or on a Sabbath.

因为那时必有大灾难，从世界的起头，直到如今，没有这样的灾难，后来也必没有。
Because in those days there will be great sorrow, such as there has not been from the start of the world till now, or ever will be.

若不减少那日子，凡有血气的，总没有一个得救的。只是为选民，那日子必减少了。
And if those days had not been made short there would have been no salvation for any, but because of the saints those days will be made short.

那时若有人对你们说，基督在这里。或说，基督在那里，你们不要信。
Then if any man says to you, See, here is the Christ, or, Here; do not put faith in him;

因为假基督，假先知，将要起来，显大神迹，大奇事。倘若能行，连选民也就迷惑了。
For there will come up false Christs, and false prophets, who will do great signs and wonders; so that if possible even the saints might be tricked.

看哪，我预先告诉你们了。
See, I have made it clear to you before it comes about.

若有人对你们说，看哪，基督在旷野里。你们不要出去。或说，看哪，基督在内屋中。你们不要信。
If, then, they say to you, See, he is in the waste land; go not out: See, he is in the inner rooms; put no faith in it.

闪电从东边发出，直照到西边。人子降临，也要这样。
Because as in a thunderstorm the bright light coming from the east is seen even in the west; so will be the coming of the Son of man.

尸首在哪里，鹰也必聚在哪里。
Wherever the dead body is, there will the eagles come together.

那些日子的灾难一过去，日头就变黑了，月亮也不放光，众星要从天上坠落，天势都要震动。
But straight away, after the trouble of those days, the sun will be made dark and the moon will not give her light and the stars will come down from heaven and the powers of heaven will be moved:

那时，人子的兆头要显在天上，地上的万族都要哀哭。他们要看见人子，有能力，有大荣耀，驾着天上的云降临。
And then the sign of the Son of man will be seen in heaven: and then all the nations of the earth will have sorrow, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.

他要差遣使者，用号筒的大声，将他的选民，从四方，从天这边到天那边，都招聚了来（方原文作风）。
And he will send out his angels with a great sound of a horn, and they will get his saints together from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

你们可以从无花果树学个比方。当树枝发嫩长叶的时候，你们就知道夏天近了。
Now take an example from the fig-tree: when her branch has become soft and puts out its leaves, you are certain that the summer is near;

这样，你们看见这一切的事，也该知道人子近了，正在门口了。
Even so, when you see all these things, you may be certain that he is near, even at the doors.

我实在告诉你们，这世代还没有过去，这些事都要成就。
Truly I say to you, This generation will not come to an end till all these things are complete.

天地要废去，我的话却不能废去。
Heaven and earth will come to an end, but my words will not come to an end.

但那日子，那时辰，没有人知道，连天上的使者也不知道，子也不知道，惟独父知道。
But of that day and hour no one has knowledge, not even the angels in heaven, or the Son, but the Father only.

挪亚的日子怎样，人子降临也要怎样。
And as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of man.

当洪水以前的日子，人照常吃喝嫁娶，直到挪亚进方舟的那日。
Because as in those days before the overflowing of the waters, they were feasting and taking wives and getting married, till the day when Noah went into the ark,

不知不觉洪水来了，把他们全都冲去。人子降临也要这样。
And they had no care till the waters came and took them all away; so will be the coming of the Son of man.

那时，两个人在田里，取去一个，撇下一个。
Then two men will be in the field; one is taken, and one let go;

两个女人推磨。取去一个，撇下一个。
Two women will be crushing grain; one is taken, and one let go.

所以你们要儆醒，因为不知道你们的主是哪一天来到。
Be watching, then! for you have no knowledge on what day your Lord will come.

家主若知道几更天有贼来，就必儆醒，不容人挖透房屋。这是你们所知道的。
But be certain of this, that if the master of the house had had knowledge of the time when the thief was coming, he would have been watching, and would not have let his house be broken into.

所以你们也要预备。因为你们想不到的时候，人子就来了。
Be ready then; for at a time which you have no thought of the Son of man will come.

谁是忠心有见识的仆人，为主人所派，管理家里的人，按时分粮给他们呢？
Who is the true and wise servant, whom his lord has put over those in his house, to give them their food at the right time?

主人来到，看见他这样行，那仆人就有福了。
A blessing on that servant, who will be doing so when his lord comes.

我实在告诉你们，主人要派他管理一切所有的。
Truly, I say to you, he will put him over all he has.

倘若那恶仆心里说，我的主人必来得迟，
But if that evil servant says in his heart, My lord is a long time in coming;

就动手打他的同伴，又和酒醉的人一同吃喝。
And is cruel to the other servants, taking his pleasure with those who are overcome with wine;

在想不到的日子，不知道的时辰，那仆人的主人要来，
The lord of that servant will come in a day when he is not looking for him, and in an hour of which he has no knowledge,

重重地处治他，（或作把他腰斩了）定他和假冒为善的人同罪。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
And will have him cut in two, and will give him a part in the fate of the false ones: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

那时，天国好比十个童女，拿着灯，出去迎接新郎。
Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins, the friends of the bride, who took their lights, and went out with the purpose of meeting the husband.

其中有五个是愚拙的。五个是聪明的。
And five of them were foolish, and five were wise.

愚拙的拿着灯，却不预备油。
For the foolish, when they took their lights, took no oil with them.

聪明的拿着灯，又预备油在器皿里。
But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lights.

新郎迟延的时候，她们都打盹睡着了。
Now the husband was a long time in coming, and they all went to sleep.

半夜有人喊着说，新郎来了，你们出来迎接他。
But in the middle of the night there is a cry, The husband comes! Go out to him.

那些童女就都起来收拾灯。
Then all those virgins got up, and made ready their lights.

愚拙的对聪明的说，请分点油给我们。因为我们的灯要灭了。
And the foolish said to the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lights are going out.

聪明的回答说，恐怕不够你我用的。不如你们自己到卖油的那里去买吧。
But the wise made answer, saying, There may not be enough for us and you; it would be better for you to go to the traders and get oil for yourselves.

她们去买的时候，新郎到了。那预备好了的，同他进去坐席。门就关了。
And while they went to get oil, the master came; and those who were ready went in with him to the feast: and the door was shut.

其余的童女，随后也来了，说，主阿，主阿，给我们开门。
After that the other virgins came, saying, Lord, Lord, let us in.

他却回答说，我实在告诉你们，我不认识你们。
But he made answer and said, Truly I say to you, I have no knowledge of you.

所以你们要儆醒，因为那日子，那时辰，你们不知道。
Keep watch, then, because you are not certain of the day or of the hour.

天国又好比一个人要往外国去，就叫了仆人来，把他的家业交给他们。
For it is as when a man, about to take a journey, got his servants together, and gave them his property.

按着各人的才干，给他们银子。一个给了五千，一个给了二千，一个给了一千。就往外国去了。
And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to everyone as he was able; and he went on his journey.

那领五千的，随即拿去做买卖，另外赚了五千。
Straight away he who had been given the five talents went and did trade with them, and made five more.

那领二千的，也照样另赚了二千。
In the same way he who had been given the two got two more.

但那领一千的，去掘开地，把主人的银子埋藏了。
But he who was given the one went away and put it in a hole in the earth, and kept his lord's money in a secret place.

过了许久，那些仆人的主人来了，和他们算账。
Now after a long time the lord of those servants comes, and makes up his account with them.

那领五千银子的，又带着那另外的五千来，说，主阿，你交给我五千银子，请看，我又赚了五千。
And he who had the five talents came with his other five talents, saying, Lord, you gave into my care five talents: see, I have got five more.

主人说，好，你这又良善又忠心的仆人。你在不多的事上有忠心，我要把许多事派你管理。可以进来享受你主人的快乐。
His lord said to him, Well done, good and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.

那领二千的也来说，主阿，你交给我二千银子，请看，我又赚了二千。
And he who had the two talents came and said, Lord, you gave into my care two talents: see, I have got two more.

主人说，好，你这又良善又忠心的仆人。你在不多的事上有忠心，我要把许多事派你管理。可以进来享受你主人的快乐。
His lord said to him, Well done, good and true servant: you have been true in a small thing, I will give you control over great things: take your part in the joy of your lord.

那领一千的，也来说，主阿，我知道你是忍心的人，没有种的地方要收割，没有散的地方要聚敛。
And he who had had the one talent came and said, Lord, I had knowledge that you are a hard man, getting in grain where you have not put seed, and making profits for which you have done no work:

我就害怕，去把你的一千银子埋藏在地里。请看，你的原银子在这里。
And I was in fear, and went away, and put your talent in the earth: here is what is yours.

主人回答说，你这又恶又懒的仆人，你既知道我没有种的地方要收割，没有散的地方要聚敛。
But his lord in answer said to him, You are a bad and unready servant; if you had knowledge that I get in grain where I did not put seed, and make profits for which I have done no work,

就当把我的银子放给兑换银钱的人，到我来的时候，可以连本带利收回。
Why, then, did you not put my money in the bank, and at my coming I would have got back what is mine with interest?

夺过他这一千来，给那有一万的。
Take away, then, his talent and give it to him who has the ten talents.

因为凡有的，还要加给他，叫他有余。没有的，连他所有的，也要夺过来。
For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have more: but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away.

把这无用的仆人，丢在外面黑暗里。在那里必要哀哭切齿了。
And put out the servant who is of no profit into the outer dark: there will be weeping and cries of sorrow.

当人子在他荣耀里同着众天使降临的时候，要坐在他荣耀的宝座上。
But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then will he be seated in his glory:

万民都要聚集在他面前。他要把他们分别出来，好像牧羊的分别绵羊、山羊一般。
And before him all the nations will come together; and they will be parted one from another, as the sheep are parted from the goats by the keeper.

把绵羊安置在右边，山羊在左边。
And he will put the sheep on his right, but the goats on the left.

于是王要向那右边的说，你们这蒙我父赐福的，可来承受那创世以来为你们所预备的国。
Then will the King say to those on his right, Come, you who have the blessing of my Father, into the kingdom made ready for you before the world was:

因为我饿了，你们给我吃。渴了，你们给我喝。我作客旅，你们留我住。
For I was in need of food, and you gave it to me: I was in need of drink, and you gave it to me: I was wandering, and you took me in;

我赤身露体，你们给我穿。我病了，你们看顾我。我在监里，你们来看我。
I had no clothing, and you gave it to me: when I was ill, or in prison, you came to me.

义人就回答说，主阿，我们什么时候见你饿了给你吃，渴了给你喝？
Then will the upright make answer to him, saying, Lord, when did we see you in need of food, and give it to you? or in need of drink, and give it to you?

什么时候见你作客旅留你住，或是赤身露体给你穿？
And when did we see you wandering, and take you in? or without clothing, and give it to you?

又什么时候见你病了，或是在监里，来看你呢？
And when did we see you ill, or in prison, and come to you?

王要回答说，我实在告诉你们，这些事你们既作在我这弟兄中一个最小的身上，就是作在我身上了。
And the King will make answer and say to them, Truly I say to you, Because you did it to the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.

王又要向那左边的说，你们这被咒诅的人，离开我，进入那为魔鬼和他的使者所预备的永火里去。
Then will he say to those on the left, Go from me, you cursed ones, into the eternal fire which is ready for the Evil One and his angels:

因为我饿了，你们不给我吃。渴了，你们不给我喝。
For I was in need of food, and you gave it not to me; I was in need of drink, and you gave it not to me:

我作客旅，你们不留我住。我赤身露体，你们不给我穿。我病了，我在监里，你们不来看顾我。
I was wandering, and you took me not in; without clothing, and you gave me no clothing; ill, and in prison, and you came not to me.

他们也要回答说，主阿，我们什么时候见你饿了，或渴了，或作客旅，或赤身露体，或病了，或在监里，不伺候你呢？
Then will they make answer, saying, Lord, when did we see you in need of food or drink, or wandering, or without clothing, or ill, or in prison, and did not take care of you?

王要回答说，我实在告诉你们，这些事你们既不作在我这弟兄中一个最小的身上，就是不作在我身上了。
Then will he make answer to them, saying, Truly I say to you, Because you did it not to the least of these, you did it not to me.

这些人要往永刑里去。那些义人要往永生里去。
And these will go away into eternal punishment; but the upright into eternal life.

耶稣说完了这一切的话，就对门徒说，
And when Jesus had come to the end of all these words, he said to his disciples,

你们知道过两天是逾越节，人子将要被交给人，钉在十字架上。
After two days is the Passover, and the Son of man will be given up to the death of the cross.

那时，祭司长和民间的长老，聚集在大祭司称为该亚法的院里。
Then the chief priests and the rulers of the people came together in the house of the high priest, who was named Caiaphas.

大家商议，要用诡计拿住耶稣杀他。
And they made designs together to take Jesus by some trick, and put him to death.

只是说，当节的日子不可，恐怕民间生乱。
But they said, Not while the feast is going on, for fear of trouble among the people.

耶稣在伯大尼长大麻疯的西门家里，
Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper,

有一个女人，拿着一玉瓶极贵的香膏来，趁耶稣坐席的时候，浇在他的头上。
There came to him a woman having a bottle of perfume of great price, and she put the perfume on his head when he was seated at table.

门徒看见，就很不喜悦，说，何用这样的枉费呢？
But when the disciples saw it they were angry, saying, To what purpose is this waste?

这香膏可以卖许多钱，周济穷人。
For we might have got much money for this and given it to the poor.

耶稣看出他们的意思，就说，为什么难为这女人呢？她在我身上作的，是一件美事。
But Jesus, seeing it, said to them, Why are you troubling the woman? she has done a kind act to me.

因为常有穷人和你们同在。只是你们不常有我。
For the poor you have ever with you, but me you have not for ever.

她将这香膏浇在我身上，是为我安葬作的。
For in putting this perfume on my body, she did it to make me ready for my last resting-place.

我实在告诉你们，普天之下，无论在什么地方传这福音，也要述说这女人所行的，作个纪念。
Truly I say to you, Wherever this good news goes out in all the world, what this woman has done will be talked of in memory of her.

当下，十二门徒里，有一个称为加略人犹大的，去见祭司长说，
Then one of the twelve, who was named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests and said,

我把他交给你们，你们愿意给我多少钱。他们就给了他三十块钱。
What will you give me, if I give him up to you? And the price was fixed at thirty bits of silver.

从那时候，他就找机会，要把耶稣交给他们。
And from that time he was watching for a chance to give him into their hands.

除酵节的第一天，门徒来问耶稣说，你吃逾越节的筵席，要我们在哪里给你预备？
Now on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where are we to make ready for you to take the Passover meal?

耶稣说，你们进城去，到某人那里，对他说，夫子说，我的时候快到了。我与门徒要在你家里守逾越节。
And he said to them, Go into the town to such a man, and say to him, The Master says, My time is near: I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.

门徒遵着耶稣所吩咐的就去预备了逾越节的筵席。
And the disciples did as Jesus had said to them; and they made ready the Passover.

到了晚上，耶稣和十二个门徒坐席。
Now when evening was come, he was seated at table with the twelve disciples;

正吃的时候，耶稣说，我实在告诉你们，你们中间有一个人要卖我了。
And while they were taking food, he said, Truly I say to you that one of you will be false to me.

他们就甚忧愁，一个一个地问他说，主，是我吗？
And they were very said, and said to him, one by one, Is it I, Lord?

耶稣回答说，同我蘸手在盘子里的，就是他要卖我。
And he made answer and said, He who puts his hand into the plate with me, the same will be false to me.

人子必要去世，正如经上指着他所写的，但卖人子的人有祸了。那人不生在世上倒好。
The Son of man goes, even as the Writings say of him: but a curse is on that man through whom the Son of man is given up; it would have been well for that man if he had never come into the world.

卖耶稣的犹大问他说，拉比，是我吗？耶稣说，你说的是。
And Judas, who was false to him, made answer and said, Is it I, Master? He says to him, Yes.

他们吃的时候，耶稣拿起饼来，祝福，就掰开，递给门徒，说，你们拿着吃，这是我的身体。
And when they were taking food, Jesus took bread and, after blessing it, he gave the broken bread to the disciples and said, Take it; this is my body.

又拿起杯来，祝谢了，递给他们，说，你们都喝这个。
And he took a cup and, having given praise, he gave it to them, saying,

因为这是我立约的血，为多人流出来，使罪得赦。
Take of it, all of you, for this is my blood of the testament, which is given for men for the forgiveness of sins.

但我告诉你们，从今以后，我不再喝这葡萄汁，直到我在我父的国里，同你们喝新的那日子。
But I say to you that from now I will not take of this fruit of the vine, till that day when I take it new with you in my Father's kingdom.

他们唱了诗，就出来往橄榄山去。
And after a song of praise to God, they went out to the Mountain of Olives.

那时，耶稣对他们说，今夜你们为我的缘故，都要跌倒。因为经上记着说，我要击打牧人，羊就分散了。
Then said Jesus to them, All of you will be turned away from me this night: for it is said in the Writings, I will put to death the keeper of the sheep, and the sheep of the flock will be put to flight.

但我复活以后，要在你们以先往加利利去。
But after I am come back from the dead, I will go before you into Galilee.

彼得说，众人虽然为你的缘故跌倒，我却永不跌倒。
But Peter made answer and said to him, Though all may be turned away from you, I will never be turned away.

耶稣说，我实在告诉你，今夜鸡叫以先，你要三次不认我。
Jesus said to him, Truly I say to you that this night, before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me.

彼得说，我就是必须和你同死，也总不能不认你。众门徒都是这样说。
Peter says to him, Even if I am put to death with you, I will not be false to you. So said all the disciples.

耶稣同门徒来到一个地方，名叫客西马尼，就对他们说，你们坐在这里，等我到那边去祷告。
Then comes Jesus with them to a place named Gethsemane, and says to his disciples, Be seated here, while I go over there for prayer.

于是带着彼得，和西庇太的两个儿子同去，就忧愁起来，极其难过。
And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and became sad and very troubled.

便对他们说，我心里甚是忧伤，几乎要死。你们在这里等候，和我一同儆醒。
Then says he to them, My soul is very sad, even to death: keep watch with me here.

他就稍往前走，俯伏在地祷告说，我父阿，倘若可行，求你叫这杯离开我。然而不要照我的意思，只要照你的意思。
And he went forward a little, and falling down on his face in prayer, he said, O my Father, if it is possible, let this cup go from me; but let not my pleasure, but yours be done.

来到门徒那里，见他们睡着了，就对彼得说，怎么样，你们不能同我儆醒片时吗？
And he comes to the disciples, and sees that they are sleeping, and says to Peter, What, were you not able to keep watch with me one hour?

总要儆醒祷告，免得入了迷惑。你们心灵固然愿意，肉体却软弱了。
Keep watch with prayer, so that you may not be put to the test: the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is feeble.

第二次又去祷告说，我父阿，这杯若不能离开我，必要我喝，就愿你的意旨成全。
Again, a second time he went away, and said in prayer, O my Father, if this may not go from me without my taking it, let your pleasure be done.

又来见他们睡着了，因为他们的眼睛困倦。
And he came again and saw them sleeping, for their eyes were tired.

耶稣又离开他们去了。第三次祷告，说的话还是与先前一样。
And he went away from them again, and a third time said the same prayer.

于是来到门徒那里，对他们说，现在你们仍然睡觉安歇吧。（吧或作吗）时候到了，人子被卖在罪人手里了。
Then he comes to the disciples; and says to them, Go on sleeping now, and take your rest: for the hour is come, and the Son of man is given into the hands of evil men.

起来，我们走吧。看哪，卖我的人近了。
Up, let us be going: see, he who gives me up is near.

说话之间，那十二个门徒里的犹大来了，并有许多人，带着刀棒，从祭司长和民间的长老那里，与他同来。
And while he was still talking, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a band armed with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and those in authority over the people.

那卖耶稣的，给了他们一个暗号，说，我与谁亲嘴，谁就是他。你们可以拿住他。
Now the false one had given them a sign saying, The one to whom I give a kiss, that is he: take him.

犹大随即到耶稣跟前说，请拉比安。就与他亲嘴。
And straight away he came to Jesus and said, Master! and gave him a kiss.

耶稣对他说，朋友，你来要作的事，就作吧。于是那些人上前，下手拿住耶稣。
And Jesus said to him, Friend, do that for which you have come. Then they came and put hands on Jesus, and took him.

有跟随耶稣的一个人，伸手拔出刀来，将大祭司的仆人砍了一刀，削掉了他一个耳朵。
And one of those who were with Jesus put out his hand, and took out his sword and gave the servant of the high priest a blow, cutting off his ear.

耶稣对他说，收刀入鞘吧。凡动刀的，必死在刀下。
Then says Jesus to him, Put up your sword again into its place: for all those who take the sword will come to death by the sword.

你想我不能求我父，现在为我差遣十二营多天使来吗？
Does it not seem possible to you that if I make request to my Father he will even now send me an army of angels?

若是这样，经上所说，事情必须如此的话，怎么应验呢？
But how then would the Writings come true, which say that so it has to be?

当时，耶稣对众人说，你们带着刀棒，出来拿我，如同拿强盗吗？我天天坐在殿里教训人，你们并没有拿我。
In that hour Jesus said to the people, Have you come out as against a thief with swords and sticks to take me? I was teaching every day in the Temple and you took me not.

但这一切的事成就了，为要应验先知书上的话。当下门徒都离开他逃走了。
But all this has taken place so that the writings of the prophets might come true. Then all his disciples went from him in flight.

拿耶稣的人，把他带到大祭司该亚法那里去。文士和长老，已经在那里聚会。
And those who had made Jesus prisoner took him away to the house of Caiaphas, the high priest, where the scribes and those in authority over the people had come together.

彼得远远地跟着耶稣，直到大祭司的院子，进到里面，就和差役同坐，要看这事到底怎样。
But Peter went after him at a distance, to the house of the high priest, and went in and took his seat with the servants, to see the end.

祭司长和全公会，寻找假见证，控告耶稣，要治死他。
Now the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin were looking for false witness against Jesus, so that they might put him to death;

虽有好些人来作假见证，总得不着实据。末后有两个人前来说，
And they were not able to get it, though a number of false witnesses came.

这个人曾说，我能拆毁神的殿，三日内又建造起来。
But later there came two who said, This man said, I am able to give the Temple of God to destruction, and to put it up again in three days.

大祭司就站起来，对耶稣说，你什么都不回答吗？这些人作见证告你的是什么呢？
And the high priest got up and said to him, Have you no answer? what is it which these say against you?

耶稣却不言语。大祭司对他说，我指着永生神，叫你起誓告诉我们，你是神的儿子基督不是。
But Jesus said not a word. And the high priest said to him, I put you on oath, by the living God, that you will say to us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.

耶稣对他说，你说的是。然而我告诉你们，后来你们要看见人子，坐在那权能者的右边，驾着天上的云降临。
Jesus says to him, You say so: but I say to you, From now you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven.

大祭司就撕开衣服说，他说了僭妄的话，我们何必再用见证人呢？这僭妄的话，现在你们都听见了。
Then the high priest, violently parting his robes, said, He has said evil against God: what more need have we of witnesses? for now his words against God have come to your ears:

你们的意见如何？他们回答说，他是该死的。
What is your opinion? They made answer and said, It is right for him to be put to death.

他们就吐唾沫在他脸上，用拳头打他。也有用手掌打他的，说，
Then they put shame on him, and were cruel to him: and some gave him blows, saying,

基督阿，你是先知，告诉我们打你的是谁。
Be a prophet, O Christ, and say who gave you a blow!

彼得在外面院子里坐着，有一个使女前来说，你素来也是同那加利利人耶稣一伙的。
Now Peter was seated in the open square outside the house: and a servant-girl came to him, saying, You were with Jesus the Galilaean.

彼得在众人面前却不承认，说，我不知道你说的是什么。
But he said before them all that it was false, saying, I have no knowledge of what you say.

既出去，到了门口，又有一个使女看见他，就对那里的人说，这个人也是同拿撒勒人耶稣一伙的。
And when he had gone out into the doorway, another saw him and says to those who were there, This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.

彼得又不承认，并且起誓说，我不认得那个人。
And again he said with an oath, I have no knowledge of the man.

过了不多的时候，旁边站着的人前来，对彼得说，你真是他们一党的。你的口音把你露出来了。
And after a little time those who were near came and said to Peter, Truly you are one of them; because your talk is witness against you.

彼得就发咒起誓地说，我不认得那个人。立时鸡就叫了。
Then with curses and oaths he said, I have no knowledge of the man. And straight away there came the cry of a cock.

彼得想起耶稣所说的话，鸡叫以先，你要三次不认我。他就出去痛哭。
And the word of Jesus came back to Peter, when he said, Before the hour of the cock's cry, you will say three times that you have no knowledge of me. And he went out, weeping bitterly.

到了早晨，众祭司长和民间的长老，大家商议，要治死耶稣。
Now when it was morning, all the chief priests and those in authority took thought together with the purpose of putting Jesus to death.

就把他捆绑解去交给巡抚彼拉多。
And they put cords on him and took him away, and gave him up to Pilate, the ruler.

这时候，卖耶稣的犹大，看见耶稣已经定了罪，就后悔，把那三十块钱，拿回来给祭司长和长老说，
Then Judas, who was false to him, seeing that he was to be put to death, in his regret took back the thirty bits of silver to the chief priests and those in authority,

我卖了无辜之人的血，是有罪了。他们说，那与我们有什么相干？你自己承当吧。
Saying, I have done wrong in giving into your hands an upright man. But they said, What is that to us? it is your business.

犹大就把那银钱丢在殿里，出去吊死了。
And he put down the silver in the Temple and went out, and put himself to death by hanging.

祭司长拾起银钱来说，这是血价，不可放在库里。
And the chief priests took the silver and said, It is not right to put it in the Temple store for it is the price of blood.

他们商议，就用那银钱买了窑户的一块田，为要埋葬外乡人。
And they made a decision to get with the silver the potter's field, as a place for the dead of other countries.

所以那块田，直到今日还叫作血田。
For this cause that field was named, The field of blood, to this day.

这就应了先知耶利米的话，说，他们用那三十块钱，就是被估定之人的价钱，是以色列人中所估定的，
Then came true that which was said by Jeremiah the prophet, And they took the thirty bits of silver, the price of him who was valued by the children of Israel;

买了窑户的一块田。这是照着主所吩咐我的。
And they gave them for the potter's field, as I had word from the Lord.

耶稣站在巡抚面前，巡抚问他说，你是犹太人的王吗？耶稣说，你说的是。
And Jesus was before the ruler, who put a question to him, Are you the King of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, You say so.

他被祭司长和长老控告的时候什么都不回答。
But when the chief priests and those in authority made statements against him, he gave no answer.

彼拉多就对他说，他们作见证，告你这么多的事，你没有听见吗？
Then says Pilate to him, Do you give no attention to what their witnesses say against you?

耶稣仍不回答，连一句话也不说，以致巡抚甚觉希奇。
And he gave him no answer, not even a word: so that the ruler was greatly surprised.

巡抚有一个常例，每逢这节期，随众人所要的，释放一个囚犯给他们。
Now at the feast it was the way for the ruler to let free to the people one prisoner, at their selection.

当时，有一个出名的囚犯叫巴拉巴。
And they had then an important prisoner, whose name was Barabbas.

众人聚集的时候，彼拉多就对他们说，你们要我释放哪一个给你们？是巴拉巴呢？是称为基督的耶稣呢？
So when they came together, Pilate said to them, Whom will you have? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is named Christ?

巡抚原知道，他们是因为嫉妒才把他解了来。
For he saw that for envy they had given him up.

正坐堂的时候，他的夫人打发人来说，这义人的事，你一点不可管。因为我今天在梦中，为他受了许多的苦。
And while he was on the judge's seat, his wife sent to him, saying, Have nothing to do with that upright man, for I have had much trouble this day in a dream because of him.

祭司长和长老，挑唆众人，求释放巴拉巴，除灭耶稣。
Now the chief priests and those in authority got the people to make request for Barabbas, and for Jesus to be put to death.

巡抚对众人说，这两个人，你们要我释放哪一个给你们呢？他们说，巴拉巴。
But the ruler made answer and said to them, Which of the two is it your pleasure that I let go free? And they said, Barabbas.

彼拉多说，这样，那称为基督的耶稣，我怎么办他呢？他们都说，把他钉十字架。
Pilate says to them, What, then, am I to do with Jesus, who is named Christ? They all say, Let him be put to death on the cross.

巡抚说，为什么呢？他作了什么恶事呢？他们便极力地喊着说，把他钉十字架。
And he said, Why, what evil has he done? But they gave loud cries, saying, To the cross with him!

彼拉多见说也无济于事，反要生乱，就拿水在众人面前洗手，说，流这义人的血，罪不在我，你们承当吧。
So when Pilate saw that he was able to do nothing, but that trouble was working up, he took water and, washing his hands before the people, said, The blood of this upright man is not on my hands: you are responsible.

众人都回答说，他的血归到我们，和我们的子孙身上。
And all the people made answer and said, Let his blood be on us, and on our children.

于是彼拉多释放巴拉巴给他们，把耶稣鞭打了，交给人钉十字架。
Then he let Barabbas go free: but after having Jesus whipped, he gave him up to be put to death on the cross.

巡抚的兵就把耶稣带进衙门，叫全营的兵都聚集在他那里。
Then the ruler's armed men took Jesus into the open square, and got all their band together.

他们给他脱了衣服，穿上一件朱红色袍子。
And they took off his clothing, and put on him a red robe.

用荆棘编作冠冕，戴在他头上，拿一根苇子放在他右手里。跪在他面前戏弄他说，恭喜犹太人的王阿。
And they made a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and put a rod in his right hand, and they went down on their knees before him, and made sport of him, saying, Long life to the King of the Jews.

又吐唾沫在他脸上，拿苇子打他的头。
And they put shame on him, and gave him blows on the head with the rod.

戏弄完了，就给他脱了袍子，仍穿上他自己的衣服，带他出去，要钉十字架。
And when they had made sport of him, they took the robe off him, and put his clothing on him, and took him away to put him on the cross.

他们出来的时候，遇见一个古利奈人，名叫西门，就勉强他同去，好背着耶稣的十字架。
And while they were coming out, they saw a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they made him go with them, so that he might take up his cross.

到了一个地方，名叫各各他，意思就是髑髅地。
And when they came to the place named Golgotha, that is to say, Dead Man's Head,

兵丁拿苦胆调和的酒，给耶稣喝。他尝了，就不肯喝。
They gave him wine mixed with bitter drink: and after tasting it, he took no more.

他们既将他钉在十字架上，就拈阄分他的衣服。
And when they had put him on the cross, they made division of his clothing among them by the decision of chance.

又坐在那里看守他。
And they were seated there watching him.

在他头以上，安一个牌子，写着他的罪状，说，这是犹太人的王耶稣。
And they put up over his head the statement of his crime in writing, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

当时，有两个强盗，和他同钉十字架，一个在右边，一个在左边。
Then two thieves were put on crosses with him, one on the right and one on the left.

从那里经过的人，讥诮他，摇着头说，
And those who went by said bitter words to him, shaking their heads and saying,

你这拆毁圣殿，三日又建造起来的，可以救自己吧。你如果是神的儿子，就从十字架上下来吧。
You who would give the Temple to destruction and put it up again in three days, get yourself free: if you are the Son of God, come down from the cross.

祭司长和文士并长老，也是这样戏弄他，说，
In the same way, the chief priests, making sport of him, with the scribes and those in authority, said,

他救了别人，不能救自己。他是以色列的王，现在可以从十字架上下来，我们就信他。
A saviour of others, he has no salvation for himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will have faith in him.

他倚靠神，神若喜悦他，现在可以救他。因为他曾说，我是神的儿子。
He put his faith in God; let God be his saviour now, if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.

那和他同钉的强盗，也是这样的讥诮他。
And the thieves who were on the crosses said evil words to him.

从午正到申初，遍地都黑暗了。
Now from the sixth hour it was dark over all the land till the ninth hour.

约在申初，耶稣大声喊着说，以利，以利，拉马撒巴各大尼？就是说，我的神，我的神，为什么离弃我？
And about the ninth hour Jesus gave a loud cry, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is, My God, my God, why are you turned away from me?

站在那里的人，有的听见就说，这个人呼叫以利亚呢。
And some of those who were near by, hearing it, said, This man is crying to Elijah.

内中有一个人，赶紧跑去，拿海绒蘸满了醋，绑在苇子上，送给他喝。
And straight away one of them went quickly, and took a sponge, and made it full of bitter wine, and put it on a rod and gave him drink.

其余的人说，且等着，看以利亚来救他不来。
And the rest said, Let him be; let us see if Elijah will come to his help.

耶稣又大声喊叫，气就断了。
And Jesus gave another loud cry, and gave up his spirit.

忽然殿里的幔子，从上到下裂为两半。地也震动。磐石也崩裂。
And the curtain of the Temple was parted in two from end to end; and there was an earth-shock; and the rocks were broken;

坟墓也开了。已睡圣徒的身体，多有起来的。
And the resting-places of the dead came open; and the bodies of a number of sleeping saints came to life;

到耶稣复活以后，他们从坟墓里出来，进了圣城，向许多人显现。
And coming out of their resting-places, after he had come again from the dead, they went into the holy town and were seen by a number of people.

百夫长和一同看守耶稣的人，看见地震，并所经历的事，就极其害怕，说，这真是神的儿子了。
Now the captain and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earth-shock and the things which were done, were in great fear and said, Truly this was a son of God.

有好些妇女在那里远远地观看。她们是从加利利跟随耶稣来服事他的。
And a number of women were there, watching from a distance, who had come with Jesus from Galilee, waiting on his needs.

内中有抹大拉的马利亚，又有雅各和约西的母亲马利亚，并有西庇太两个儿子的母亲。
Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

到了晚上，有一个财主，名叫约瑟，是亚利马太来的。他也是耶稣的门徒。
And in the evening, there came a man of wealth from Arimathaea, Joseph by name, who was a disciple of Jesus:

这人去见彼拉多，求耶稣的身体。彼拉多就吩咐给他。
This man went in to Pilate, and made a request for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate gave orders for it to be given to him.

约瑟取了身体，用干净细麻布裹好，
And Joseph took the body, folding it in clean linen,

安放在自己的新坟墓里，就是他凿在磐石里的。他又把大石头滚到墓门口，就去了。
And put it in the resting-place which had been cut out of the rock for himself; and after rolling a great stone to the door of it he went away.

有抹大拉的马利亚，和那个马利亚在那里，对着坟墓坐着。
And Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, seated by the place of the dead.

次日，就是预备日的第二天，祭司长和法利赛人聚集，来见彼拉多，说，
Now on the day after the getting ready of the Passover, the chief priests and Pharisees came together to Pilate,

大人，我们记得那诱惑人的，还活着的时候，曾说，三日后我要复活。
Saying, Sir, we have in mind how that false man said, while he was still living, After three days I will come again from the dead.

因此，请吩咐人将坟墓把守妥当，直到第三日。恐怕他的门徒来把他偷了去，就告诉百姓说，他从死里复活了。这样，那后来的迷惑，比先前的更利害了。
Give orders, then, that the place where his body is may be made safe till the third day, for fear that his disciples come and take him away secretly and say to the people, He has come back from the dead: and the last error will be worse than the first.

彼拉多说，你们有看守的兵。去吧，尽你们所能的，把守妥当。
Pilate said to them, You have watchmen; go and make it as safe as you are able.

他们就带着看守的兵同去，封了石头，将坟墓把守妥当。
So they went, and made safe the place where his body was, putting a stamp on the stone, and the watchmen were with them.

安息日将尽，七日的头一日，天快亮的时候，抹大拉的马利亚，和那个马利亚，来看坟墓。
Now late on the Sabbath, when the dawn of the first day of the week was near, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the place where his body was.

忽然地大震动。因为有主的使者，从天上下来，把石头滚开，坐在上面。
And there was a great earth-shock; for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, rolling back the stone, took his seat on it.

他的像貌如同闪电，衣服洁白如雪。
His form was shining like the light, and his clothing was white as snow:

看守的人，就因他吓得浑身乱战，甚至和死人一样。
And for fear of him the watchmen were shaking, and became as dead men.

天使对妇女说，不要害怕，我知道你们是寻找那钉十字架的耶稣。
And the angel said to the women, Have no fear: for I see that you are searching for Jesus, who was put to death on the cross.

他不在这里，照他所说的，已经复活了。你们来看安放主的地方。
He is not here, for he has come to life again, even as he said. Come, see the Lord's resting-place.

快去告诉他的门徒，说他从死里复活了，并且在你们以先往加利利去，在那里你们要见他。看哪，我已经告诉你们了。
And go quickly and give his disciples the news that he has come back from the dead, and is going before you into Galilee; there you will see him, as I have said to you.

妇女们就急忙离开坟墓，又害怕，又大大地欢喜，跑去要报给他的门徒。
And they went away quickly, with fear and great joy, to give his disciples the news.

忽然耶稣遇见她们，说，愿你们平安。她们就上前抱住他的脚拜他。
And on the way, Jesus came to them, saying, Be glad. And they came and put their hands on his feet, and gave him worship.

耶稣对她们说，不要害怕，你们去告诉我的弟兄，叫他们往加利利去，在那里必见我。
Then said Jesus to them, Have no fear: go and give word to my brothers to go into Galilee, and there they will see me.

他们去的时候，看守的兵，有几个进城去，将所经历的事，都报给祭司长。
Now, while they were going, some of the watchmen came into the town and gave news to the chief priests of all the things which had taken place.

祭司长和长老聚集商议，就拿许多银钱给兵丁说，
And when they had come together with those in authority, and had made their decision, they gave much money to the watchmen, saying,

你们要这样说，夜间我们睡觉的时候，他的门徒来把他偷去了。
Say, His disciples came by night and took him away secretly while we were sleeping.

倘若这话被巡抚听见，有我们劝他，保你们无事。
And if this comes to the ruler's ears, we will see that he does not make you responsible.

兵丁受了银钱，就照所嘱咐他们的去行。这话就传说在犹太人中间，直到今日。
So they took the money, and did as they had been ordered: and this account has been current among the Jews till the present time.

十一个门徒往加利利去，到了耶稣约定的山上。
But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had given them orders to go.

他们见了耶稣就拜他。然而还有人疑惑。
And when they saw him they gave him worship: but some were in doubt.

耶稣进前来，对他们说，天上，地下所有的权柄，都赐给我了。
And Jesus came to them and said, All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.

所以你们要去，使万民作我的门徒，奉父子圣灵的名，给他们施洗。（或作给他们施洗归于父子圣灵的名）
Go then, and make disciples of all the nations, giving them baptism in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit:

凡我所吩咐你们的，都教训他们遵守，我就常与你们同在，直到世界的末了。
Teaching them to keep all the rules which I have given you: and see, I am ever with you, even to the end of the world.

