波斯王古列元年，耶和华为要应验借耶利米口所说的话，就激动波斯王古列的心，使他下诏通告全国，说，
Now in the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, in order that the word of the Lord given by the mouth of Jeremiah might come true, the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, was moved by the Lord, so that he made a public statement through all his kingdom, and put it in writing, saying,

波斯王古列如此说，耶和华天上的神，已将天下万国赐给我。又嘱咐我在犹大的耶路撒冷，为他建造殿宇。
These are the words of Cyrus, king of Persia: The Lord God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he has made me responsible for building a house for him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

在你们中间凡作他子民的，可以上犹大的耶路撒冷，在耶路撒冷重建耶和华以色列神的殿（只有他是神）。愿神与这人同在。
Whoever there is among you of his people, may his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and take in hand the building of the house of the Lord, the God of Israel; he is the God who is in Jerusalem.

凡剩下的人，无论寄居何处，那地的人要用金银，财物，牲畜帮助他，另外也要为耶路撒冷神的殿甘心献上礼物。
And whoever there may be of the rest of Israel, living in any place, let the men of that place give him help with offerings of silver and gold and goods and beasts, in addition to the offering freely given for the house of God in Jerusalem.

于是，犹大和便雅悯的族长，祭司，利未人，就是一切被神激动他心的人，都起来要上耶路撒冷去建造耶和华的殿。
Then the heads of families of Judah and Benjamin, with the priests and the Levites, got ready, even all those whose spirits were moved by God to go up and take in hand the building of the Lord's house in Jerusalem.

他们四围的人就拿银器，金子，财物，牲畜，珍宝帮助他们（原文作坚固他们的手），另外还有甘心献的礼物。
And all their neighbours gave them help with offerings of vessels of silver and gold and goods and beasts and things of great value, in addition to what was freely offered.

古列王也将耶和华殿的器皿拿出来，这器皿是尼布甲尼撒从耶路撒冷掠来，放在自己神之庙中的。
And Cyrus the king got out the vessels of the house of the Lord which Nebuchadnezzar had taken from Jerusalem and put in the house of his gods;

波斯王古列派库官米提利达将这器皿拿出来，按数交给犹大的首领设巴萨。
Even these Cyrus made Mithredath, the keeper of his wealth, get out, and he gave them, after numbering them, to Sheshbazzar, the ruler of Judah.

器皿的数目记在下面。金盘三十个，银盘一千个，刀二十九把，
And this is the number of them: there were thirty gold plates, a thousand silver plates, twenty-nine knives,

金碗三十个，银碗之次的四百一十个，别样的器皿一千件。
Thirty gold basins, four hundred and ten silver basins, and a thousand other vessels.

金银器皿共有五千四百件。被掳的人从巴比伦上耶路撒冷的时候，设巴萨将这一切都带上来。
There were five thousand, four hundred gold and silver vessels. All these were taken back by Sheshbazzar, when those who had been taken prisoner went up from Babylon to Jerusalem.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒，从前掳到巴比伦之犹大省的人，现在他们的子孙，从被掳到之地，回耶路撒冷和犹大，各归本城。
Now these are the people of the divisions of the kingdom, among those who had been made prisoners by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and taken away to Babylon, who went back to Jerusalem and Judah, everyone to his town;

他们是同着所罗巴伯，耶书亚，尼希米，西莱雅，利来雅，末底改，必珊，米斯拔，比革瓦伊，利宏，巴拿回来的。
Who went with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah, The number of the men of the people of Israel:

以色列人民的数目记在下面。巴录的子孙二千一百七十二名。
The children of Parosh, two thousand, one hundred and seventy-two.

示法提雅的子孙三百七十二名。
The children of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two.

亚拉的子孙七百七十五名。
The children of Arah, seven hundred and seventy-five.

巴哈摩押的后裔，就是耶书亚，和约押的子孙二千八百一十二名。
The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand, eight hundred and twelve.

以拦的子孙一千二百五十四名。
The children of Elam, a thousand, two hundred and fifty-four.

萨土的子孙九百四十五名。
The children of Zattu, nine hundred and forty-five.

萨改的子孙七百六十名。
The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.

巴尼的子孙六百四十二名。
The children of Bani, six hundred and forty-two.

比拜的子孙六百二十三名。
The children of Bebai, six hundred and twenty-three.

押甲的子孙一千二百二十二名。
The children of Azgad, a thousand, two hundred and twenty-two.

亚多尼干的子孙六百六十六名。
The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty-six.

比革瓦伊的子孙二千零五十六名。
The children of Bigvai, two thousand and fifty-six.

亚丁的子孙四百五十四名。
The children of Adin, four hundred and fifty-four.

亚特的后裔，就是希西家的子孙九十八名。
The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight.

比赛的子孙三百二十三名。
The children of Bezai, three hundred and twenty-three.

约拉的子孙一百一十二名。
The children of Jorah, a hundred and twelve.

哈顺的子孙二百二十三名。
The children of Hashum, two hundred and twenty-three.

吉吧珥人九十五名。
The children of Gibbar, ninety-five.

伯利恒人一百二十三名。
The children of Beth-lehem, a hundred and twenty-three.

尼陀法人五十六名。
The men of Netophah, fifty-six.

亚拿突人一百二十八名。
The men of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty-eight.

亚斯玛弗人四十二名。
The children of Azmaveth, forty-two.

基列耶琳人，基非拉人，比录人共七百四十三名。
The children of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three.

拉玛人，迦巴人共六百二十一名。
The children of Ramah and Geba, six hundred and twenty-one.

默玛人一百二十二名。
The men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty-two.

伯特利人，艾人共二百二十三名。
The men of Beth-el and Ai, two hundred and twenty-three.

尼波人五十二名。
The children of Nebo, fifty-two.

末必人一百五十六名。
The children of Magbish, a hundred and fifty-six.

别的以拦子孙一千二百五十四名。
The children of the other Elam, a thousand, two hundred and fifty-four.

哈琳的子孙三百二十名。
The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

罗德人，哈第人，阿挪人共七百二十五名。
The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-five.

耶利哥人三百四十五名。
The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five.

西拿人三千六百三十名。
The children of Senaah, three thousand, six hundred and thirty.

祭司，耶书亚家耶大雅的子孙九百七十三名。
The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three.

音麦的子孙一千零五十二名。
The children of Immer, a thousand and fifty-two.

巴施户珥的子孙一千二百四十七名。
The children of Pashhur, a thousand, two hundred and forty-seven.

哈琳的子孙一千零一十七名。
The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

利未人，何达威雅的后裔，就是耶书亚和甲篾的子孙七十四名。
The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy-four.

歌唱的，亚萨的子孙一百二十八名。
The music-makers: the children of Asaph, a hundred and twenty-eight

守门的，沙龙的子孙，亚特的子孙，达们的子孙，亚谷的子孙，哈底大的子孙，朔拜的子孙，共一百三十九名。
The children of the door-keepers: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, a hundred and thirty-nine.

尼提宁（就是殿役），西哈的子孙，哈苏巴的子孙，答巴俄的子孙，
The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

基绿的子孙，西亚的子孙，巴顿的子孙，
The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon,

利巴拿的子孙，哈迦巴的子孙，亚谷的子孙，
The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub,

哈甲的子孙，萨买的子孙，哈难的子孙，
The children of Hagab, the children of Shamlai, the children of Hanan,

吉德的子孙，迦哈的子孙，利亚雅的子孙，
The children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah,

利汛的子孙，尼哥大的子孙，迦散的子孙，
The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of Gazzam,

乌撒的子孙，巴西亚的子孙，比赛的子孙，
The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai,

押拿的子孙，米乌宁的子孙，尼普心的子孙，
The children of Asnah, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephisim,

巴卜的子孙，哈古巴的子孙，哈忽的子孙，
The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

巴洗律的子孙，米希大的子孙，哈沙的子孙，
The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,

巴柯的子孙，西西拉的子孙，答玛的子孙，
The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Temah,

尼细亚的子孙，哈提法的子孙。
The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

所罗门仆人的后裔，就是琐太的子孙，琐斐列的子孙，比路大的子孙，
The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Hassophereth, the children of Peruda,

雅拉的子孙，达昆的子孙，吉德的子孙，
The children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,

示法提雅的子孙，哈替的子孙，玻黑列哈斯巴音的子孙，亚米的子孙。
The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of Ami.

尼提宁，和所罗门仆人的后裔，共三百九十二名。
All the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants, were three hundred and ninety-two.

从特米拉，特哈萨，基绿，押但，音麦上来的，不能指明他们的宗族谱系是以色列人不是。
And these were the people who went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addan, and Immer. But having no knowledge of their fathers' families or offspring, it was not certain that they were Israelites;

他们是第来雅的子孙，多比雅的子孙，尼哥大的子孙，共六百五十二名。
The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and fifty-two.

祭司中，哈巴雅的子孙，哈哥斯的子孙，巴西莱的子孙。因为他们的先祖，娶了基列人，巴西莱的女儿为妻，所以起名叫巴西莱。
And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who was married to one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and took their name.

这三家的人在族谱之中，寻查自己的谱系，却寻不着，因此算为不洁，不准供祭司的职任。
They made search for their record among the lists of families, but their names were nowhere to be seen; so they were looked on as unclean and no longer priests.

省长对他们说，不可吃至圣的物，直到有用乌陵和土明，决疑的祭司兴起来。
And the Tirshatha said that they were not to have the most holy things for their food, till a priest came to give decision by Urim and Thummim.

会众共有四万二千三百六十名。
The number of all the people together was forty-two thousand, three hundred and sixty,

此外，还有他们的仆婢七千三百三十七名，又有歌唱的男女二百名。
As well as their men-servants and their women-servants, of whom there were seven thousand, three hundred and thirty-seven: and they had two hundred men and women to make music.

他们有马七百三十六匹，骡子二百四十五匹，
They had seven hundred and thirty-six horses, two hundred and forty-five transport beasts,

骆驼四百三十五只，驴六千七百二十匹。
Four hundred and thirty-five camels, six thousand, seven hundred and twenty asses.

有些族长到了耶路撒冷耶和华殿的地方，便为神的殿甘心献上礼物，要重新建造。
And some of the heads of families, when they came to the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem, gave freely of their wealth for the building up of the house of God in its place:

他们量力捐入工程库的金子六万一千达利克，银子五千弥拿，并祭司的礼服一百件。
Every one, as he was able, gave for the work sixty-one thousand darics of gold, five thousand pounds of silver and a hundred priests' robes.

于是祭司，利未人，民中的一些人，歌唱的，守门的，尼提宁，并以色列众人，各住在自己的城里。
So the priests and the Levites and the people and the music-makers and the door-keepers and the Nethinim, took up their places in their towns; even all Israel in their towns.

到了七月，以色列人住在各城，那时他们如同一人，聚集在耶路撒冷。
And when the seventh month came, and the children of Israel were in the towns, the people came together like one man to Jerusalem.

约萨达的儿子耶书亚和他的弟兄众祭司，并撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，与他的弟兄，都起来建筑以色列神的坛，要照神人摩西律法书上所写的，在坛上献燔祭。
Then Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his brothers the priests, and Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, with his brothers, got up and made the altar of the God of Israel for burned offerings as is recorded in the law of Moses, the man of God.

他们在原有的根基上筑坛，因惧怕邻国的民，又在其上向耶和华早晚献燔祭。
They put the altar on its base; for fear was on them because of the people of the countries: and they made burned offerings on it to the Lord, even burned offerings morning and evening.

又照律法书上所写的守住棚节，按数照例献每日所当献的燔祭。
And they kept the feast of tents, as it is recorded, making the regular burned offerings every day by number, as it is ordered; for every day what was needed.

其后献常献的燔祭，并在月朔与耶和华的一切圣节献祭，又向耶和华献各人的甘心祭。
And after that, the regular burned offering and the offerings for the new moons and all the fixed feasts of the Lord which had been made holy, and the offering of everyone who freely gave his offering to the Lord.

从七月初一日起，他们就向耶和华献燔祭。但耶和华殿的根基尚未立定。
From the first day of the seventh month they made a start with the burned offerings, but the base of the Temple of the Lord had still not been put in its place.

他们又将银子给石匠，木匠。把粮食，酒，油给西顿人，推罗人，使他们将香柏树从利巴嫩运到海里，浮海运到约帕，是照波斯王古列所允准的。
And they gave money to the stoneworkers and woodworkers; and meat and drink and oil to the people of Zidon and of Tyre, for the transport of cedar-trees from Lebanon to the sea, to Joppa, as Cyrus, king of Persia, had given them authority to do.

百姓到了耶路撒冷神殿的地方。第二年二月，撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，约萨达的儿子，耶书亚和其余的弟兄，就是祭司，利未人，并一切被掳归回耶路撒冷的人，都兴工建造。又派利未人，从二十岁以外的，督理建造耶和华殿的工作。
Now in the second year of their coming into the house of God in Jerusalem, in the second month, the work was taken in hand by Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and the rest of their brothers the priests and the Levites, and all those who had come from the land where they were prisoners to Jerusalem: and they made the Levites, of twenty years old and over, responsible for overseeing the work of the house of the Lord.

于是犹大（在二章四十节作何达威雅）的后裔，就是耶书亚和他的子孙与弟兄。甲篾和他的子孙，利未人希拿达的子孙与弟兄，都一同起来，督理那在神殿做工的人。
Then Jeshua with his sons and his brothers, Kadmiel with his sons, the sons of Hodaviah, together took up the work of overseeing the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad with their sons and their brothers, the Levites.

匠人立耶和华殿根基的时候，祭司皆穿礼服吹号，亚萨的子孙利未人敲钹，照以色列王大卫所定的例，都站着赞美耶和华。
And when the builders put in position the base of the Temple of the Lord, the priests, dressed in their robes, took their places with horns, and the Levites, the sons of Asaph, with brass instruments, to give praise to the Lord in the way ordered by David, king of Israel.

他们彼此唱和，赞美称谢耶和华说，他本为善，他向以色列人永发慈爱。他们赞美耶和华的时候，众民大声呼喊，因耶和华殿的根基已经立定。
And they gave praise to the Lord, answering one another in their songs and saying, For he is good, for his mercy to Israel is eternal. And all the people gave a great cry of joy, when they gave praise to the Lord, because the base of the Lord's house was put in place.

然而有许多祭司，利未人，族长，就是见过旧殿的老年人，现在亲眼看见立这殿的根基，便大声哭号，也有许多人大声欢呼。
But a number of the priests and Levites and the heads of families, old men who had seen the first house, when the base of this house was put down before their eyes, were overcome with weeping; and a number were crying out with joy:

甚至百姓不能分辨欢呼的声音，和哭号的声音。因为众人大声呼喊，声音听到远处。
So that in the ears of the people the cry of joy was mixed with the sound of weeping; for the cries of the people were loud and came to the ears of those who were a long way off.

犹大和便雅悯的敌人，听说被掳归回的人，为耶和华以色列的神建造殿宇，
Now news came to the haters of Judah and Benjamin that the people who had come back were building a Temple to the Lord, the God of Israel;

就去见所罗巴伯和以色列的族长，对他们说，请容我们与你们一同建造。因为我们寻求你们的神，与你们一样。自从亚述王以撒哈顿带我们上这地以来，我们常祭祀神。
Then they came to Zerubbabel and to the heads of families, and said to them, Let us take part in the building with you; for we are servants of your God, even as you are; and we have been making offerings to him from the days of Esar-haddon, king of Assyria, who put us here.

但所罗巴伯，耶书亚，和其余以色列的族长对他们说，我们建造神的殿与你们无干，我们自己为耶和华以色列的神协力建造，是照波斯王古列所吩咐的。
But Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the rest of the heads of families in Israel said to them, You have no part with us in the building of a house for our God; we ourselves will do the work together for the Lord, the God of Israel, as Cyrus, king of Persia, has given us orders.

那地的民，就在犹大人建造的时候，使他们的手发软，扰乱他们。
Then the people of the land made the hands of the people of Judah feeble, troubling them with fear in their building;

从波斯王古列年间，直到波斯王大利乌登基的时候，贿买谋士，要败坏他们的谋算。
And they gave payment to men who made designs against them and kept them from effecting their purpose, all through the time of Cyrus, king of Persia, till Darius became king.

在亚哈随鲁才登基的时候，上本控告犹大和耶路撒冷的居民。
And in the time of Ahasuerus, when he first became king, they put on record a statement against the people of Judah and Jerusalem.

亚达薛西年间，比施兰，米特利达，他别，和他们的同党，上本奏告波斯王亚达薛西。本章是用亚兰文字，亚兰方言。
And in the time of Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his friends, sent a letter to Artaxerxes, king of Persia, writing it in the Aramaean writing and language.

省长利宏，书记伸帅要控告耶路撒冷人，也上本奏告亚达薛西王。
Rehum, the chief ruler, and Shimshai the scribe, sent a letter against Jerusalem, to Artaxerxes the king;

省长利宏，书记伸帅，和同党的底拿人，亚法萨提迦人，他毗拉人，亚法撒人，亚基卫人，巴比伦人，书珊迦人，底亥人，以拦人，
The letter was sent by Rehum, the chief ruler, and Shimshai the scribe and their friends; the Dinaites and the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the Dehaites, the Elamites,

和尊大的亚斯那巴所迁移，安置在撒玛利亚城，并大河西一带地方的人等，
And the rest of the nations which the great and noble Osnappar took over and put in Samaria and the rest of the country over the river:

上奏亚达薛西王说，河西的臣民云云。
This is a copy of the letter which they sent to Artaxerxes the king: Your servants living across the river send these words:

王该知道，从王那里上到我们这里的犹大人，已经到耶路撒冷重建，这反叛恶劣的城，筑立根基，建造城墙。
We give news to the king that the Jews who came from you have come to us at Jerusalem; they are building up again that uncontrolled and evil town; the walls are complete and they are joining up the bases.

如今王该知道，他们若建造这城，城墙完毕就不再与王进贡，交课，纳税，终久王必受亏损。
The king may be certain that when the building of this town and its walls is complete, they will give no tax or payment in goods or forced payments, and in the end it will be a cause of loss to the kings.

我们既食御盐，不忍见王吃亏，因此奏告于王。
Now because we are responsible to the king, and it is not right for us to see the king's honour damaged, we have sent to give the king word of these things,

请王考察先王的实录，必在其上查知这城是反叛的城，与列王和各省有害。自古以来，其中常有悖逆的事，因此这城曾被拆毁。
So that search may be made in the book of the records of your fathers: and you will see in the book of the records that this town has been uncontrolled, and a cause of trouble to kings and countries, and that there were outbursts against authority there in the past: for which reason the town was made waste.

我们谨奏王知，这城若再建造，城墙完毕，河西之地王就无分了。
We give you word, that if the building of this town and its walls is made complete, there will be an end of your power in the country across the river.

那时王谕覆省长利宏，书记伸帅，和他们的同党，就是住撒玛利亚并河西一带地方的人，说，愿你们平安云云。
Then the king sent an answer to Rehum, the chief ruler, and Shimshai the scribe, and their friends living in Samaria, and to the rest of those across the river, saying, Peace to you:

你们所上的本，已经明读在我面前。
And now the sense of the letter which you sent to us has been made clear to me,

我已命人考查，得知此城古来果然背叛列王，其中常有反叛悖逆的事。
And I gave orders for a search to be made, and it is certain that in the past this town has made trouble for kings, and that outbursts against authority have taken place there.

从前耶路撒冷也有大君王统管河西全地，人就给他们进贡，交课，纳税。
Further, there have been great kings in Jerusalem, ruling over all the country across the river, to whom they gave taxes and payments in goods and forced payments.

现在你们要出告示命这些人停工，使这城不得建造，等我降旨。
Give an order now, that these men are to do nothing more, and that the building of the town is to be stopped, till I give an order.

你们当谨慎，不可迟延，为何容害加重，使王受亏损呢？
Be certain to do this with all care: do not let trouble be increased to the king's damage.

亚达薛西王的上谕读在利宏和书记伸帅，并他们的同党面前，他们就急忙往耶路撒冷去见犹大人，用势力强迫他们停工。
Then, after reading the king's letter, Rehum and Shimshai the scribe and their friends went quickly to Jerusalem, to the Jews, and had them stopped by force.

于是，在耶路撒冷神殿的工程就停止了，直停到波斯王大利乌第二年。
So the work of the house of God at Jerusalem came to an end; so it was stopped, till the second year of the rule of Darius, king of Persia.

那时，先知哈该，和易多的孙子撒迦利亚，奉以色列神的名向犹大和耶路撒冷的犹大人说劝勉的话。
Now the prophets Haggai and Zechariah, the son of Iddo, were preaching to the Jews in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel.

于是撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，和约萨达的儿子耶书亚，都起来动手建造耶路撒冷神的殿，有神的先知在那里帮助他们。
Then Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, got up and made a start at building the house of God at Jerusalem: and the prophets of God were with them, helping them.

当时河西的总督达乃和示他波斯乃，并他们的同党来问说，谁降旨让你们建造这殿，修成这墙呢？
At the same time, Tattenai, ruler of the land across the river, and Shethar-bozenai, and their men, came to them and said, Who gave you orders to go on building this house and this wall?

我们便告诉他们建造这殿的人叫什么名字。
Then they said these words to them: What are the names of the men who are at work on this building?

神的眼目看顾犹大的长老，以致总督等没有叫他们停工，直到这事奏告大利乌得着他的回谕。
But the eye of their God was on the chiefs of the Jews, and they did not make them give up working till the question had been put before Darius and an answer had come by letter about it.

河西的总督达乃和示他波斯乃，并他们的同党，就是住河西的亚法萨迦人，上本奏告大利乌王。
This is a copy of the letter which Tattenai, the ruler of the land across the river, and Shethar-bozenai and his friends the Apharsachites, living across the river, sent to Darius the king:

本上写着说，愿大利乌王诸事平安。
They sent him a letter saying, To Darius the king, all peace:

王该知道，我们往犹大省去，到了至大神的殿，这殿是用大石建造的。梁木插入墙内，工作甚速，他们手下亨通。
This is to give the king word that we went into the land of Judah, to the house of the great God, which is made of great stones, and has its walls supported with wood, and the work is going on with industry, and they are doing it well.

我们就问那些长老说，谁降旨让你们建造这殿，修成这墙呢？
Then we said to the men responsible, who gave you authority for the building of this house and these walls?

又问他们的名字，要记录他们首领的名字，奏告于王。
And we made request for their names, so that we might send you word, and give you the names of the men at the head of them.

他们回答说，我们是天地之神的仆人，重建前多年所建造的殿，就是以色列的一位大君王建造修成的。
And they made answer to us, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and we are building the house which was put up in times long past and was designed and made complete by a great king of Israel.

只因我们列祖惹天上的神发怒，神把他们交在迦勒底人，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手中，他就拆毁这殿，又将百姓掳到巴比伦。
But when the God of heaven was moved to wrath by our fathers, he gave them up into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, the Chaldaean, who sent destruction on this house and took the people away into Babylon.

然而巴比伦王古列元年，他降旨允准建造神的这殿。
But in the first year of Cyrus, king of Babylon, Cyrus the king gave an order for the building of this house of God;

神殿中的金，银器皿，就是尼布甲尼撒从耶路撒冷的殿中掠去，带到巴比伦庙里的，古列王从巴比伦庙里取出来，交给派为省长的，名叫设巴萨，
And the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the Temple which was in Jerusalem, and put into the house of his god in Babylon, these Cyrus the king took from the house of his god in Babylon, and gave to one named Sheshbazzar, whom he had made ruler;

对他说可以将这些器皿带去，放在耶路撒冷的殿中，在原处建造神的殿。
And he said to him, Go, take these vessels, and put them in the Temple in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be put up again in its place.

于是这设巴萨来建立耶路撒冷神殿的根基。这殿从那时直到如今尚未造成。
Then this same Sheshbazzar came and put the house of God in Jerusalem on its bases: and from that time till now the building has been going on, but it is still not complete.

现在王若以为美，请察巴比伦王的府库，看古列王降旨允准在耶路撒冷建造神的殿没有，王的心意如何。请降旨晓谕我们。
So now, if it seems good to the king, let search be made in the king's store-house at Babylon, to see if it is true that an order was given by Cyrus the king for the building of this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send us word of his pleasure in connection with this business.

于是大利乌王降旨，要寻察典籍库内，就是在巴比伦藏宝物之处。
Then Darius the king gave an order and a search was made in the house of the records, where the things of value were stored up in Babylon.

在玛代省亚马他城的宫内寻得一卷，其中记着说，
And at Achmetha, in the great house of the king in the land of Media, they came across a roll, in which this statement was put on record:

古列王元年，他降旨论到耶路撒冷神的殿，要建造这殿为献祭之处，坚立殿的根基。殿高六十肘，宽六十肘，
In the first year of Cyrus the king, Cyrus the king made an order: In connection with the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be put up, the place where they make offerings, and let the earth for the bases be put in place; let it be sixty cubits high and sixty cubits wide;

用三层大石头，一层新木头，经费要出于王库。
With three lines of great stones and one line of new wood supports; and let the necessary money be given out of the king's store-house;

并且神殿的金银器皿，就是尼布甲尼撒从耶路撒冷的殿中掠到巴比伦的，要归还带到耶路撒冷的殿中，各按原处放在神的殿里。
And let the gold and silver vessels from the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took from the Temple at Jerusalem to Babylon, be given back and taken again to the Temple at Jerusalem, every one in its place, and put them in the house of God.

现在河西的总督达乃和示他波斯乃，并你们的同党，就是住河西的亚法萨迦人，你们当远离他们。
So now, Tattenai, ruler of the land across the river, and Shethar-bozenai and your people the Apharsachites across the river, keep far from that place:

不要拦阻神殿的工作，任凭犹大人的省长，和犹大人的长老，在原处建造神的这殿。
Let the work of this house of God go on; let the ruler of the Jews and their responsible men put up this house of God in its place.

我又降旨，吩咐你们向犹大人的长老为建造神的殿当怎样行，就是从河西的款项中，急速拨取贡银作他们的经费，免得耽误工作。
Further, I give orders as to what you are to do for the responsible men of the Jews in connection with the building of this house of God: that from the king's wealth, that is, from the taxes got together in the land over the river, the money needed is to be given to these men readily, so that their work may not be stopped.

他们与天上的神献燔祭所需用的公牛犊，公绵羊，绵羊羔，并所用的麦子，盐，酒，油，都要照耶路撒冷祭司的话，每日供给他们，不得有误。
And whatever they have need of, young oxen and sheep and lambs, for burned offerings to the God of heaven, grain, salt, wine, and oil, whatever the priests in Jerusalem say is necessary, is to be given to them day by day regularly:

好叫他们献馨香的祭给天上的神，又为王和王众子的寿命祈祷。
So that they may make offerings of a sweet smell to the God of heaven, with prayers for the life of the king and of his sons.

我再降旨，无论谁更改这命令，必从他房屋中拆出一根梁来，把他举起，悬在其上，又使他的房屋成为粪堆。
And I have given orders that if anyone makes any change in this word, one of the supports is to be pulled out of his house, and he is to be lifted up and fixed to it; and his house is to be made waste for this;

若有王和民伸手更改这命令，拆毁这殿，愿那使耶路撒冷的殿作为他名居所的神将他们灭绝。我大利乌降这旨意，当速速遵行。
And may the God who has made it a resting-place for his name send destruction on all kings and peoples whose hands are outstretched to make any change in this or to do damage to this house of God at Jerusalem. I, Darius, have given this order, let it be done with all care.

于是，河西总督达乃和示他波斯乃，并他们的同党，因大利乌王所发的命令，就急速遵行。
Then Tattenai, the ruler across the river, and Shethar-bozenai and their people, because of the order given by King Darius, did as he had said with all care.

犹大长老，因先知哈该，和易多的孙子撒迦利亚，所说劝勉的话，就建造这殿，凡事亨通。他们遵着以色列神的命令，和波斯王古列，大利乌，亚达薛西的旨意，建造完毕。
And the responsible men of the Jews went on with their building, and did well, helped by the teaching of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah, the son of Iddo. They went on building till it was complete, in keeping with the word of the God of Israel, and the orders given by Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes, king of Persia.

大利乌王第六年，亚达月初三日，这殿修成了。
And the building of this house was complete on the third day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of the rule of Darius the king.

以色列的祭司和利未人，并其余被掳归回的人，都欢欢喜喜地行奉献神殿的礼。
And the children of Israel, the priests and the Levites, and the rest of those who had come back, kept the feast of the opening of this house of God with joy.

行奉献神殿的礼就献公牛一百只，公绵羊二百只，绵羊羔四百只，又照以色列支派的数目献公山羊十二只，为以色列众人作赎罪祭。
And they gave as offerings at the opening of this house of God a hundred oxen, two hundred sheep, four hundred lambs; and for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, being the number of the tribes of Israel.

且派祭司和利未人按着班次在耶路撒冷事奉神，是照摩西律法书上所写的。
And they put the priests in their divisions and the Levites in their order, for the worship of God at Jerusalem; as it is recorded in the book of Moses.

正月十四日，被掳归回的人守逾越节。
And the children of Israel who had come back kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.

原来，祭司和利未人一同自洁，无一人不洁净。利未人为被掳归回的众人和他们的弟兄众祭司，并为自己宰逾越节的羊羔。
For the priests and the Levites had made themselves clean together; they were all clean: and they put the Passover lamb to death for all those who had come back, and for their brothers the priests and for themselves.

从掳到之地归回的以色列人，和一切除掉所染外邦人污秽，归附他们，要寻求耶和华以色列神的人都吃这羊羔，
And the children of Israel, who had come back, and all those who were joined to them, after separating themselves from the evil ways of the people of the land to become the servants of the Lord, the God of Israel, took food together,

欢欢喜喜地守除酵节七日。因为耶和华使他们欢喜，又使亚述王的心转向他们，坚固他们的手，作以色列神殿的工程。
And kept the feast of unleavened bread for seven days with joy: for the Lord had made them full of joy, by turning the heart of the king of Assyria to them to give them help in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

这事以后，波斯王亚达薛西年间，有个以斯拉，他是西莱雅的儿子，西莱雅是亚撒利雅的儿子，亚撒利雅是希勒家的儿子。
Now after these things, when Artaxerxes was king of Persia, Ezra, the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,

希勒家是沙龙的儿子，沙龙是撒督的儿子，撒督是亚希突的儿子，
The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,

亚希突是亚玛利雅的儿子，亚玛利雅是亚撒利雅的儿子，亚撒利雅是米拉约的儿子，
The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,

米拉约是西拉希雅的儿子，西拉希雅是乌西的儿子，乌西是布基的儿子，
The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,

布基是亚比书的儿子，亚比书是非尼哈的儿子，非尼哈是以利亚撒的儿子，以利亚撒是大祭司亚伦的儿子。
The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest:

这以斯拉从巴比伦上来，他是敏捷的文士，通达耶和华以色列神所赐摩西的律法书。王允准他一切所求的，是因耶和华他神的手帮助他。
This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a scribe, expert in the law of Moses which the Lord, the God of Israel, had given: and the king, moved by the Lord his God, gave him whatever he made request for.

亚达薛西王第七年，以色列人，祭司，利未人，歌唱的，守门的，尼提宁，有上耶路撒冷的。
And some of the children of Israel went up, with some of the priests and the Levites and the music-makers and the door-keepers and the Nethinim, to Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.

王第七年五月，以斯拉到了耶路撒冷。
And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, in the seventh year of the king's rule.

正月初一日，他从巴比伦起程。因他神施恩的手帮助他，五月初一日就到了耶路撒冷。
For, starting his journey from Babylon on the first day of the first month, he came to Jerusalem on the first day of the fifth month, by the good help of his God.

以斯拉定志考究遵行耶和华的律法，又将律例典章教训以色列人。
For Ezra had given his mind to learning the law of the Lord and doing it, and to teaching his rules and decisions in Israel.

祭司以斯拉是通达耶和华诫命，和赐以色列之律例的文士。亚达薛西王赐给他谕旨，上面写着说，
Now this is a copy of the letter which King Artaxerxes gave to Ezra, the priest and the scribe, who put into writing the words of the orders of the Lord, and of his rules for Israel:

诸王之王亚达薛西，达于祭司以斯拉通达天上神律法大德的文士，云云。
Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, scribe of the law of the God of heaven, all peace;

住在我国中的以色列人，祭司，利未人，凡甘心上耶路撒冷去的，我降旨准他们与你同去。
And now it is my order that all those of the people of Israel, and their priests and Levites in my kingdom, who are ready and have a desire to go to Jerusalem, are to go with you.

王与七个谋士既然差你去，照你手中神的律法书，察问犹大，和耶路撒冷的景况。
Because you are sent by the king and his seven wise men, to get knowledge about Judah and Jerusalem, as you are ordered by the law of your God which is in your hand;

又带金银，就是王和谋士甘心献给住耶路撒冷，以色列神的，
And to take with you the silver and gold freely offered by the king and his wise men to the God of Israel, whose Temple is in Jerusalem,

并带你在巴比伦全省所得的金银，和百姓，祭司乐意献给耶路撒冷他们神殿的礼物。
As well as all the silver and gold which you get from the land of Babylon, together with the offering of the people and of the priests, freely given for the house of their God, which is in Jerusalem:

所以你当用这金银，急速买公牛，公绵羊，绵羊羔，和同献的素祭奠祭之物，献在耶路撒冷你们神殿的坛上。
So with this money get with care oxen, sheep, and lambs, with their meal offerings and their drink offerings, to be offered on the altar of the house of your God, which is in Jerusalem.

剩下的金银，你和你的弟兄看着怎样好，就怎样用，总要遵着你们神的旨意。
And whatever seems right to you and to your brothers to do with the rest of the silver and gold, that do, as may be pleasing to your God.

所交给你神殿中使用的器皿，你要交在耶路撒冷神面前。
And the vessels which have been given to you for the uses of the house of your God, you are to give to the God of Jerusalem.

你神殿里若再有需用的经费，你可以从王的府库里支取。
And whatever more is needed for the house of your God, and which you may have to give, take it from the king's store-house.

我亚达薛西王又降旨与河西的一切库官，说，通达天上神律法的文士祭司以斯拉，无论向你们要什么，你们要速速地备办，
And I, even I, Artaxerxes the king, now give orders to all keepers of the king's money across the river, that whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, may have need of from you, is to be done with all care,

就是银子直到一百他连得，麦子一百柯珥，酒一百吧特，油一百吧特，盐不计其数，也要给他。
Up to a hundred talents of silver, a hundred measures of grain, a hundred measures of wine, and a hundred measures of oil, and salt without measure.

凡天上之神所吩咐的，当为天上神的殿详细办理。为何使忿怒临到王和王众子的国呢？
Whatever is ordered by the God of heaven, let it be done completely for the house of the God of heaven; so that there may not be wrath against the kingdom of the king and his sons.

我又晓谕你们，至于祭司，利未人，歌唱的，守门的，和尼提宁，并在神殿当差的人，不可叫他们进贡，交课，纳税。
In addition, we make it clear to you, that it will be against the law to put any tax or payment in goods or forced payment on any of the priests or Levites, the music-makers, door-keepers, Nethinim, or any servants of this house of God.

以斯拉阿，要照着你神赐你的智慧，将所有明白你神律法的人立为士师，审判官，治理河西的百姓，使他们教训一切不明白神律法的人。
And you, Ezra, by the wisdom of your God which is in you, are to put rulers and judges to have authority over all the people across the river who have knowledge of the laws of your God; and you are to give teaching to him who has no knowledge of them.

凡不遵行你神律法和王命令的人就当速速定他的罪，或治死，或充军，或抄家，或囚禁。
And if anyone does not keep the law of your God and the law of the king, take care that punishment is given to him, by death or by driving him from his country or by taking away his goods or by putting him in prison.

以斯拉说，耶和华我们列祖的神是应当称颂的。因他使王起这心意修饰耶路撒冷耶和华的殿，
Praise be to the Lord, the God of our fathers, who has put such a thing into the heart of the king, to make fair the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem;

又在王和谋士，并大能的军长面前施恩于我。因耶和华我神的手帮助我，我就得以坚强，从以色列中招聚首领，与我一同上来。
And has given mercy to me before the king and his government and before all the king's great captains. And I was made strong by the hand of the Lord my God which was on me, and I got together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

当亚达薛西王年间，同我从巴比伦上来的人，他们的族长和他们的家谱记在下面。
Now these are the heads of families who were listed of those who went up with me from Babylon, when Artaxerxes was king.

属非尼哈的子孙有革顺，属以他玛的子孙有但以理，属大卫的子孙有哈突。
Of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush;

属巴录的后裔，就是示迦尼的子孙有撒迦利亚，同着他，按家谱计算，男丁一百五十人。
Of the sons of Shecaniah; of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah; and with him were listed a hundred and fifty males.

属巴哈摩押的子孙有西拉希雅的儿子以利约乃，同着他有男丁二百。
Of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai, the son of Zerahiah; and with him two hundred males.

属示迦尼的子孙有雅哈悉的儿子，同着他有男丁三百。
Of the sons of Shecaniah, the son of Jahaziel; and with him three hundred males.

属亚丁的子孙有约拿单的儿子以别，同着他有男丁五十。
And of the sons of Adin, Ebed, the son of Jonathan; and with him fifty males.

属以拦的子孙有亚他利雅的儿子耶筛亚，同着他有男丁七十。
And of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah; the son of Athaliah; and with him seventy males.

属示法提雅的子孙有米迦勒的儿子西巴第雅，同着他有男丁八十。
And of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah, the son of Michael; and with him eighty males.

属约押的子孙有耶歇的儿子俄巴底亚，同着他有男丁二百一十八。
Of the sons of Joab, Obadiah, the son of Jehiel; and with him two hundred and eighteen males.

属示罗密的子孙有约细斐的儿子，同着他有男丁一百六十。
And of the sons of Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah; and with him a hundred and sixty males.

属比拜的子孙有比拜的儿子撒迦利亚，同着他有男丁二十八。
And of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah, the son of Bebai; and with him twenty-eight males.

属押甲的子孙有哈加坦的儿子约哈难，同着他有男丁一百一十。
And of the sons of Azgad, Johanan, the son of Hakkatan; and with him a hundred and ten males.

属亚多尼干的子孙，就是末尾的，他们的名字是以利法列，耶利，示玛雅，同着他们有男丁六十。
And of the sons of Adonikam, the last, whose names were Eliphelet, Jeuel, and Shemaiah; and with them sixty males.

属比革瓦伊的子孙有乌太和撒布，同着他们有男丁七十。
And of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud; and with them seventy males.

我招聚这些人在流入亚哈瓦的河边，我们在那里住了三日。我查看百姓和祭司，见没有利未人在那里，
And I made them come together by the river flowing to Ahava; and we were there in tents for three days: and after viewing the people and the priests I saw that no sons of Levi were there.

就召首领以利以谢，亚列，示玛雅，以利拿单，雅立，以利拿单，拿单，撒迦利亚，米书兰，又召教习约雅立和以利拿单。
Then I sent for Eliezer and Ariel and Shemaiah and Elnathan Jarib and Elnathan and Nathan and Zechariah and Meshullam, all responsible men; and for Joiarib and Elnathan, who were wise men.

我打发他们往迦西斐雅地方，去见那里的首领易多，又告诉他们当向易多和他的弟兄尼提宁说什么话，叫他们为我们神的殿带使用的人来。
And I sent them to Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and gave them orders what to say to Iddo and his brothers the Nethinim at the place Casiphia, so that they might come back to us with men to do the work of the house of our God.

蒙我们神施恩的手帮助我们，他们在以色列的曾孙，利未的孙子，抹利的后裔中带一个通达人来。还有示利比和他的众子与弟兄共一十八人。
And by the help of our God they got for us Ish-sechel, one of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah with his sons and brothers, eighteen;

又有哈沙比雅，同着他有米拉利的子孙耶筛亚，并他的众子和弟兄共二十人。
And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brothers and their sons, twenty;

从前大卫和众首领派尼提宁服事利未人，现在从这尼提宁中也带了二百二十人来，都是按名指定的。
And of the Nethinim, to whom David and the captains had given the work of helping the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinim, all of them specially named.

那时，我在亚哈瓦河边宣告禁食，为要在我们神面前克苦己心，求他使我们和妇人孩子，并一切所有的，都得平坦的道路。
Then I gave orders for a time of going without food, there by the river Ahava, so that we might make ourselves low before our God in prayer, requesting from him a straight way for us and for our little ones and for all our substance.

我求王拨步兵马兵帮助我们抵挡路上的仇敌，本以为羞耻。因我曾对王说，我们神施恩的手必帮助一切寻求他的。但他的能力和忿怒，必攻击一切离弃他的。
For I would not, for shame, make request to the king for a band of armed men and horsemen to give us help against those who might make attacks on us on the way: for we had said to the king, The hand of our God is on his servants for good, but his power and his wrath are against all those who are turned away from him.

所以我们禁食祈求我们的神，他就应允了我们。
So we went without food, requesting our God for this: and his ear was open to our prayer.

我分派祭司长十二人，就是示利比，哈沙比雅，和他们的弟兄十人，
So I put on one side twelve of the chiefs of the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers with them,

将王和谋士，军长，并在那里的以色列众人为我们神殿所献的金银和器皿，都秤了交给他们。
And gave to them by weight the silver and the gold and the vessels, all the offering for the house of our God which the king and his wise men and his captains and all Israel there present had given:

我秤了交在他们手中的银子有六百五十他连得。银器重一百他连得。金子一百他连得。
Measuring into their hands six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels, a hundred talents' weight, and a hundred talents of gold,

金碗二十个，重一千达利克。上等光铜的器皿两个，宝贵如金。
And twenty gold basins, of a thousand darics, and two vessels of the best bright brass, equal in value to gold.

我对他们说，你们归耶和华为圣，器皿也为圣。金银是甘心献给耶和华你们列祖之神的。
And I said to them, You are holy to the Lord and the vessels are holy: and the silver and the gold are an offering freely given to the Lord, the God of your fathers.

你们当儆醒看守，直到你们在耶路撒冷耶和华殿的库内，在祭司长和利未族长，并以色列的各族长面前过了秤。
Take care of them and keep them, till you put them on the scales before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites and the chiefs of the families of Israel, in Jerusalem, in the rooms of the house of the Lord.

于是，祭司，利未人按着分量接受金银和器皿，要带到耶路撒冷我们神的殿里。
So the priests and the Levites took the weight of silver and gold and the vessels, to take them to Jerusalem into the house of our God.

正月十二日，我们从亚哈瓦河边起行，要往耶路撒冷去。我们神的手保佑我们，救我们脱离仇敌和路上埋伏之人的手。
Then we went away from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go to Jerusalem; and the hand of our God was on us, and he gave us salvation from our haters and those who were waiting to make an attack on us by the way.

我们到了耶路撒冷，在那里住了三日。
And we came to Jerusalem and were there for three days.

第四日，在我们神的殿里把金银和器皿都秤了，交在祭司乌利亚的儿子米利末的手中。同着他有非尼哈的儿子以利亚撒，还有利未人耶书亚的儿子约撒拔和宾内的儿子挪亚底。
And on the fourth day, the silver and the gold and the vessels were measured out by weight in the house of our God into the hands of Meremoth, the son of Uriah, the priest; and with him was Eleazar, the son of Phinehas; and with them were Jozabad, the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah, the son of Binnui, the Levites;

当时都点了数目，按着分量写在册上。
All was handed over by number and by weight: and the weight was put on record at that time.

从掳到之地归回的人向以色列的神献燔祭，就是为以色列众人献公牛十二只，公绵羊九十六只，绵羊羔七十七只，又献公山羊十二只作赎罪祭，这都是向耶和华焚献的。
And those who had been prisoners, who had come back from a strange land, made burned offerings to the God of Israel, twelve oxen for all Israel, ninety-six male sheep, seventy-seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin-offering: all this was a burned offering to the Lord.

他们将王的谕旨交给王所派的总督与河西的省长，他们就帮助百姓，又供给神殿里所需用的。
And they gave the king's orders to the king's captains and the rulers across the river, and they gave the people and the house of God the help which was needed.

这事做完了，众首领来见我，说，以色列民和祭司并利未人，没有离绝迦南人，赫人，比利洗人，耶布斯人，亚扪人，摩押人，埃及人，亚摩利人，仍效法这些国的民，行可憎的事。
Now after these things were done, the captains came to me and said, The people of Israel and the priests and Levites have not kept themselves separate from the people of the lands, but have taken part in the disgusting ways of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.

因他们为自己和儿子娶了这些外邦女子为妻，以致圣洁的种类和这些国的民混杂。而且首领和官长在这事上为罪魁。
For they have taken their daughters for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy seed has been mixed with the peoples of the lands; and in fact the captains and rulers have been the first to do this evil.

我一听见这事，就撕裂衣服和外袍，拔了头发和胡须，惊惧忧闷而坐。
And hearing this, with signs of grief and pulling out the hair of my head and my chin, I took my seat on the earth deeply troubled.

凡为以色列神言语战兢的，都因这被掳归回之人所犯的罪聚集到我这里来。我就惊惧忧闷而坐，直到献晚祭的时候。
Then everyone who went in fear of the words of the God of Israel, because of the sin of those who had come back, came together to me; and I kept where I was, overcome with grief, till the evening offering.

献晚祭的时候我起来，心中愁苦，穿着撕裂的衣袍，双膝跪下向耶和华我的神举手，
And at the evening offering, having made myself low before God, I got up, and with signs of grief, falling down on my knees, with my hands stretched out to the Lord my God,

说，我的神阿，我抱愧蒙羞，不敢向我神仰面。因为我们的罪孽灭顶，我们的罪恶滔天。
I said, O my God, shame keeps me from lifting up my face to you, my God: for our sins are increased higher than our heads and our evil-doing has come up to heaven.

从我们列祖直到今日，我们的罪恶甚重。因我们的罪孽，我们和君王，祭司都交在外邦列王的手中，杀害，掳掠，抢夺，脸上蒙羞正如今日的光景。
From the days of our fathers till this day we have been great sinners; and for our sins, we and our kings and our priests have been given up into the hands of the kings of the lands, to the sword and to prison and to loss of goods and to shame of face, as it is this day.

现在耶和华我们的神暂且施恩与我们，给我们留些逃脱的人，使我们安稳如钉子钉在他的圣所，我们的神好光照我们的眼目，使我们在受辖制之中稍微复兴。
And now for a little time grace has come to us from the Lord our God, to let a small band of us get free and to give us a nail in his holy place, so that our God may give light to our eyes and a measure of new life in our prison chains.

我们是奴仆，然而在受辖制之中，我们的神仍没有丢弃我们，在波斯王眼前向我们施恩，叫我们复兴，能重建我们神的殿，修其毁坏之处，使我们在犹大和耶路撒冷有墙垣。
For we are servants; but our God has not been turned away from us in our prison, but has had mercy on us before the eyes of the kings of Persia, to give us new strength to put up again the house of our God and to make fair its waste places, and to give us a wall in Judah and Jerusalem.

我们的神阿，既是如此，我们还有什么话可说呢？因为我们已经离弃你的命令，
And now, O our God, what are we to say after this? for we have not kept your laws,

就是你借你仆人众先知所吩咐的说，你们要去得为业之地是污秽之地。因列国之民的污秽和可憎的事，叫全地从这边直到那边满了污秽。
Which you gave to your servants the prophets, saying, The land into which you are going, to take it for a heritage, is an unclean land, because of the evil lives of the peoples of the land and their disgusting ways, which have made the land unclean from end to end.

所以不可将你们的女儿嫁他们的儿子，也不可为你们的儿子娶他们的女儿，永不可求他们的平安和他们的利益，这样你们就可以强盛，吃这地的美物，并遗留这地给你们的子孙永远为业。
So now do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons or do anything for their peace or well-being for ever; so that you may be strong, living on the good of the land, and handing it on to your children for a heritage for ever.

神阿，我们因自己的恶行和大罪，遭遇了这一切的事，并且你刑罚我们轻于我们罪所当得的，又给我们留下这些人。
And after everything which has come on us because of our evil-doing and our great sin, and seeing that the punishment which you, O God, have given us, is less than the measure of our sins, and that you have kept from death those of us who are here;

我们岂可再违背你的命令，与这行可憎之事的民结亲呢？若这样行，你岂不向我们发怒，将我们灭绝，以致没有一个剩下逃脱的人吗？
Are we again to go against your orders, taking wives from among the people who do these disgusting things? would you not be angry with us till our destruction was complete, till there was not one who got away safe?

耶和华以色列的神阿，因你是公义的，我们这剩下的人才得逃脱，正如今日的光景。看哪，我们在你面前有罪恶，因此无人在你面前站立得住。
O Lord God of Israel, righteousness is yours; we are only a small band which has been kept from death, as at this day: see, we are before you in our sin; for no one may keep his place before you because of this.

以斯拉祷告，认罪，哭泣，俯伏在神殿前的时候，有以色列中的男女孩童聚集到以斯拉那里，成了大会，众民无不痛哭。
Now while Ezra was making his prayer and his statement of wrongdoing, weeping and falling down before the house of God, a very great number of men and women and children out of Israel came together round him: for the people were weeping bitterly.

属以拦的子孙，耶歇的儿子示迦尼对以斯拉说，我们在此地娶了外邦女子为妻，干犯了我们的神，然而以色列人还有指望。
And Shecaniah, the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answering, said to Ezra, We have done evil against our God, and have taken as our wives strange women of the peoples of the land: but still there is hope for Israel in this question.

现在当与我们的神立约，休这一切的妻，离绝她们所生的，照着我主和那因神命令战兢之人所议定的，按律法而行。
Let us now make an agreement with our God to put away all the wives and all their children, if it seems right to my lord and to those who go in fear of the words of our God; and let it be done in keeping with the law.

你起来，这是你当办的事，我们必帮助你，你当奋勉而行。
Up, now! for this is your business, and we are with you; take heart and do it.

以斯拉便起来，使祭司长和利未人，并以色列众人起誓说，必照这话去行。他们就起了誓。
Then Ezra got up, and made the chiefs of the priests and the Levites and all Israel take an oath that they would do this. So they took an oath.

以斯拉从神殿前起来，进入以利亚实的儿子约哈难的屋里，到了那里不吃饭，也不喝水。因为被掳归回之人所犯的罪，心里悲伤。
Then Ezra got up from before the house of God and went into the room of Jehohanan, the son of Eliashib; but when he came there, he took no food or drink, for he was sorrowing for the sin of those who had come back.

他们通告犹大和耶路撒冷被掳归回的人，叫他们在耶路撒冷聚集。
And they made a public statement through all Judah and Jerusalem, to all those who had come back, that they were to come together to Jerusalem;

凡不遵首领和长老所议定，三日之内不来的，就必抄他的家，使他离开被掳归回之人的会。
And that if anyone did not come before three days were past, as ordered by the rulers and the responsible men, all his goods would be put under the curse, and he himself would be cut off from the meeting of the people who had come back.

于是，犹大和便雅悯众人，三日之内都聚集在耶路撒冷。那日正是九月二十日，众人都坐在神殿前的宽阔处。因这事，又因下大雨，就都战兢。
Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin came together to Jerusalem before three days were past; it was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month; and all the people were seated in the wide square in front of the house of God, shaking with fear because of this business and because of the great rain.

祭司以斯拉站起来，对他们说，你们有罪了。因你们娶了外邦的女子为妻，增添以色列人的罪恶。。
And Ezra the priest got to his feet and said to them, You have done wrong and taken strange women for your wives, so increasing the sin of Israel.

现在当向耶和华你们列祖的神认罪，遵行他的旨意，离绝这些国的民和外邦的女子。
So now, give praise to the Lord, the God of your fathers, and do his pleasure; and make yourselves separate from the peoples of the land and from the strange women.

会众都大声回答说，我们必照着你的话行，
Then all the people, answering, said with a loud voice, As you have said, so it is right for us to do.

只是百姓众多，又逢大雨的时令，我们不能站在外头，这也不是一两天办完的事，因我们在这事上犯了大罪。
But the number of people is great, and it is a time of much rain; it is not possible for us to go on waiting outside, and this is not a thing which may be done in one day or even two: for our sin in this business is great.

不如为全会众派首领办理。凡我们城邑中娶外邦女子为妻的，当按所定的日期，同着本城的长老和士师而来，直到办完这事，神的烈怒就转离我们了。
So now let our rulers be representatives for all the people, and let all those in our towns who are married to strange women come at fixed times, and with them the responsible men and the judges of every town, till the burning wrath of our God is turned away from us, and this has been done.

惟有亚撒黑的儿子约拿单，特瓦的儿子雅哈谢阻挡（或作总办）这事，并有米书兰和利未人沙比太帮助他们。
Only Jonathan, the son of Asahel, and Jahzeiah, the son of Tikvah, were against this, Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite supporting them.

被掳归回的人如此而行。祭司以斯拉和些族长按着宗族都指名见派，在十月初一日，一同在座查办这事，
So those who had come back did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain heads of families, by their fathers' families, all of them by their names, were marked out; and on the first day of the tenth month they took their places to go into the question with care.

到正月初一日，才查清娶外邦女子的人数。
And they got to the end of all the men who were married to strange women by the first day of the first month.

在祭司中查出娶外邦女子为妻的，就是耶书亚的子孙约萨达的儿子，和他弟兄玛西雅，以利以谢，雅立，基大利。
And among the sons of the priests who were married to strange women were these: of the sons of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak and his brothers, Maaseiah and Eliezer and Jarib and Gedaliah.

他们便应许必休他们的妻。他们因有罪，就献群中的一只公绵羊赎罪。
And they gave their word that they would put away their wives; and for their sin, they gave an offering of a male sheep of the flock.

音麦的子孙中，有哈拿尼，西巴第雅。
And of the sons of Immer, Hanani and Zebadiah.

哈琳的子孙中，有玛西雅，以利雅，示玛雅，耶歇，乌西雅。
And of the sons of Harim, Maaseiah and Elijah and Shemaiah and Jehiel and Uzziah.

巴施户珥的子孙中，有以利约乃，玛西雅，以实玛利，拿坦业，约撒拔，以利亚撒。
And of the sons of Pashhur, Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.

利未人中，有约撒拔，示每，基拉雅，基拉雅就是基利他。还有毗他希雅，犹大，以利以谢。
And of the Levites, Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah (that is Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.

歌唱的人中有以利亚实。守门的人中，有沙龙，提联，乌利。
And of the music-makers, Eliashib; and of the door-keepers, Shallum and Telem and Uri.

以色列人巴录的子孙中，有拉米，耶西雅，玛基雅，米雅民，以利亚撒，玛基雅，比拿雅。
And of Israel, the sons of Parosh, Ramiah and Izziah and Malchijah and Mijamin and Eleazar and Malchijah and Benaiah.

以拦的子孙中，有玛他尼，撒迦利亚，耶歇，押底，耶利末，以利雅。
And of the sons of Elam, Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel and Abdi and Jeremoth and Elijah.

萨土的子孙中，有以利约乃，以利亚实，玛他尼，耶利末，撒拔，亚西撒。
And of the sons of Zattu, Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth and Zabad and Aziza.

比拜的子孙中，有约哈难，哈拿尼雅，萨拜，亚勒。
And of the sons of Bebai, Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai.

巴尼的子孙中，有米书兰，玛鹿，亚大雅，雅述，示押，耶利末。
And of the sons of Bani, Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub and Sheal, Jeremoth.

巴哈摩押的子孙中，有阿底拿，基拉，比拿雅，玛西雅，玛他尼，比撒列，宾内，玛拿西。
And of the sons of Pahath-moab, Adna and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel and Binnui and Manasseh.

哈琳的子孙中，有以利以谢，伊示雅，玛基雅，示玛雅，西缅，
And of the sons of Harim, Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,

便雅悯，玛鹿，示玛利雅。
Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah.

哈顺的子孙中，有玛特乃，玛达他，撒拔，以利法列，耶利买，玛拿西，示每。
Of the sons of Hashum, Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei.

巴尼的子孙中，有玛玳，暗兰，乌益，
Of the sons of Bani, Maadai, Amram, and Uel,

比拿雅，比底雅，基禄，
Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi,

瓦尼雅，米利末，以利亚实，
Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,

玛他尼，玛特乃，雅扫，
Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasu,

巴尼，宾内，示每，
And Bani and Binnui, Shimei;

示利米雅，拿单，亚大雅，
And Shelemiah and Nathan and Adaiah,

玛拿底拜，沙赛，沙赖，
Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,

亚萨利，示利米雅，示玛利雅，
Azarel and Shelemiah, Shemariah,

沙龙，亚玛利雅，约瑟。
Shallum, Amariah, Joseph.

尼波的子孙中，有耶利，玛他提雅，撒拔，西比拿，雅玳，约珥，比拿雅。
Of the sons of Nebo, Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Iddo, and Joel, Benaiah.

这些人都娶了外邦女子为妻，其中也有生了儿女的。
All these had taken strange wives; and some of them had wives by whom they had offspring.

