在耶路撒冷作王，大卫的儿子，传道者的言语。
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.

传道者说，虚空的虚空，虚空的虚空。凡事都是虚空。
All is to no purpose, said the Preacher, all the ways of man are to no purpose.

人一切的劳碌，就是他在日光之下的劳碌，有什么益处呢？
What is a man profited by all his work which he does under the sun?

一代过去，一代又来。地却永远长存。
One generation goes and another comes; but the earth is for ever.

日头出来，日头落下，急归所出之地。
The sun comes up and the sun goes down, and goes quickly back to the place where he came up.

风往南刮，又向北转，不住地旋转，而且返回转行原道。
The wind goes to the south, turning back again to the north; circling round for ever.

江河都往海里流，海却不满。江河从何处流，仍归还何处。
All the rivers go down to the sea, but the sea is not full; to the place where the rivers go, there they go again.

万事令人厌烦。（或作万物满有困乏）人不能说尽。眼看，看不饱，耳听，听不足。
All things are full of weariness; man may not give their story: the eye has never enough of its seeing, or the ear of its hearing.

已有的事，后必再有。已行的事，后必再行。日光之下并无新事。
That which has been, is that which is to be, and that which has been done, is that which will be done, and there is no new thing under the sun.

岂有一件事人能指着说，这是新的。哪知，在我们以前的世代，早已有了。
Is there anything of which men say, See, this is new? It has been in the old time which was before us.

已过的世代，无人记念，将来的世代，后来的人也不记念。
There is no memory of those who have gone before, and of those who come after there will be no memory for those who are still to come after them.

我传道者在耶路撒冷作过以色列的王。
I, the Preacher, was king over Israel in Jerusalem.

我专心用智慧寻求查究天下所作的一切事，乃知神叫世人所经练的，是极重的劳苦。
And I gave my heart to searching out in wisdom all things which are done under heaven: it is a hard thing which God has put on the sons of men to do.

我见日光之下所作的一切事，都是虚空，都是捕风。
I have seen all the works which are done under the sun; all is to no purpose, and desire for wind.

弯曲的不能变直，缺少的不能足数。
That which is bent may not be made straight, and that which is not there may not be numbered.

我心里议论，说，我得了大智慧，胜过我以前在耶路撒冷的众人。而且我心中多经历智慧，和知识的事。
I said to my heart, See, I have become great and am increased in wisdom more than any who were before me in Jerusalem--yes, my heart has seen much wisdom and knowledge.

我又专心察明智慧，狂妄，和愚昧。乃知这也是捕风。
And I gave my heart to getting knowledge of wisdom, and of the ways of the foolish. And I saw that this again was desire for wind.

因为多有智慧，就多有愁烦。加增知识的，就加增忧伤。
Because in much wisdom is much grief, and increase of knowledge is increase of sorrow.

我心里说，来吧，我以喜乐试试你，你好享福。谁知，这也是虚空。
I said in my heart, I will give you joy for a test; so take your pleasure--but it was to no purpose.

我指嬉笑说，这是狂妄。论喜乐说，有何功效呢？
Of laughing I said, It is foolish; and of joy--What use is it?

我心里察究，如何用酒使我肉体舒畅，我心却仍以智慧引导我。又如何持住愚昧，等我看明世人，在天下一生当行何事为美。
I made a search with my heart to give pleasure to my flesh with wine, still guiding my heart with wisdom, and to go after foolish things, so that I might see what was good for the sons of men to do under the heavens all the days of their life.

我为自己动大工程，建造房屋，栽种葡萄园，
I undertook great works, building myself houses and planting vine-gardens.

修造园囿，在其中栽种各样果木树，
I made myself gardens and fruit gardens, planting in them fruit-trees of all sorts.

挖造水池，用以浇灌嫩小的树木。
I made pools to give water for the woods with their young trees.

我买了仆婢，也有生在家中的仆婢。又有许多牛群羊群，胜过以前在耶路撒冷众人所有的。
I got men-servants and women-servants, and they gave birth to sons and daughters in my house. I had great wealth of herds and flocks, more than all who were in Jerusalem before me.

我又为自己积蓄金银，和君王的财宝，并各省的财宝。又得唱歌的男女，和世人所喜爱的物，并许多的妃嫔。
I got together silver and gold and the wealth of kings and of countries. I got makers of song, male and female; and the delights of the sons of men--girls of all sorts to be my brides.

这样，我就日见昌盛，胜过以前在耶路撒冷的众人。我的智慧仍然存留。
And I became great; increasing more than all who had been before me in Jerusalem, and my wisdom was still with me.

凡我眼所求的，我没有留下不给他的。我心所乐的，我没有禁止不享受的。因我的心为我一切所劳碌的快乐。这就是我从劳碌中所得的分。
And nothing which was desired by my eyes did I keep from them; I did not keep any joy from my heart, because my heart took pleasure in all my work, and this was my reward.

后来我察看我手所经营的一切事，和我劳碌所成的功。谁知都是虚空，都是捕风，在日光之下毫无益处。
Then I saw all the works which my hands had made, and everything I had been working to do; and I saw that all was to no purpose and desire for wind, and there was no profit under the sun.

我转念观看智慧，狂妄，和愚昧。在王以后而来的人，还能作什么呢？也不过行早先所行的就是了。
And I went again in search of wisdom and of foolish ways. What may the man do who comes after the king? The thing which he has done before.

我便看出智慧胜过愚昧，如同光明胜过黑暗。
Then I saw that wisdom is better than foolish ways--as the light is better than the dark.

智慧人的眼目光明，（光明原文作在他头上）愚昧人在黑暗里行。我却看明有一件事，这两等人都必遇见。
The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the foolish man goes walking in the dark; but still I saw that the same event comes to them all.

我就心里说，愚昧人所遇见的，我也必遇见。我为何更有智慧呢？我心里说，这也是虚空。
Then said I in my heart: As it comes to the foolish man, so will it come to me; so why have I been wise overmuch? Then I said in my heart: This again is to no purpose.

智慧人，和愚昧人一样，永远无人记念。因为日后都被忘记。可叹智慧人死亡，与愚昧人无异。
Of the wise man, as of the foolish man, there is no memory for ever, seeing that those who now are will have gone from memory in the days to come. See how death comes to the wise as to the foolish!

我所以恨恶生命，因为在日光之下所行的事我都以为烦恼。都是虚空，都是捕风。
So I was hating life, because everything under the sun was evil to me: all is to no purpose and desire for wind.

我恨恶一切的劳碌，就是我在日光之下的劳碌。因为我得来的必留给我以后的人。
Hate had I for all my work which I had done, because the man who comes after me will have its fruits.

那人是智慧，是愚昧，谁能知道。他竟要管理我劳碌所得的，就是我在日光之下用智慧所得的。这也是虚空。
And who is to say if that man will be wise or foolish? But he will have power over all my work which I have done and in which I have been wise under the sun. This again is to no purpose.

故此，我转想我在日光之下所劳碌的一切工作，心便绝望。
So my mind was turned to grief for all the trouble I had taken and all my wisdom under the sun.

因为有人用智慧知识灵巧所劳碌得来的，却要留给未曾劳碌的人为分。这也是虚空，也是大患。
Because there is a man whose work has been done with wisdom, with knowledge, and with an expert hand; but one who has done nothing for it will have it for his heritage. This again is to no purpose and a great evil.

人在日光之下劳碌累心，在他一切的劳碌上得着什么呢？
What does a man get for all his work, and for the weight of care with which he has done his work under the sun?

因为他日日忧虑，他的劳苦成为愁烦。连夜间心也不安。这也是虚空。
All his days are sorrow, and his work is full of grief. Even in the night his heart has no rest. This again is to no purpose.

人莫强如吃喝，且在劳碌中享福。我看这也是出于神的手。
There is nothing better for a man than taking meat and drink, and having delight in his work. This again I saw was from the hand of God.

论到吃用，享福，谁能胜过我呢？
Who may take food or have pleasure without him?

神喜悦谁，就给谁智慧，知识，和喜乐。惟有罪人，神使他劳苦，叫他将所收聚的，所堆积的，归给神所喜悦的人。这也是虚空，也是捕风。
To the man with whom he is pleased, God gives wisdom and knowledge and joy; but to the sinner he gives the work of getting goods together and storing up wealth, to give to him in whom God has pleasure. This again is to no purpose and desire for wind.

凡事都有定期，天下万务都有定时。
For everything there is a fixed time, and a time for every business under the sun.

生有时，死有时。栽种有时，拔出所栽种的，也有时。
A time for birth and a time for death; a time for planting and a time for uprooting;

杀戮有时，医治有时。拆毁有时，建造有时。
A time to put to death and a time to make well; a time for pulling down and a time for building up;

哭有时，笑有时。哀恸有时，跳舞有时。
A time for weeping and a time for laughing; a time for sorrow and a time for dancing;

抛掷石头有时，堆聚石头有时。怀抱有时，不怀抱有时。
A time to take stones away and a time to get stones together; a time for kissing and a time to keep from kissing;

寻找有时，失落有时。保守有时，舍弃有时。
A time for search and a time for loss; a time to keep and a time to give away;

撕裂有时，缝补有时。静默有时，言语有时。
A time for undoing and a time for stitching; a time for keeping quiet and a time for talk;

喜爱有时，恨恶有时。争战有时，和好有时。
A time for love and a time for hate; a time for war and a time for peace.

这样看来，作事的人在他的劳碌上有什么益处呢？
What profit has the worker in the work which he does?

我见神叫世人劳苦，使他们在其中受经练。
I saw the work which God has put on the sons of man.

神造万物，各按其时成为美好。又将永生安置在世人心里。（永生原文作永远）然而神从始至终的作为，人不能参透。
He has made everything right in its time; but he has made their hearts without knowledge, so that man is unable to see the works of God, from the first to the last.

我知道世人，莫强如终身喜乐行善。
I am certain that there is nothing better for a man than to be glad, and to do good while life is in him.

并且人人吃喝，在他一切劳碌中享福。这也是神的恩赐。
And for every man to take food and drink, and have joy in all his work, is a reward from God.

我知道神一切所作的，都必永存，无所增添，无所减少。神这样行，是要人在他面前存敬畏的心。
I am certain that whatever God does will be for ever. No addition may be made to it, nothing may be taken from it; and God has done it so that man may be in fear before him.

现今的事早先就有了。将来的事早已也有了。并且神使已过的事重新再来。（或作并且神再寻回已过的事）
Whatever is has been before, and what is to be is now; because God makes search for the things which are past.

我又见日光之下，在审判之处有奸恶。在公义之处也有奸恶。
And again, I saw under the sun, in the place of the judges, that evil was there; and in the place of righteousness, that evil was there.

我心里说，神必审判义人和恶人。因为在那里，各样事务，一切工作，都有定时。
I said in my heart, God will be judge of the good and of the bad; because a time for every purpose and for every work has been fixed by him.

我心里说，这乃为世人的缘故，是神要试验他们，使他们觉得自己不过像兽一样。
I said in my heart, It is because of the sons of men, so that God may put them to the test and that they may see themselves as beasts.

因为世人遭遇的，兽也遭遇。所遭遇的都是一样。这个怎样死，那个也怎样死。气息都是一样。人不能强于兽。都是虚空。
Because the fate of the sons of men and the fate of the beasts is the same. As is the death of one so is the death of the other, and all have one spirit. Man is not higher than the beasts; because all is to no purpose.

都归一处。都是出于尘土，也都归于尘土。
All go to one place, all are of the dust, and all will be turned to dust again.

谁知道人的灵是往上升，兽的魂是下入地呢？
Who is certain that the spirit of the sons of men goes up to heaven, or that the spirit of the beasts goes down to the earth?

故此，我见人，莫强如在他经营的事上喜乐。因为这是他的分。他身后的事，谁能使他回来得见呢？
So I saw that there is nothing better than for a man to have joy in his work--because that is his reward. Who will make him see what will come after him?

我又转念，见日光之下所行的一切欺压。看哪，受欺压的流泪，且无人安慰。欺压他们的有势力，也无人安慰他们。
And again I saw all the cruel things which are done under the sun; there was the weeping of those who have evil done to them, and they had no comforter: and from the hands of the evil-doers there went out power, but they had no comforter.

因此，我赞叹那早已死的死人，胜过那还活着的活人。
So my praise was for the dead who have gone to their death, more than for the living who still have life.

并且我以为那未曾生的，就是未见过日光之下恶事的，比这两等人更强。
Yes, happier than the dead or the living seemed he who has not ever been, who has not seen the evil which is done under the sun.

我又见人为一切的劳碌，和各样灵巧的工作，就被邻舍嫉妒。这也是虚空，也是捕风。
And I saw that the cause of all the work and of everything which is done well was man's envy of his neighbour. This again is to no purpose and a desire for wind.

愚昧人抱着手，吃自己的肉。
The foolish man, folding his hands, takes the flesh of his body for food.

满了一把，得享安静，强如满了两把，劳碌捕风。
One hand full of rest is better than two hands full of trouble and desire for wind.

我又转念，见日光之下有一件虚空的事。
Then I came back, and I saw an example of what is to no purpose under the sun.

有人孤单无二，无子，无兄，竟劳碌不息，眼目也不以钱财为足。他说，我劳劳碌碌，刻苦自己，不享福乐，到底是为谁呢？这也是虚空，是极重的劳苦。
It is one who is by himself, without a second, and without son or brother; but there is no end to all his work, and he has never enough of wealth. For whom, then, am I working and keeping myself from pleasure? This again is to no purpose, and a bitter work.

两个人总比一个人好，因为二人劳碌同得美好的果效。
Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their work.

若是跌倒，这人可以扶起他的同伴。若是孤身跌倒，没有别人扶起他来。这人就有祸了。
And if one has a fall, the other will give him a hand; but unhappy is the man who is by himself, because he has no helper.

再者，二人同睡，就都暖和。一人独睡，怎能暖和呢？
So again, if two are sleeping together they are warm, but how may one be warm by himself?

有人攻胜孤身一人，若有二人便能敌挡他。三股合成的绳子，不容易折断。
And two attacked by one would be safe, and three cords twisted together are not quickly broken.

贫穷而有智慧的少年人，胜过年老不肯纳谏的愚昧王。
A young man who is poor and wise is better than a king who is old and foolish and will not be guided by the wisdom of others.

这人是从监牢中出来作王。在他国中，生来原是贫穷的。
Because out of a prison the young man comes to be king, though by birth he was only a poor man in the kingdom.

我见日光之下一切行动的活人，都随从那第二位，就是起来代替老王的少年人。
I saw all the living under the sun round the young man who was to be ruler in place of the king.

他所治理的众人，就是他的百姓，多得无数。在他后来的人，尚且不喜悦他。这真是虚空，也是捕风。
There was no end of all the people, of all those whose head he was, but they who come later will have no delight in him. This again is to no purpose and desire for wind.

你到神的殿，要谨慎脚步。因为近前听，胜过愚昧人献祭，（或作胜过献愚昧人的祭）他们本不知道所作的是恶。
Put your feet down with care when you go to the house of God, for it is better to give ear than to make the burned offerings of the foolish, whose knowledge is only of doing evil.

你在神面前不可冒失开口，也不可心急发言。因为神在天上，你在地下，所以你的言语要寡少。
Be not unwise with your mouth, and let not your heart be quick to say anything before God, because God is in heaven and you are on the earth--so let not the number of your words be great.

事务多，就令人作梦，言语多，就显出愚昧。
As a dream comes from much business, so the voice of a foolish man comes with words in great number.

你向神许愿，偿还不可迟延。因他不喜悦愚昧人。所以你许的愿应当偿还。
When you take an oath before God, put it quickly into effect, because he has no pleasure in the foolish; keep the oath you have taken.

你许愿不还，不如不许。
It is better not to take an oath than to take an oath and not keep it.

不可任你的口使肉体犯罪。也不可在祭司（原文作使者）面前说是错许了。为何使神因你的声音发怒，败坏你手所作的呢？
Let not your mouth make your flesh do evil. And say not before the angel, It was an error. So that God may not be angry with your words and put an end to the work of your hands.

多梦和多言，其中多有虚幻。你只要敬畏神。
Because much talk comes from dreams and things of no purpose. But let the fear of God be in you.

你若在一省之中见穷人受欺压，并夺去公义公平的事，不要因此诧异。因有一位高过居高位的鉴察。在他们以上还有更高的。
If you see the poor under a cruel yoke, and law and right being violently overturned in a country, be not surprised, because one authority is keeping watch on another and there are higher than they.

况且地的益处归众人。就是君王也受田地的供应。
It is good generally for a country where the land is worked to have a king.

贪爱银子的，不因得银子知足。贪爱丰富的，也不因得利益知足。这也是虚空。
He who has a love for silver never has enough silver, or he who has love for wealth, enough profit. This again is to no purpose.

货物增添，吃的人也增添。物主得什么益处呢？不过眼看而已。
When goods are increased, the number of those who take of them is increased; and what profit has the owner but to see them?

劳碌的人，不拘吃多吃少，睡得香甜。富足人的丰满，却不容他睡觉。
The sleep of a working man is sweet, if he has little food or much; but to him who is full, sleep will not come.

我见日光之下，有一宗大祸患，就是财主积存赀财，反害自己。
There is a great evil which I have seen under the sun--wealth kept by the owner to be his downfall.

因遭遇祸患，这些赀财就消灭。那人若生了儿子，手里也一无所有。
And I saw the destruction of his wealth by an evil chance; and when he became the father of a son he had nothing in his hand.

他怎样从母胎赤身而来，也必照样赤身而去。他所劳碌得来的。手中分毫不能带去。
As he came from his mother at birth, so does he go again; he gets from his work no reward which he may take away in his hand.

他来的情形怎样，他去的情形也怎样。这也是一宗大祸患。他为风劳碌有什么益处呢？
And this again is a great evil, that in all points as he came so will he go; and what profit has he in working for the wind?

并且他终身在黑暗中吃喝，多有烦恼，又有病患呕气。
All his days are in the dark, and he has much sorrow, pain, disease, and trouble.

我所见为善为美的，就是人在神赐他一生的日子吃喝，享受日光之下劳碌得来的好处。因为这是他的分。
This is what I have seen: it is good and fair for a man to take meat and drink and to have joy in all his work under the sun, all the days of his life which God has given him; that is his reward.

神赐人赀财丰富，使他能以吃用，能取自己的分，在他劳碌中喜乐。这乃是神的恩赐。
Every man to whom God has given money and wealth and the power to have pleasure in it and to do his part and have joy in his work: this is given by God.

他不多思念自己一生的年日。因为神应他的心使他喜乐。
He will not give much thought to the days of his life; because God lets him be taken up with the joy of his heart.

我见日光之下有一宗祸患，重压在人身上。
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is hard on men;

就是人蒙神赐他赀财，丰富，尊荣，以致他心里所愿的一样都不缺，只是神使他不能吃用，反有外人来吃用。这是虚空，也是祸患。
A man to whom God gives money, wealth, and honour so that he has all his desires but God does not give him the power to have joy of it, and a strange man takes it. This is to no purpose and an evil disease.

人若生一百个儿子，活许多岁数，以致他的年日甚多，心里却不得满享福乐，又不得埋葬。据我说，那不到期而落的胎比他倒好。
If a man has a hundred children, and his life is long so that the days of his years are great in number, but his soul takes no pleasure in good, and he is not honoured at his death; I say that a birth before its time is better than he.

因为虚虚而来，暗暗而去，名字被黑暗遮蔽。
In wind it came and to the dark it will go, and with the dark will its name be covered.

并且没有见过天日，也毫无知觉。这胎，比那人倒享安息。
Yes, it saw not the sun, and it had no knowledge; it is better with this than with the other.

那人虽然活千年，再活千年，却不享福，众人岂不都归一个地方去吗？
And though he goes on living a thousand years twice over and does not see good, are not the two going to the same place?

人的劳碌都为口腹，心里却不知足。
All the work of man is for his mouth, and still he has a desire for food.

这样看来，智慧人比愚昧人有什么长处呢？穷人在众人面前知道如何行，有什么长处呢？
What have the wise more than the foolish? and what has the poor man by walking wisely before the living?

眼睛所看的，比心里妄想的倒好。这也是虚空，也是捕风。
What the eyes see is better than the wandering of desire. This is to no purpose and a desire for wind.

先前所有的，早已起了名。并知道何为人。他也不能与那比自己力大的相争。
That which is, has been named before, and of what man is there is knowledge. He has no power against one stronger than he.

加增虚浮的事既多，这与人有什么益处呢？
There are words without number for increasing what is to no purpose, but what is man profited by them?

人一生虚度的日子，就如影儿经过。谁知道什么与他有益呢？谁能告诉他身后在日光之下有什么事呢？
Who is able to say what is good for man in life all the days of his foolish life which he goes through like a shade? who will say what is to be after him under the sun?

名誉强如美好的膏油。人死的日子，胜过人生的日子。
A good name is better than oil of great price, and the day of death than the day of birth.

往遭丧的家去，强如往宴乐的家去，因为死是众人的结局。活人也必将这事放在心上。
It is better to go to the house of weeping, than to go to the house of feasting; because that is the end of every man, and the living will take it to their hearts.

忧愁强如喜笑，因为面带愁容，终必使心喜乐。
Sorrow is better than joy; when the face is sad the mind gets better.

智慧人的心，在遭丧之家。愚昧人的心，在快乐之家。
The hearts of the wise are in the house of weeping; but the hearts of the foolish are in the house of joy.

听智慧人的责备，强如听愚昧人的歌唱。
It is better to take note of the protest of the wise, than for a man to give ear to the song of the foolish.

愚昧人的笑声，好像锅下烧荆棘的爆声，这也是虚空。
Like the cracking of thorns under a pot, so is the laugh of a foolish man; and this again is to no purpose.

勒索使智慧人变为愚妄。贿赂能败坏人的慧心。
The wise are troubled by the ways of the cruel, and the giving of money is the destruction of the heart.

事情的终局，强如事情的起头。存心忍耐的，胜过居心骄傲的。
The end of a thing is better than its start, and a gentle spirit is better than pride.

你不要心里急躁恼怒，因为恼怒存在愚昧人的怀中。
Be not quick to let your spirit be angry; because wrath is in the heart of the foolish.

不要说，先前的日子强过如今的日子，是什么缘故呢？你这样问，不是出于智慧。
Say not, Why were the days which have gone by better than these? Such a question comes not from wisdom.

智慧和产业并好。而且见天日的人，得智慧更为有益。
Wisdom together with a heritage is good, and a profit to those who see the sun.

因为智慧护庇人，好像银钱护庇人一样。惟独智慧能保全智慧人的生命，这就是知识的益处。
Wisdom keeps a man from danger even as money does; but the value of knowledge is that wisdom gives life to its owner.

你要察看神的作为，因神使为曲的，谁能变为直呢？
Give thought to the work of God. Who will make straight what he has made bent?

遇亨通的日子，你当喜乐。遭患难的日子，你当思想。因为神使这两样并列，为的是叫人查不出身后有什么事。
In the day of wealth have joy, but in the day of evil take thought: God has put the one against the other, so that man may not be certain what will be after him.

有义人行义，反致灭亡。有恶人行恶，倒享长寿。这都是我在虚度之日中所见过的。
These two have I seen in my life which is to no purpose: a good man coming to his end in his righteousness, and an evil man whose days are long in his evil-doing.

不要行义过分。也不要过于自逞智慧。何必自取败亡呢？
Be not given overmuch to righteousness and be not over-wise. Why let destruction come on you?

不要行恶过分。也不要为人愚昧。何必不到期而死呢？
Be not evil overmuch, and be not foolish. Why come to your end before your time?

你持守这个为美。那个也不要松手。因为敬畏神的人，必从这两样出来。
It is good to take this in your hand and not to keep your hand from that; he who has the fear of God will be free of the two.

智慧使有智慧的人，比城中十个官长更有能力。
Wisdom makes a wise man stronger than ten rulers in a town.

时常行善而不犯罪的义人，世上实在没有。
There is no man on earth of such righteousness that he does good and is free from sin all his days.

人所说的一切话，你不要放在心上，恐怕听见你的仆人咒诅你。
Do not give ear to all the words which men say, for fear of hearing the curses of your servant.

因为你心里知道，自己也曾屡次咒诅别人。
Your heart has knowledge how frequently others have been cursed by you.

我曾用智慧试验这一切事。我说，要得智慧，智慧却离我远。
All this I have put to the test by wisdom; I said, I will be wise, but it was far from me.

万事之理离我甚远，而且最深，谁能测透呢？
Far off is true existence, and very deep; who may have knowledge of it?

我转念，一心要知道，要考察，要寻求智慧，和万事的理由。又要知道邪恶为愚昧，愚昧为狂妄。
I gave my mind to knowledge and to searching for wisdom and the reason of things, and to the discovery that sin is foolish, and that to be foolish is to be without one's senses.

我得知有等妇人，比死还苦，她的心是网罗，手是锁链。凡蒙神喜悦的人，必能躲避她。有罪的人，却被她缠住了。
And I saw a thing more bitter than death, even the woman whose heart is full of tricks and nets, and whose hands are as bands. He with whom God is pleased will get free from her, but the sinner will be taken by her.

传道者说，看哪，一千男子中，我找到一个正直人。但众女子中，没有找到一个。我将这事一一比较，要寻求其理，我心仍要寻找，却未曾找到。
Look! this I have seen, said the Preacher, taking one thing after another to get the true account,


For which my soul is still searching, but I have it not; one man among a thousand have I seen; but a woman among all these I have not seen.

我所找到的，只有一件，就是神造人原是正直，但他们寻出许多巧计。
This only have I seen, that God made men upright, but they have been searching out all sorts of inventions.

谁如智慧人呢？谁知道事情的解释呢？人的智慧使他的脸发光，并使他脸上的暴气改变。
Who is like the wise man? and to whom is the sense of anything clear? A man's wisdom makes his face shining, and his hard face will be changed.

我劝你遵守王的命令。既指神起誓，理当如此。
I say to you, Keep the king's law, from respect for the oath of God.

不要急躁离开王的面前。不要固执行恶。因为他凡事都随自己的心意而行。
Be not quick to go from before him. Be not fixed in an evil design, because he does whatever is pleasing to him.

王的话本有权力，谁敢问他说，你作什么呢？
The word of a king has authority; and who may say to him, What is this you are doing?

凡遵守命令的，必不经历祸患。智慧人的心，能辨明时候和定理。（原文作审判下节同）
Whoever keeps the law will come to no evil: and a wise man's heart has knowledge of time and of decision.

各样事务成就，都有时候和定理。因为人的苦难，重压在他身上。
For every purpose there is a time and a decision, because the sorrow of man is great in him.

他不知道将来的事，因为将来如何，谁能告诉他呢？
No one is certain what is to be, and who is able to say to him when it will be?

无人有权力掌管生命，将生命留住。也无人有权力掌管死期。这场争战，无人能免，邪恶也不能救那好行邪恶的人。
No man has authority over the wind, to keep the wind; or is ruler over the day of his death. In war no man's time is free, and evil will not keep the sinner safe.

这一切我都见过。也专心查考日光之下所作的一切事。有时这人管辖那人，令人受害。
All this have I seen, and have given my heart to all the work which is done under the sun: there is a time when man has power over man for his destruction.

我见恶人埋葬，归入坟墓。又见行正直事的，离开圣地，在城中被人忘记。这也是虚空。
And then I saw evil men put to rest, taken even from the holy place; and they went about and were praised in the town because of what they had done. This again is to no purpose.

因为断定罪名，不立刻施刑，所以世人满心作恶。
Because punishment for an evil work comes not quickly, the minds of the sons of men are fully given to doing evil.

罪人虽然作恶百次，倒享长久的年日。然而我准知道，敬畏神的，就是在他面前敬畏的人，终久必得福乐。
Though a sinner does evil a hundred times and his life is long, I am certain that it will be well for those who go in fear of God and are in fear before him.

恶人却不得福乐，也不得长久的年日。这年日好像影儿，因他不敬畏神。
But it will not be well for the evil-doer; he will not make his days long like a shade, because he has no fear before God.

世上有一件虚空的事，就是义人所遭遇的，反照恶人所行的。又有恶人所遭遇的，反照义人所行的。我说，这也是虚空。
There is a thing which is to no purpose done on the earth: that there are good men to whom is given the same punishment as those who are evil, and there are evil men who get the reward of the good. I say that this again is to no purpose.

我就称赞快乐，原来人在日光之下，莫强如吃喝快乐。因为他在日光之下，神赐他一生的年日，要从劳碌中，时常享受所得的。
So I gave praise to joy, because there is nothing better for a man to do under the sun than to take meat and drink and be happy; for that will be with him in his work all the days of his life which God gives him under the sun.

我专心求智慧，要看世上所作的事。（有昼夜不睡觉，不合眼的）。
When I gave my mind to the knowledge of wisdom and to seeing the business which is done on the earth (and there are those whose eyes see not sleep by day or by night),

我就看明神一切的作为。知道人查不出日光之下所作的事。任凭他费多少力寻查，都查不出来。就是智慧人虽想知道，也是查不出来。
Then I saw all the work of God, and that man may not get knowledge of the work which is done under the sun; because, if a man gives hard work to the search he will not get knowledge, and even if the wise man seems to be coming to the end of his search, still he will be without knowledge.

我将这一切事放在心上，详细考究，就知道义人和智慧人，并他们的作为，都在神手中。或是爱，或是恨，都在他们的前面，人不能知道。
All this I took to heart, and my heart saw it all: that the upright and the wise and their works are in the hand of God; and men may not be certain if it will be love or hate; all is to no purpose before them.

凡临到众人的事，都是一样。义人和恶人，都遭遇一样的事。好人，洁净人和不洁净人，献祭的与不献祭的，也是一样。好人如何，罪人也如何。起誓的如何，怕起誓的也如何。
Because to all there is one event, to the upright man and to the evil, to the clean and to the unclean, to him who makes an offering and to him who makes no offering; as is the good so is the sinner; he who takes an oath is as he who has fear of it.

在日光之下所行的一切事上，有一件祸患，就是众人所遭遇的，都是一样。并且世人的心，充满了恶。活着的时候心里狂妄，后来就归死人那里去了。
This is evil in all things which are done under the sun: that there is one fate for all, and the hearts of the sons of men are full of evil; while they have life their hearts are foolish, and after that--to the dead.

与一切活人相连的，那人还有指望。因为活着的狗，比死了的狮子更强。
For him who is joined to all the living there is hope; a living dog is better than a dead lion.

活着的人，知道必死。死了的人，毫无所知。也不再得赏赐，他们的名无人记念。
The living are conscious that death will come to them, but the dead are not conscious of anything, and they no longer have a reward, because there is no memory of them.

他们的爱，他们的恨，他们的嫉妒，早都消灭了。在日光之下所行的一切事上，他们永不再有分了。
Their love and their hate and their envy are now ended; and they have no longer a part for ever in anything which is done under the sun.

你只管去欢欢喜喜吃你的饭。心中快乐喝你的酒。因为神已经悦纳你的作为。
Come, take your bread with joy, and your wine with a glad heart. God has taken pleasure in your works.

你的衣服当时常洁白。你头上也不要缺少膏油。
Let your clothing be white at all times, and let not your head be without oil.

在你一生虚空的年日，就是神赐你在日光之下虚空的年日，当同你所爱的妻，快活度日。因为那是你生前，在日光之下劳碌的事上所得的分。
Have joy with the woman of your love all the days of your foolish life which he gives you under the sun. Because that is your part in life and in your work which you do under the sun.

凡你手所当作的事，要尽力去作。因为在你所必去的阴间，没有工作，没有谋算，没有知识，也没有智慧。
Whatever comes to your hand to do with all your power, do it because there is no work, or thought, or knowledge, or wisdom in the place of the dead to which you are going.

我又转念，见日光之下，快跑的未必能赢，力战的未必得胜，智慧的未必得粮食，明哲的未必得赀财，灵巧的未必得喜悦。所临到众人的，是在乎当时的机会。
And again I saw under the sun that the reward goes not to him who is quick, or the fruits of war to the strong; and there is no bread for the wise, or wealth for men of learning, or respect for those who have knowledge; but time and chance come to all.

原来人也不知道自己的定期。鱼被恶网圈住，鸟被网罗捉住，祸患忽然临到的时候，世人陷在其中，也是如此。
Even man has no knowledge of his time; like fishes taken in an evil net, or like birds taken by deceit, are the sons of men taken in an evil time when it comes suddenly on them.

我见日光之下有一样智慧，据我看乃是广大，
This again I have seen under the sun as wisdom and it seemed great to me.

就是有一小城，其中的人数稀少，有大君王来攻击，修筑营垒，将城围困。
There was a little town and the number of its men was small, and there came a great king against it and made an attack on it, building works of war round about it.

城中有一个贫穷的智慧人，他用智慧救了那城，却没有人记念那穷人。
Now there was in the town a poor, wise man, and he, by his wisdom, kept the town safe. But no one had any memory of that same poor man.

我就说，智慧胜过勇力。然而那贫穷人的智慧，被人藐视，他的话也无人听从。
Then I said, Wisdom is better than strength, but the poor man's wisdom is not respected, and his words are not given a hearing.

宁可在安静之中听智慧人的言语，不听掌管愚昧人的喊声。
The words of the wise which come quietly to the ear are noted more than the cry of a ruler among the foolish.

智慧胜过打仗的兵器。但一个罪人，能败坏许多善事。
Wisdom is better than instruments of war, but one sinner is the destruction of much good.

死苍蝇，使作香的膏油发出臭气。这样，一点愚昧，也能败坏智慧和尊荣。
Dead flies make the oil of the perfumer give out an evil smell; more valued is a little wisdom than the great glory of the foolish.

智慧人的心居右。愚昧人的心居左。
The heart of the wise man goes in the right direction; but the heart of a foolish man in the wrong.

并且愚昧人行路，显出无知。对众人说，他是愚昧人。
And when the foolish man is walking in the way, he has no sense and lets everyone see that he is foolish.

掌权者的心，若向你发怒，不要离开你的本位，因为柔和能免大过。
If the wrath of the ruler is against you, keep in your place; in him who keeps quiet even great sins may be overlooked.

我见日光之下，有一件祸患，似乎出于掌权的错误，
There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, like an error which comes by chance from a ruler:

就是愚昧人立在高位。富足人坐在低位。
The foolish are placed in high positions, but men of wealth are kept low.

我见过仆人骑马，王子像仆人在地上步行。
I have seen servants on horses, and rulers walking on the earth as servants.

挖陷坑的，自己必掉在其中。拆墙垣的，必为蛇所咬。
He who makes a hole for others will himself go into it, and for him who makes a hole through a wall the bite of a snake will be a punishment.

凿开（或作挪移）石头的，必受损伤。劈开木头的，必遭危险。
He who gets out stones from the earth will be damaged by them, and in the cutting of wood there is danger.

铁器钝了，若不将刃磨快，就必多费气力。但得智慧指教，便有益处。
If the iron has no edge, and he does not make it sharp, then he has to put out more strength; but wisdom makes things go well.

未行法术以先，蛇若咬人，后行法术也是无益。
If a snake gives a bite before the word of power is said, then there is no longer any use in the word of power.

智慧人的口，说出恩言。愚昧人的嘴，吞灭自己。
The words of a wise man's mouth are sweet to all, but the lips of a foolish man are his destruction.

他口中的言语，起头是愚昧。他话的末尾，是奸恶的狂妄。
The first words of his mouth are foolish, and the end of his talk is evil crime.

愚昧人多有言语，人却不知将来有什么事。他身后的事，谁能告诉他呢？
The foolish are full of words; man has no knowledge of what will be; and who is able to say what will be after him?

凡愚昧人，他的劳碌使自己困乏。因为连进城的路他也不知道。
The work of the foolish will be a weariness to him, because he has no knowledge of the way to the town.

邦国阿，你的王若是孩童，你的群臣早晨宴乐，你就有祸了。
Unhappy is the land whose king is a boy, and whose rulers are feasting in the morning.

邦国阿，你的王若是贵胄之子，你的群臣按时吃喝，为要补力，不为酒醉，你就有福了。
Happy is the land whose ruler is of noble birth, and whose chiefs take food at the right time, for strength and not for feasting.

因人懒惰，房顶塌下。因人手懒，房屋滴漏。
When no work is done the roof goes in, and when the hands do nothing water comes into the house.

设摆筵席，是为喜笑。酒能使人快活，钱能叫万事应心。
A feast is for laughing, and wine makes glad the heart; but by the one and the other money is wasted.

你不可咒诅君王，也不可心怀此念。在你卧房也不可咒诅富户。因为空中的鸟，必传扬这声音。有翅膀的，也必述说这事。
Say not a curse against the king, even in your thoughts; and even secretly say not a curse against the man of wealth; because a bird of the air will take the voice, and that which has wings will give news of it.

当将你的粮食撒在水面，因为日久必能得着。
Put out your bread on the face of the waters; for after a long time it will come back to you again.

你要分给七人，或分给八人，因为你不知道将来有什么灾祸临到地上。
Give a part to seven or even to eight, because you have no knowledge of the evil which will be on the earth.

云若满了雨，就必倾倒在地上。树若向南倒，或向北倒，树倒在何处，就存在何处。
If the clouds are full of rain, they send it down on the earth; and if a tree comes down to the south, or the north, in whatever place it comes down, there it will be.

看风的必不撒种。望云的必不收割。
He who is watching the wind will not get the seed planted, and he who is looking at the clouds will not get in the grain.

风从何道来，骨头在怀孕妇人的胎中如何长成，你尚且不得知道，这样，行万事之神的作为，你更不得知道。
As you have no knowledge of the way of the wind, or of the growth of the bones in the body of her who is with child, even so you have no knowledge of the works of God who has made all.

早晨要撒你的种，晚上也不要歇你的手，因为你不知道哪一样发旺，或是早撒的，或是晚撒的，或是两样都好。
In the morning put your seed into the earth, and till the evening let not your hand be at rest; because you are not certain which will do well, this or that--or if the two will be equally good.

光本是佳美的，眼见日光也是可悦的。
Truly the light is sweet, and it is good for the eyes to see the sun.

人活多年，就当快乐多年。然而也当想到黑暗的日子，因为这日子必多，所要来的都是虚空。
But even if a man's life is long and he has joy in all his years, let him keep in mind the dark days, because they will be great in number. Whatever may come is to no purpose.

少年人哪，你在幼年时当快乐。在幼年的日子，使你的心欢畅，行你心所愿行的，看你眼所爱看的，却要知道，为这一切的事，神必审问你。
Have joy, O young man, while you are young; and let your heart be glad in the days of your strength, and go in the ways of your heart, and in the desire of your eyes; but be certain that for all these things God will be your judge.

所以你当从心中除掉愁烦。从肉体克去邪恶。因为一生的开端，和幼年之时，都是虚空的。
So put away trouble from your heart, and sorrow from your flesh; because the early years and the best years are to no purpose.

你趁着年幼，衰败的日子尚未来到，就是你所说，我毫无喜乐的那些年日未曾临近之先，当记念造你的主。
Let your mind be turned to your Maker in the days of your strength, while the evil days come not, and the years are far away when you will say, I have no pleasure in them;

不要等到日头，光明，月亮，星宿，变为黑暗，雨后云彩反回，
While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, are not dark, and the clouds come not back after the rain;

看守房屋的发颤，有力的屈身，推磨的稀少就止息，从窗户往外看的都昏暗，
In the day when the keepers of the house are shaking for fear, and the strong men are bent down, and the women who were crushing the grain are at rest because their number is small, and those looking out of the windows are unable to see;

街门关闭，推磨的响声微小，雀鸟一叫，人就起来，歌唱的女子，也都衰微，
When the doors are shut in the street, and the sound of the crushing is low, and the voice of the bird is soft, and the daughters of music will be made low;

人怕高处，路上有惊慌，杏树开花，蚱蜢成为重担，人所愿的也都废掉，因为人归他永远的家，吊丧的在街上往来，
And he is in fear of that which is high, and danger is in the road, and the tree is white with flower, and the least thing is a weight, and desire is at an end, because man goes to his last resting-place, and those who are sorrowing are in the streets;

银链折断，金罐破裂，瓶子在泉旁损坏，水轮在井口破烂，
Before ever the silver cord is cut, or the vessel of gold is broken, or the pot is broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the water-hole;

尘土仍归于地，灵仍归于赐灵的神。
And the dust goes back to the earth as it was, and the spirit goes back to God who gave it.

传道者说，虚空的虚空，凡事都是虚空。
All things are to no purpose, says the Preacher, all is to no purpose.

再者，传道者因有智慧，仍将知识教训众人。又默想，又考查，又陈说许多箴言。
And because the Preacher was wise he still gave the people knowledge; searching out, testing, and putting in order a great number of wise sayings.

传道者专心寻求可喜悦的言语，是凭正直写的诚实话。
The Preacher made search for words which were pleasing, but his writing was in words upright and true.

智慧人的言语，好像刺棍。会中之师的言语，又像钉稳的钉子。都是一个牧者所赐的。
The words of the wise are pointed, and sayings grouped together are like nails fixed with a hammer; they are given by one guide.

我儿，还有一层，你当受劝戒。着书多，没有穷尽。读书多，身体疲倦。
And further, my son, take note of this: of the making of books there is no end, and much learning is a weariness to the flesh.

这些事都已听见了。总意就是敬畏神，谨守他的诫命，这是人所当尽的本分。（或作这是众人的本分）
This is the last word. All has been said. Have fear of God and keep his laws; because this is right for every man.

因为人所作的事，连一切隐藏的事，无论是善是恶，神都必审问。
God will be judge of every work, with every secret thing, good or evil.