俄巴底亚得了耶和华的默示。论以东，说，我从耶和华那里听见信息，并有使者被差往列国去，说，起来吧，一同起来与以东争战。
The vision of Obadiah. This is what the Lord has said about Edom: We have had word from the Lord, and a representative has been sent among the nations, saying, Up! and let us make war against her.

我使你以东在列国中为最小的，被人大大藐视。
See, I have made you small among the nations: you are much looked down on.

住在山穴中，居所在高处的阿，你因狂傲自欺，心里说，谁能将我拉下地去呢？
You have been tricked by the pride of your heart, O you whose living-place is in the cracks of the rock, whose house is high up; who has said in his heart, Who will make me come down to earth?

你虽如大鹰高飞，在星宿之间搭窝，我必从那里拉下你来。这是耶和华说的。
Though you go up on high like an eagle, though your house is placed among the stars, I will make you come down from there, says the Lord.

盗贼若来在你那里，或强盗夜间而来，（你何竟被剪除）岂不偷窃直到够了呢？摘葡萄的若来到你那里，岂不剩下些葡萄呢？
If thieves came, attacking you by night, (how are you cut off!) would they not go on taking till they had enough? if men came cutting your grapes would they take them all?

以扫的隐密处，何竟被搜寻？他隐藏的宝物何竟被查出？
How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his secret stores looked for!

与你结盟的，都送你上路，直到交界。与你和好的，欺骗你，且胜过你。与你一同吃饭的，设下网罗陷害你。在你心里毫无聪明。
All the men who were united with you have been false to you, driving you out to the edge of the land: the men who were at peace with you have overcome you; they have taken their heritage in your place.

耶和华说，到那日，我岂不从以东除灭智慧人，从以扫山除灭聪明人。
Will I not, in that day, says the Lord, take away the wise men out of Edom, and wisdom out of the mountain of Esau?

提幔哪，你的勇士必惊惶，甚至以扫山的人，都被杀戮剪除。
And your men of war, O Teman, will be overcome with fear, so that every one of them may be cut off from the mountain of Esau.

因你向兄弟雅各行强暴，羞愧必遮盖你，你也必永远断绝。
Because you were the cause of violent death and because of your cruel behaviour to your brother Jacob, you will be covered with shame and will be cut off for ever.

当外人掳掠雅各的财物，外邦人进入他的城门，为耶路撒冷拈阄的日子，你竟站在一旁，像与他们同伙。
Because you were there watching when men from other lands took away his goods, and strange men came into his doors, and put the fate of Jerusalem to the decision of chance; you were like one of them.

你兄弟遭难的日子，你不当瞪眼看着，犹大人被灭的日子，你不当因此欢乐。他们遭难的日子，你不当说狂傲的话。
Do not see with pleasure your brother's evil day, the day of his fate, and do not be glad over the children of Judah on the day of their destruction, or make wide your mouth on the day of trouble.

我民遭灾的日子，你不当进他们的城门。他们遭灾的日子，你不当瞪眼看着他们受苦。他们遭灾的日子，你不当伸手抢他们的财物。
Do not go into the doors of my people on the day of their downfall; do not be looking on their trouble with pleasure on the day of their downfall, or put your hands on their goods on the day of their downfall.

你不当站在岔路口，剪除他们中间逃脱的。他们遭难的日子，你不当将他们剩下的人交付仇敌。
And do not take your place at the cross-roads, cutting off those of his people who get away; and do not give up to their haters those who are still there in the day of trouble.

耶和华降罚的日子临近万国。你怎样行，他也必照样向你行。你的报应必归到你头上。
For the day of the Lord is coming quickly on all nations: as you have done it will be done to you; the reward of your acts will come on your head.

你们犹大人在我圣山怎样喝了苦杯，万国也必照样常常地喝。且喝且咽，他们就归于无有。
For as you have been drinking on my holy mountain, so will all the nations go on drinking without end; they will go on drinking and the wine will go down their throats, and they will be as if they had never been.

在锡安山必有逃脱的人，那山也必成圣。雅各家必得原有的产业。
But in Mount Zion some will be kept safe, and it will be holy; and the children of Jacob will take their heritage.

雅各家必成为大火，约瑟家必为火焰，以扫家必如碎秸，火必将他烧着吞灭。以扫家必无余剩的。这是耶和华说的。
And the children of Jacob will be a fire and those of Joseph a flame, and the children of Esau dry stems of grass, burned up by them till all is gone: and there will be no people living in Esau; for the Lord has said it.

南地的人必得以扫山，高原的人必得非利士地，也得以法莲地，和撒玛利亚地，便雅悯人必得基列。
And they will take the South, and the lowland, and the country of Ephraim, and Gilead, as their heritage.

在迦南人中被掳的以色列众人，必得地直到撒勒法。在西法拉中被掳的耶路撒冷人，必得南地的城邑。
And those of the children of Israel who were the first to be taken away as prisoners, will have their heritage among the Canaanites as far as Zarephath; and those who were taken away from Jerusalem, who are in Sepharad, will have the towns of the South.

必有拯救者上到锡安山，审判以扫山，国度就归耶和华了。
And those who have been kept safe will come up from Mount Zion to be judges of the mountain of Esau; and the kingdom will be the Lord's.

