亚当生塞特。塞特生以挪士。
Adam, Seth, Enosh;

以挪士生该南。该南生玛勒列。玛勒列生雅列。
Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,

雅列生以诺。以诺生玛土撒拉。玛土撒拉生拉麦。
Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech;

拉麦生挪亚。挪亚生闪，含，雅弗。
Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

雅弗的儿子是歌篾，玛各，玛代，雅完，土巴，米设，提拉。
The sons of Japheth: Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.

歌篾的儿子是亚实基拿，低法（低法创世记十章三节是利法），陀迦玛。
And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz and Diphath and Togarmah.

雅完的儿子是以利沙，他施，基提，多单（多单有作罗单的）。
And the sons of Javan: Elishah and Tarshish, Kittim and Rodanim.

含的儿子是古实，麦西，弗，迦南。
The sons of Ham: Cush and Egypt, Put and Canaan.

古实的儿子是西巴，哈腓拉，撒弗他，拉玛，撒弗提迦。拉玛的儿子是示巴，底但。
And the sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah and Sabta and Raama and Sabteca. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.

古实生宁录。他为世上英雄之首。
And Cush was the father of Nimrod: he was the first to be a great man in the earth.

麦西生路低人，亚拿米人，利哈比人，拿弗土希人，
And Egypt was the father of the Ludim and the Anamim and the Lehabim and the Naphtuhim

帕斯鲁细人，迦斯路希人，迦斐托人。从迦斐托出来的有非利士人。
And the Pathrusim and the Casluhim and the Caphtorim (from whom came the Philistines).

迦南生长子西顿，又生赫
And Canaan was the father of Zidon, his oldest son, and Heth,

和耶布斯人，亚摩利人，革迦撒人，
And the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgashite,

希未人，亚基人，西尼人，
And the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite,

亚瓦底人，洗玛利人，并哈马人。
And the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite.

闪的儿子是以拦，亚述，亚法撒，路德，亚兰，乌斯，户勒，基帖，米设（米设创世记十章二十三节作玛施）。
The sons of Shem: Elam and Asshur and Arpachshad and Lud and Aram and Uz and Hul and Gether and Meshech.

亚法撒生沙拉。沙拉生希伯。
And Arpachshad was the father of Shelah, and Shelah was the father of Eber.

希伯生了两个儿子，一个名叫法勒（法勒就是分的意思），因为那时人就分地居住。法勒的兄弟名叫约坍。
And Eber had two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, because in his days a division was made of the earth; and his brother's name was Joktan.

约坍生亚摩答，沙列，哈萨玛非，耶拉，
And Joktan was the father of Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and Jerah

哈多兰，乌萨，德拉，
And Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah

以巴录，亚比玛利，示巴，
And Ebal and Abimael and Sheba

阿斐，哈腓拉，约巴。这都是约坍的儿子。
And Ophir and Havilah and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.

闪生亚法撒。亚法撒生沙拉。
Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah,

沙拉生希伯。希伯生法勒。法勒生拉吴。
Eber, Peleg, Reu,

拉吴生西鹿。西鹿生拿鹤。拿鹤生他拉。
Serug, Nahor, Terah,

他拉生亚伯兰，亚伯兰就是亚伯拉罕。
Abram (that is Abraham).

亚伯拉罕的儿子是以撒，以实玛利。
The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.

以实玛利的儿子记在下面，以实玛利的长子是尼拜约，其次是基达，押德别，米比衫，
These are their generations: the oldest son of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam,

米施玛，度玛，玛撒，哈达，提玛，
Mishma and Dumah, Massa, Hadad and Tema,

伊突，拿非施，基底玛。这都是以实玛利的儿子。
Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.

亚伯拉罕的妾基土拉所生的儿子，就是心兰，约珊，米但，米甸，伊施巴，书亚。约珊的儿子是示巴，底但。
And the sons of Keturah, Abraham's servant-wife: she was the mother of Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.

米甸的儿子是以法，以弗，哈诺，亚比大，以勒大。这都是基土拉的子孙。
And the sons of Midian: Ephah and Epher and Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.

亚伯拉罕生以撒。以撒的儿子是以扫和以色列。
And Abraham was the father of Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.

以扫的儿子是以利法，流珥，耶乌施，雅兰，可拉。
The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel and Jeush and Jalam and Korah.

以利法的儿子是提幔，阿抹，洗玻，迦坦，基纳斯，亭纳，亚玛力。
The sons of Eliphaz: Teman and Omar, Zephi and Gatam, Kenaz and Timna and Amalek.

流珥的儿子是拿哈，谢拉，沙玛，米撒。
The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah and Mizzah.

西珥的儿子是罗坍，朔巴，祭便，亚拿，底顺，以察，底珊。
And the sons of Seir: Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan.

罗坍的儿子是何利，荷幔。罗坍的妹子是亭纳。
And the sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam; and Timna was Lotan's sister.

朔巴的儿子是亚勒文，玛拿辖，以巴录，示非，阿南。祭便的儿子是亚雅，亚拿。
The sons of Shobal: Alian and Manahath and Ebal, Shephi and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah.

亚拿的儿子是底顺。底顺的儿子是哈默兰，伊是班，益兰，基兰。
The sons of Anah: Dishon. And the sons of Dishon: Hamran and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.

以察的儿子是辟罕，撒番，亚干。底珊的儿子是乌斯，亚兰。
The sons of Ezer: Bilhan and Zaavan, Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.

以色列人未有君王治理之先，在以东地作王的记在下面，有比珥的儿子比拉，他的京城名叫亭哈巴。
Now these are the kings who were ruling in the land of Edom, before there was any king over Israel: Bela, the son of Beor; his town was named Dinhabah.

比拉死了，波斯拉人谢拉的儿子约巴接续他作王。
At his death, Jobab, the son of Zerah of Bozrah, became king in his place.

约巴死了，提幔地的人户珊接续他作王。
At the death of Jobab, Husham, from the land of the Temanites, became king in his place.

户珊死了，比达的儿子哈达接续他作王。这哈达就是在摩押地杀败米甸人的，他的京城名叫亚未得。
And at the death of Husham, Hadad, the son of Bedad, who overcame Midian in the field of Moab, became king; his town was named Avith.

哈达死了，玛士利加人桑拉接续他作王。
And at the death of Hadad, Samlah of Masrekah became king in his place.

桑拉死了，大河边的利河伯人扫罗接续他作王。
And at the death of Samlah, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river became king in his place,

扫罗死了，亚革波的儿子巴勒哈南接续他作王。
And at the death of Shaul, Baal-hanan, the son of Achbor, became king in his place.

巴勒哈南死了，哈达接续他作王。他的京城名叫巴伊，他的妻子名叫米希他别，是米萨合的孙女，玛特列的女儿。
And at the death of Baal-hanan, Hadad became king in his place; his town was named Pai, and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.

哈达死了，以东人的族长有亭纳族长，亚勒瓦族长，耶帖族长，
And Hadad came to his end. Now the chiefs of Edom were: the chief of Timna, the chief of Aliah, the chief of Jetheth,

亚何利巴玛族长，以拉族长，比嫩族长，
The chief of Oholibamah, the chief of Elah, the chief of Pinon,

基纳斯族长，提幔族长，米比萨族长，
The chief of Kenaz, the chief of Teman, the chief of Mibzar,

玛基叠族长，以兰族长。这都是以东人的族长。
The chief of Magdiel, the chief of Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.

以色列的儿子是流便，西缅，利未，犹大，以萨迦，西布伦，
These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Judah, Issachar and Zebulun;

但，约瑟，便雅悯，拿弗他利，迦得，亚设。
Dan, Joseph and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

犹大的儿子是珥，俄南，示拉，这三人是迦南人书亚女儿所生的。犹大的长子珥在耶和华眼中看为恶，耶和华就使他死了。
The sons of Judah: Er and Onan and Shelah; these three were his sons by Bathshua, the Canaanite woman. And Er, Judah's oldest son, did evil in the eyes of the Lord; and he put him to death.

犹大的儿妇他玛给犹大生法勒斯和谢拉。犹大共有五个儿子。
And Tamar, his daughter-in-law, had Perez and Zerah by him. All the sons of Judah were five.

法勒斯的儿子是希斯仑，哈母勒。
The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul.

谢拉的儿子是心利，以探，希幔，甲各，大拉（大拉即达大），共五人。
And the sons of Zerah: Zimri and Ethan and Heman and Calcol and Dara; five of them.

迦米的儿子是亚干，这亚干在当灭的物上犯了罪，连累了以色列人。
And the sons of Carmi: Achan, the troubler of Israel, who did wrong about the cursed thing.

以探的儿子是亚撒利雅。
And the son of Ethan: Azariah.

希斯仑所生的儿子是耶拉篾，兰，基路拜。
And the sons of Hezron, the offspring of his body: Jerahmeel and Ram and Chelubai.

兰生亚米拿达。亚米拿达生拿顺。拿顺作犹大人的首领。
And Ram was the father of Amminadab; and Amminadab was the father of Nahshon, chief of the children of Judah;

拿顺生撒门。撒门生波阿斯。
And Nahshon was the father of Salma, and Salma was the father of Boaz,

波阿斯生俄备得。俄备得生耶西。
And Boaz was the father of Obed, and Obed was the father of Jesse,

耶西生长子以利押，次子亚比拿达，三子示米亚（示米亚即沙玛，见撒母耳上十六章九节），
And Jesse was the father of Eliab, his oldest son, and Abinadab, the second, and Shimea, the third,

四子拿坦业，五子拉代，
Nethanel, the fourth, Raddai, the fifth,

六子阿鲜，七子大卫。
Ozem, the sixth, David, the seventh;

他们的姐妹是洗鲁雅和亚比该。洗鲁雅的儿子是亚比筛，约押，亚撒黑，共三人。
And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. And Zeruiah had three sons: Abishai and Joab and Asahel.

亚比该生亚玛撒。亚玛撒的父亲是以实玛利人益帖。
And Abigail was the mother of Amasa; and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.

希斯仑的儿子迦勒娶阿苏巴和耶略为妻，阿苏巴的儿子是耶设，朔吧，押墩。
And Caleb, the son of Hezron, had children by Azubah his wife, the daughter of Jerioth; and these were her sons: Jesher and Shobab and Ardon.

阿苏巴死了，迦勒又娶以法他，生了户珥。
And after the death of Azubah, Caleb took as his wife Ephrath, who was the mother of Hur.

户珥生乌利。乌利生比撒列。
And Hur was the father of Uri; and Uri was the father of Bezalel.

希斯仑正六十岁娶了基列父亲玛吉的女儿，与她同房。玛吉的女儿生了西割。
And after that, Hezron had connection with the daughter of Machir, the father of Gilead, whom he took as his wife when he was sixty years old; and she had Segub by him.

西割生睚珥。睚珥在基列地有二十三个城邑。
And Segub was the father of Jair, who had twenty-three towns in the land of Gilead.

后来基述人和亚兰人夺了睚珥的城邑，并基纳和其乡村，共六十个。这都是基列父亲玛吉之子的。
And Geshur and Aram took the tent-towns of Jair from them, with Kenath and the small places round it, even sixty towns. All these were the sons of Machir, the father of Gilead.

希斯仑在迦勒以法他死后，他的妻亚比雅给他生了亚施户。亚施户是提哥亚的父亲。
And after the death of Hezron, Caleb had connection with Ephrath, his father Hezron's wife, and she gave birth to his son Asshur, the father of Tekoa.

希斯仑的长子耶拉篾生长子兰，又生布拿，阿连，阿鲜，亚希雅。
And the sons of Jerahmeel, the oldest son of Hezron, were Ram, the oldest, and Bunah and Oren and Ozem and Ahijah.

耶拉篾又娶一妻名叫亚她拉，是阿南的母亲。
And Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah: she was the mother of Onam.

耶拉篾长子兰的儿子是玛斯，雅悯，以结。
And the sons of Ram, the oldest son of Jerahmeel, were Maaz and Jamin and Eker.

阿南的儿子是沙买，雅大。沙买的儿子是拿答，亚比述。
And the sons of Onam were Shammai and Jada; and the sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.

亚比述的妻名叫亚比孩，亚比孩给他生了亚办和摩利。
And the name of Abishur's wife was Abihail; and she had Ahban and Molid by him.

拿答的儿子是西列，亚遍。西列死了没有儿子。
And the sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; but Seled came to his end without sons.

亚遍的儿子是以示。以示的儿子是示珊。示珊的儿子是亚来。
And the sons of Appaim: Ishi. And the sons of Ishi: Sheshan. And the sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.

沙买兄弟雅大的儿子是益帖，约拿单。益帖死了没有儿子。
And the sons of Jada, the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan; and Jether came to his end without sons.

约拿单的儿子是比勒，撒萨。这都是撒拉篾的子孙。
And the sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.

示珊没有儿子，只有女儿。示珊有一个仆人名叫耶哈，是埃及人。
Now Sheshan had no sons, but only daughters. And Sheshan had an Egyptian servant, whose name was Jarha.

示珊将女儿给了仆人耶哈为妻，给他生了亚太。
And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha, his servant, as a wife; and she had Attai by him.

亚太生拿单。拿单生撒拔。
And Attai was the father of Nathan, and Nathan was the father of Zabad,

撒拔生以弗拉。以弗拉生俄备得。
And Zabad was the father of Ephlal, and Ephlal was the father of Obed,

俄备得生耶户。耶户生亚撒利雅。
And Obed was the father of Jehu, and Jehu was the father of Azariah,

亚撒利雅生希利斯。希利斯生以利亚萨。
And Azariah was the father of Helez, and Helez was the father of Eleasah,

以利亚萨生西斯买。西斯买生沙龙。
And Eleasah was the father of Sismai, and Sismai was the father of Shallum,

沙龙生耶加米雅。耶加米雅生以利沙玛。
And Shallum was the father of Jekamiah, and Jekamiah was the father of Elishama.

耶拉篾兄弟迦勒的长子米沙，是西弗之祖玛利沙的儿子，是希伯仑之祖。
And the sons of Caleb, the brother of Jerahmeel, were Mareshah, his oldest son, who was the father of Ziph and Hebron.

希伯仑的儿子是可拉，他普亚，利肯，示玛。
And the sons of Hebron: Korah and Tappuah and Rekem and Shema.

示玛生拉含，是约干之祖。利肯生沙买。
And Shema was the father of Raham, the father of Jorkeam, and Rekem was the father of Shammai.

沙买的儿子是玛云。玛云是伯夙之祖。
And the son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.

迦勒的妾以法生哈兰，摩撒，迦谢。哈兰生迦卸。
And Ephah, Caleb's servant-wife, had Haran and Moza and Gazez; and Haran was the father of Gazez.

雅代的儿子是利健，约坦，基珊，毗力，以法，沙亚弗。
And the sons of Jahdai: Regem and Jotham and Geshan and Pelet and Ephah and Shaaph.

迦勒的妾玛迦生示别，特哈拿，
Maacah, Caleb's servant-wife, was the mother of Sheber and Tirhanah,

又生麦玛拿之祖沙亚弗，抹比拿和基比亚之祖示法。迦勒的女儿是押撒。
And Shaaph, the father of Madmannah, Sheva, the father of Machbena and the father of Gibea; and Caleb's daughter was Achsah. These were the sons of Caleb.

迦勒的子孙就是以法他的长子，户珥的儿子，记在下面，基列耶琳之祖朔巴，
The sons of Hur, the oldest son of Ephrathah; Shobal, the father of Kiriath-jearim,

伯利恒之祖萨玛，伯迦得之祖哈勒。
Salma, the father of Beth-lehem, Hareph, the father of Beth-gader.

基列耶琳之祖朔巴的子孙是哈罗以和一半米努哈人（米努哈人即玛拿哈人）。
And Shobal, the father of Kiriath-jearim, had sons: Haroeh, half of the Manahathites.

基列耶琳的诸族是以帖人，布特人，舒玛人，密来人，又从这些族中生出琐拉人和以实陶人来。
And the families of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites and the Puthites and the Shumathites and the Mishraites; from them came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.

萨玛的子孙是伯利恒人，尼陀法人，亚他绿伯约押人，一半玛拿哈人，琐利人，
The sons of Salma: Beth-lehem and the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-Joab and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.

和住雅比斯众文士家的特拉人，示米押人，苏甲人。这都是基尼人利甲家之祖哈末所生的。
And the families of scribes who were living at Jabez: the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are the Kenites, the offspring of Hammath, the father of the family of Rechab.

大卫在希伯仑所生的儿子记在下面，长子暗嫩是耶斯列人亚希暖生的。次子但以利是迦密人亚比该生的。
Now these were David's sons, whose birth took place in Hebron: the oldest Amnon, by Ahinoam of Jezreel; the second Daniel, by Abigail the Carmelite woman;

三子押沙龙是基述王达买的女儿玛迦生的。四子亚多尼雅是哈及生的。
The third Absalom, the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur; the fourth Adonijah, the son of Haggith;

五子示法提雅是亚比他生的。六子以特念是大卫的妻以格拉生的。
The fifth Shephatiah, by Abital; the sixth Ithream, by Eglah his wife.

这六人都是大卫在希伯仑生的。大卫在希伯仑作王七年零六个月，在耶路撒冷作王三十三年。
He had six sons in Hebron; he was ruling there for seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem for thirty-three years.

大卫在耶路撒冷所生的儿子是示米亚，朔吧，拿单，所罗门。这四人是亚米利的女儿拔书亚生的。
And in Jerusalem he had four sons, Shimea and Shobab and Nathan and Solomon, by Bath-shua, the daughter of Ammiel;

还有益辖，以利沙玛，以利法列，
And Ibhar and Elishama and Eliphelet

挪迦，尼斐，雅非亚，
And Nogah and Nepheg and Japhia

以利沙玛，以利雅大，以利法列，共九人。
And Elishama and Eliada and Eliphelet, nine.

这都是大卫的儿子，还有他们的妹子他玛，妃嫔的儿子不在其内。
All these were the sons of David, in addition to the sons of his servant-wives; and Tamar was their sister.

所罗门的儿子是罗波安。罗波安的儿子是亚比雅。亚比雅的儿子是亚撒。亚撒的儿子是约沙法。
And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abijah was his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,

约沙法的儿子是约兰。约兰的儿子是亚哈谢。亚哈谢的儿子是约阿施。
Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,

约阿施的儿子是亚玛谢。亚玛谢的儿子是亚撒利雅。亚撒利雅的儿子是约坦。
Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,

约坦的儿子是亚哈斯。亚哈斯的儿子是希西家。希西家的儿子是玛拿西。
Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,

玛拿西的儿子是亚们。亚们的儿子是约西亚。
Amon his son, Josiah his son.

约西亚的长子是约哈难，次子是约雅敬，三子是西底家，四子是沙龙。
And the sons of Josiah: the oldest Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.

约雅敬的儿子是耶哥尼雅和西底家。
And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.

耶哥尼雅被掳。他的儿子是撒拉铁，
And the sons of Jeconiah, who was taken prisoner: Shealtiel his son,

玛基兰，毗大雅，示拿萨，耶加米，何沙玛，尼大比雅。
And Malchiram and Pedaiah and Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama and Nedabiah.

毗大雅的儿子是所罗巴伯，示每。所罗巴伯的儿子是米书兰，哈拿尼雅，他们的妹子名叫示罗密。
And the sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei; and the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;

米书兰的儿子是哈舒巴，阿黑，比利家，哈撒底，于沙希悉，共五人。
And Hashubah and Ohel and Berechiah and Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed, five.

哈拿尼雅的儿子是毗拉提，耶筛亚。还有利法雅的众子，亚珥难的众子，俄巴底亚的众子，示迦尼的众子。
And the sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah.

示迦尼的儿子是示玛雅。示玛雅的儿子是哈突，以甲，巴利亚，尼利雅，沙法，共六人。
And the sons of Shecaniah: Shemaiah; and the sons of Shemaiah: Hattush and Igal and Bariah and Neariah and Shaphat, six.

尼利雅的儿子是以利约乃，希西家，亚斯利干，共三人。
And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai and Hizkiah and Azrikam, three.

以利约乃的儿子是何大雅，以利亚实，毗莱雅，阿谷，约哈难，第莱雅，阿拿尼，共七人。
And the sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah and Eliashib and Pelaiah and Akkub and Johanan and Delaiah and Anani, seven.

犹大的儿子是法勒斯，希斯仑，迦米，户珥，朔巴。
The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron and Carmi and Hur and Shobal.

朔巴的儿子利亚雅生雅哈。雅哈生亚户买和拉哈。这是琐拉人的诸族。
And Reaiah, the son of Shobal, was the father of Jahath; and Jahath was the father of Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.

以坦之祖的儿子是耶斯列，伊施玛，伊得巴。他们的妹子名叫哈悉勒玻尼。
And these were the sons of Hur, the father of Etam: Jezreel and Ishma and Idbash, and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi;

基多之祖是毗努伊勒。户沙之祖是以谢珥。这都是伯利恒之祖以法他的长子户珥所生的。
And Penuel, the father of Gedor, and Ezer, the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the oldest son of Ephrathah, the father of Beth-lehem.

提哥亚之祖亚施户有两个妻子，一名希拉，一名拿拉。
And Ashhur, the father of Tekoa, had two wives, Helah and Naarah.

拿拉给亚施户生亚户撒，希弗，提米尼，哈辖斯他利。这都是拿拉的儿子。
And Naarah had Ahuzzam by him, and Hepher and Temeni and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.

希拉的儿子是洗列，琐辖，伊提南。
And the sons of Helah were Zereth, Izhar and Ethnan.

哥斯生亚诺，琐比巴，并哈仑儿子亚哈黑的诸族。
And Koz was the father of Anub and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.

雅比斯比他众弟兄更尊贵，他母亲给他起名叫雅比斯，意思说，我生他甚是痛苦。
And Jabez was honoured more than his brothers; but his mother had given him the name Jabez, saying, Because I gave birth to him with sorrow.

雅比斯求告以色列的神说，甚愿你赐福与我，扩张我的境界，常与我同在，保佑我不遭患难，不受艰苦。神就应允他所求的。
And Jabez made a prayer to the God of Israel, saying, If only you would truly give me a blessing, and make wider the limits of my land, and let your hand be with me, and keep me from evil, so that I may not be troubled by it! And God gave him his desire.

书哈的弟兄基绿生米黑，米黑是伊施屯之祖。
And Chelub, the brother of Shuhah, was the father of Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.

伊施屯生伯拉巴，巴西亚，并珥拿辖之祖提欣拿，这都是利迦人。
And Eshton was the father of Bethrapha and Paseah and Tehinnah, the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah.

基纳斯的儿子是俄陀聂，西莱雅。俄陀聂的儿子是哈塔。
And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: Hathath.

悯挪太生俄弗拉。西莱雅生革夏纳欣人之祖约押。他们都是匠人。
And Meonothai was the father of Ophrah; and Seraiah was the father of Joab, the father of Ge-harashim; they were expert workmen.

耶孚尼的儿子是迦勒。迦勒的儿子是以路，以拉，拿安。以拉的儿子是基纳斯。
And the sons of Caleb, the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and the son of Elah: Kenaz.

耶哈利勒的儿子是西弗，西法，提利，亚撒列。
And the sons of Jehallelel: Ziph and Ziphah, Tiria and Asarel.

以斯拉的儿子是益帖，米列，以弗，雅伦。米列娶法老女儿比提雅为妻，生米利暗，沙买，和以实提摩之祖益巴。米列又娶犹大女子为妻，生基多之祖雅列，梭哥之祖希伯，和撒挪亚之祖耶古铁。
And the sons of Ezrah: Jether and Mered and Epher and Jalon; and these are the sons of Bithiah, the daughter of Pharaoh, the wife of Mered. And she became the mother of Miriam and Shammai and Ishbah, the father of Eshtemoa.


And his wife, a woman of the tribe of Judah, became the mother of Jered, the father of Gedor, and Heber, the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel, the father of Zanoah.

荷第雅的妻是拿含的妹子，她所生的儿子是迦米人基伊拉和玛迦人以实提摩之祖。
And the sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.

示门的儿子是暗嫩，林拿，便哈南，提伦。以示的儿子是梭黑与便梭黑。
And the sons of Shimon: Amnon and Rinnah, Ben-hanan and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi: Zoheth; and the son of Zoheth. ...

犹大的儿子是示拉。示拉的儿子是利迦之祖珥，玛利沙之祖拉大，和属亚实比族织细麻布的各家。
The sons of Shelah, the son of Judah: Er, the father of Lecah, and Laadah, the father of Mareshah, and the families of those who made delicate linen, of the family of Ashbea;

还有约敬，哥西巴人，约阿施，萨拉，就是在摩押地掌权的，又有雅叔比利恒。这都是古时所记载的。
And Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, who were rulers in Moab, and went back to Beth-lehem. And the records are very old.

这些人都是窑匠，是尼他应和基低拉的居民。与王同处，为王作工。
These were the potters, and the people living among planted fields with walls round them; they were there to do the king's work.

西缅的儿子是尼母利，雅悯，雅立，谢拉，扫罗。
The sons of Simeon: Nemuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;

扫罗的儿子是沙龙。沙龙的儿子是米比衫。米比衫的儿子是米施玛。
Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.

米施玛的儿子是哈母利。哈母利的儿子是撒刻。撒刻的儿子是示每。
And the sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.

示每有十六个儿子，六个女儿，他弟兄的儿女不多，他们各家不如犹大族的人丁增多。
And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers had only a small number of children, and their family was not as fertile as the children of Judah.

西缅人住在别是巴，摩拉大，哈萨书亚，
And they were living at Beer-sheba and Moladah and Hazar-shual,

辟拉，以森，陀腊，
And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,

彼土利，何珥玛，洗革拉，
And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,

伯玛嘉博，哈萨苏撒，伯比利，沙拉音，这些城邑直到大卫作王的时候都是属西缅人的。
And at Beth-marcaboth, and at Hazarsusim, and at Beth-biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their towns till David became king.

他们的五个城邑是以坦，亚因，临门，陀健，亚珊。
And their small towns were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen and Ashan, five towns;

还有属城的乡村，直到巴力。这是他们的住处，他们都有家谱。
And all the small places round these towns, as far as Baalath-beer, the high place of the South. These were their living-places, and they have lists of their generations.

还有米所巴，雅米勒，亚玛谢的儿子约沙，
And Meshobab and Jamlech and Joshah, the son of Amaziah,

约珥，约示比的儿子耶户。约示比是西莱雅的儿子。西莱雅是亚薛的儿子。
And Joel and Jehu, the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,

还有以利约乃，雅哥巴，约朔海，亚帅雅，亚底业，耶西篾，比拿雅，
And Elioenai and Jaakobah and Jeshohaiah and Asaiah and Adiel and Jesimiel and Benaiah,

示非的儿子细撒。示非是亚龙的儿子。亚龙是耶大雅的儿子。耶大雅是申利的儿子。申利是示玛雅的儿子。
And Ziza, the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah;

以上所记的人名都是作族长的，他们宗族的人数增多。
These, whose names are given, were chiefs in their families, and their families became very great in number.

他们往平原东边基多口去，寻找牧放羊群的草场，
And they went to the opening into Gedor, as far as the east side of the valley, in search of grass-land for their flocks.

寻得肥美的草场地，又宽阔又平静。从前住那里的是含族的人。
And they came to some good fertile grass-land, in a wide quiet country of peace-loving people; for the people who were living there before were of the offspring of Ham.

以上录名的人，在犹大王希西家年间，来攻击含族人的帐棚和那里所有的米乌尼人，将他们灭尽，就住在他们的地方，直到今日，因为那里有草场可以牧放羊群。
And these whose names are given came in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and made an attack on the Meunim who were living there, and put an end to them to this day, and took their place, because there was grass there for their flocks.

这西缅人中，有五百人上西珥山，率领他们的是以示的儿子毗拉提，尼利雅，利法雅，和乌薛，
And some of them, five hundred of the sons of Simeon, went to the hill-country of Seir, with Pelatiah and Neariah and Rephaiah and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, at their head.

杀了逃脱剩下的亚玛力人，就住在那里直到今日。
And they put to death the rest of the Amalekites who had got away safely, and made it their living-place to this day.

以色列的长子原是流便。因他污秽了父亲的床，他长子的名分就归了约瑟。只是按家谱他不算长子。
And the sons of Reuben, the oldest son of Israel, (for he was the oldest son, but, because he made his father's bride-bed unclean, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel; but he is not to be given the place of the oldest.

犹大胜过一切弟兄，君王也是从他而出。长子的名分却归约瑟。
Though Judah became stronger than his brothers, and from him came the ruler, the birthright was Joseph's:)

以色列长子流便的儿子是哈诺，法路，希斯伦，迦米。
The sons of Reuben, the oldest son of Israel: Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi.

约珥的儿子是示玛雅。示玛雅的儿子是歌革。歌革的儿子是示每。
The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,

示每的儿子是米迦。米迦的儿子是利亚雅。利亚雅的儿子是巴力。
Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,

巴力的儿子是备拉。这备拉作流便支派的首领，被亚述王提革拉毗尼色掳去。
Beerah his son, whom Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, took away as a prisoner: he was chief of the Reubenites.

他的弟兄照着宗族，按着家谱作族长的是耶利，撒迦利雅，比拉。
And his brothers by their families, when the list of their generations was made up: the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,

比拉是亚撒的儿子。亚撒是示玛的儿子。示玛是约珥的儿子。约珥所住的地方是从亚罗珥直到尼波和巴力免，
And Bela, the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who was living in Aroer, as far as Nebo and Baal-meon;

又向东延到伯拉河这边的旷野，因为他们在基列地牲畜增多。
And to the east his limits went as far as the starting point of the waste land, ending at the river Euphrates, because their cattle were increased in number in the land of Gilead.

扫罗年间，他们与夏甲人争战，夏甲人倒在他们手下，他们就在基列东边的全地，住在夏甲人的帐棚里。
And in the days of Saul they made war on the Hagarites, and overcame them; and they put up their tents through all the land east of Gilead.

迦得的子孙在流便对面，住在巴珊地，延到撒迦。
And the sons of Gad were living opposite to them, in the land of Bashan as far as Salecah:

他们中间有作族长的约珥，有作副族长的沙番，还有雅乃和住在巴珊的沙法。
Joel the chief, and Shapham the second, and Janai and Shaphat in Bashan;

他们族弟兄是米迦勒，米书兰，示巴，约赖，雅干，细亚，希伯，共七人。
And their brothers, the men of their family: Michael and Meshullam and Sheba and Jorai and Jacan and Zia and Eber, seven of them.

这都是亚比孩的儿子。亚比孩是户利的儿子。户利是耶罗亚的儿子。耶罗亚是基列的儿子。基列是米迦勒的儿子。米迦勒是耶示筛的儿子。耶示筛是耶哈多的儿子。耶哈多是布斯的儿子。
These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz;

还有古尼的孙子，押比叠的儿子亚希。这都是作族长的。
Ahi, the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, head of their families.

他们住在基列与巴珊和巴珊的乡村，并沙仑的郊野，直到四围的交界。
And they were living in Gilead in Bashan, in its small towns and in all the grass-land of Sirion as far as its limits.

这些人在犹大王约坦并在以色列王耶罗波安年间，都载入家谱。
All these were listed under the names of their families, in the time of Jotham, king of Judah, and in the time of Jeroboam, king of Israel.

流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人，能拿盾牌和刀剑，拉弓射箭，出征善战的勇士共有四万四千七百六十名。
There were forty-four thousand, seven hundred and sixty of the sons of Reuben and of the Gadites and of the half-tribe of Manasseh, all strong men, expert in the use of the body-cover, the sword, and the bow, and in the art of war, all able to take up arms.

他们与夏甲人，伊突人，拿非施人，挪答人争战。
And they went to war against the Hagarites, with Jetur and Naphish and Nodab.

他们得了神的帮助，夏甲人和跟随夏甲的人都交在他们手中。因为他们在阵上呼求神，倚赖神，神就应允他们。
And they were helped against them, so that the Hagarites, and those with them, were given into their power. For they sent up prayers to God in the fight, and he gave ear to them, because they put their faith in him.

他们掳掠了夏甲人的牲畜，有骆驼五万，羊二十五万，驴二千。又有人十万。
And they took away their cattle: fifty thousand camels, two hundred and fifty thousand sheep, and two thousand asses, and a hundred thousand men.

敌人被杀仆倒的甚多，因为这争战是出乎神。他们就住在敌人的地上，直到被掳的时候。
And a very great number went to their death, because the war was God's purpose. And they went on living in their place till they were taken away as prisoners.

玛拿西半支派的人住在那地。从巴珊延到巴力黑们，示尼珥与黑门山。
And the men of the half-tribe of Manasseh were living in the land: and their numbers were increased till all the land from Bashan to Baal-hermon and Senir and the mountain Hermon was theirs.

他们的族长是以弗，以示，以列，亚斯列，耶利米，何达威雅，雅叠，都是大能的勇士，是有名的人，也是作族长的。
And these were the heads of their families: Epher and Ishi and Eliel and Azriel and Jeremiah and Hodaviah and Jahdiel, men of war, of great name, heads of families.

他们得罪了他们列祖的神，随从那地之民的神行邪淫。这民就是神在他们面前所除灭的。
And they did evil against the God of their fathers, worshipping the gods of the people of the land, whom God had put to destruction before them.

故此，以色列的神激动亚述王普勒和亚述王提革拉毗尼色的心，他们就把流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人掳到哈腊，哈博，哈拉与歌散河边，直到今日还在那里。
And the God of Israel put an impulse into the heart of Pul, king of Assyria, and of Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, who took them away as prisoners, all the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, to Halah and Habor and Hara and to the river of Gozan, to this day.

利未的儿子是革顺，哥辖，米拉利。
The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

歌辖的儿子是暗兰，以斯哈，希伯伦，乌薛。
And the sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.

暗兰的儿子是亚伦，摩西，还有女儿米利暗。亚伦的儿子是拿答，亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛。
And the sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses and Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

以利亚撒生非尼哈。非尼哈生亚比书。
Eleazar was the father of Phinehas; Phinehas was the father of Abishua;

亚比书生布基。布基生乌西。
And Abishua was the father of Bukki, and Bukki was the father of Uzzi,

乌西生西拉希雅。西拉希雅生米拉约。
And Uzzi was the father of Zerahiah, and Zerahiah was the father of Meraioth;

米拉约生亚玛利雅。亚玛利雅生亚希突。
Meraioth was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub,

亚希突生撒督。撒督生亚希玛斯。
And Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Ahimaaz,

亚希玛斯生亚撒利雅。亚撒利雅生约哈难。
And Ahimaaz was the father of Azariah, and Azariah was the father of Johanan,

约哈难生亚撒利雅（这亚撒利雅在所罗门于耶路撒冷所建造的殿中，供祭司的职分）。
And Johanan was the father of Azariah, (he was priest in the house which Solomon put up in Jerusalem:)

亚撒利雅生亚玛利雅。亚玛利雅生亚希突。
And Azariah was the father of Amariah, and Amariah was the father of Ahitub,

亚希突生撒督。撒督生沙龙。
And Ahitub was the father of Zadok, and Zadok was the father of Shallum,

沙龙生希勒家。希勒家生亚撒利雅。
And Shallum was the father of Hilkiah, and Hilkiah was the father of Azariah,

亚撒利雅生西莱雅。西莱雅生约萨答。
And Azariah was the father of Seraiah, and Seraiah was the father of Jehozadak;

当耶和华借尼布甲尼撒的手掳掠犹大和耶路撒冷人的时候，这约萨答也被掳去。
And Jehozadak went as a prisoner when the Lord took away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.

利未的儿子是革顺，哥辖，米拉利。
The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.

革顺的儿子名叫立尼，示每。
And these are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.

哥辖的儿子是暗兰，以斯哈，希伯伦，乌薛。
And the sons of Kohath were Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.

米拉利的儿子是抹利，母示。这是按着利未人宗族分的各家。
The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites listed by the names of their fathers.

革顺的儿子是立尼。立尼的儿子是雅哈。雅哈的儿子是薪玛。
Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,

薪玛的儿子是约亚。约亚的儿子是易多。易多的儿子是谢拉。谢拉的儿子是耶特赖。
Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.

哥辖的儿子是亚米拿达。亚米拿达的儿子是可拉。可拉的儿子是亚惜。
The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,

亚惜的儿子是以利加拿。以利加拿的儿子是以比雅撒。以比雅撒的儿子是亚惜。
Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,

亚惜的儿子是他哈。他哈的儿子是乌列。乌列的儿子是乌西雅。乌西雅的儿子是少罗。
Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.

以利加拿的儿子是亚玛赛和亚希摩。
And the sons of Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth.

亚希摩的儿子是以利加拿。以利加拿的儿子是琐菲。琐菲的儿子是拿哈。
Elkanah his son: Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,

拿哈的儿子是以利押。以利押的儿子是耶罗罕。耶罗罕的儿子是以利加拿。以利加拿的儿子是撒母耳。
Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son, Samuel his son.

撒母耳的长子是约珥，次子是亚比亚。
And the sons of Samuel: the oldest Joel, and the second Abiah.

米拉利的儿子是抹利。抹利的儿子是立尼。立尼的儿子是示每。示每的儿子是乌撒。
The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,

乌撒的儿子是示米亚。示米亚的儿子是哈基雅。哈基雅的儿子是亚帅雅。
Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.

约柜安设之后，大卫派人在耶和华殿中管理歌唱的事。
And these are those whom David made responsible for the music in the house of the Lord, after the ark had rest.

他们就在会幕前当歌唱的差，及至所罗门在耶路撒冷建造了耶和华的殿，他们便按着班次供职。
They gave worship with songs before the House of the Tent of meeting, till Solomon put up the house of the Lord in Jerusalem; and they took their places for their work in their regular order.

供职的人和他们的子孙记在下面，哥辖的子孙中有歌唱的希幔。希幔是约珥的儿子。约珥是撒母耳的儿子。
And these are those who did this work, and their sons. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman, who made melody, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,

撒母耳是以利加拿的儿子。以利加拿是耶罗罕的儿子。耶罗罕是以列的儿子。以列是陀亚的儿子。
The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,

陀亚是苏弗的儿子。苏弗是以利加拿的儿子。以利加拿是玛哈的儿子。玛哈是亚玛赛的儿子。
The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,

亚玛赛是以利加拿的儿子。以利加拿是约珥的儿子。约珥是亚撒利雅的儿子。亚撒利雅是西番雅的儿子。
The son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,

西番雅是他哈的儿子。他哈是亚惜的儿子。亚惜是以比雅撒的儿子。以比雅撒是可拉的儿子。
The son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,

可拉是以斯哈的儿子。以斯哈是哥辖的儿子。哥辖是利未的儿子。利未是以色列的儿子。
The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.

希幔的族兄亚萨是比利家的儿子，亚萨在希幔右边供职。比利家是示米亚的儿子。
And his brother Asaph, whose place was at his right hand, Asaph, the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea,

示米亚是米迦勒的儿子。米迦勒是巴西雅的儿子。巴西雅是玛基雅的儿子。
The son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,

玛基雅是伊特尼的儿子。伊特尼是谢拉的儿子。谢拉是亚大雅的儿子。
The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,

亚大雅是以探的儿子。以探是薪玛的儿子。薪玛是示每的儿子。
The son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,

示每是雅哈的儿子。雅哈是革顺的儿子。革顺是利未的儿子。
The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.

他们的族弟兄米拉利的子孙，在他们左边供职的有以探。以探是基示的儿子。基示是亚伯底的儿子。亚伯底是玛鹿的儿子。
And on the left their brothers, the sons of Merari: Ethan, the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,

玛鹿是哈沙比雅的儿子。哈沙比雅是亚玛谢的儿子。亚玛谢是希勒家的儿子。
The son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,

希勒家是暗西的儿子。暗西是巴尼的儿子。巴尼是沙麦的儿子。
The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,

沙麦是末力的儿子。末力是母示的儿子。母示是米拉利的儿子。米拉利是利未的儿子。
The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.

他们的族弟兄利未人也被派办神殿中的一切事。
And their brothers the Levites were responsible for all the work of the Tent of the house of God.

亚伦和他的子孙在燔祭坛和香坛上献祭烧香，又在至圣所办理一切的事，为以色列人赎罪，是照神仆人摩西所吩咐的。
But Aaron and his sons made offerings on the altar of burned offering, and on the altar of perfume, for all the work of the most holy place, and to take away the sin of Israel, doing everything ordered by Moses, the servant of God.

亚伦的儿子是以利亚撒。以利亚撒的儿子是非尼哈。非尼哈的儿子是亚比书。
And these are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,

亚比书的儿子是布基。布基的儿子是乌西。乌西的儿子是西拉希雅。
Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,

西拉希雅的儿子是米拉约。米拉约的儿子是亚玛利雅。亚玛利雅的儿子是亚希突。
Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,

亚希突的儿子是撒督。撒督的儿子是亚希玛斯。
Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.

他们的住处按着境内的营寨，记在下面。哥辖族亚伦的子孙先拈阄得地，
Now these are their living-places, the limits inside which they were to put up their tents: to the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, because they had the first selection,

在犹大地中得了希伯仑和四围的郊野。
To them they gave Hebron and its outskirts in the land of Judah;

只是属城的田地和村庄都为耶孚尼的儿子迦勒所得。
But the open country of the town, and the small places round it, they gave to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh.

亚伦的子孙得了逃城希伯仑，又得了立拿与其郊野，雅提珥，以实提莫与其郊野。
And to the sons of Aaron they gave Hebron, the town to which men might go in flight and be safe, and Libnah with its outskirts, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with its outskirts,

希仑与其郊野，底璧与其郊野，
And Hilen with its outskirts, Debir with its outskirts,

亚珊与其郊野，伯示麦与其郊野。
And Ashan with its outskirts, and Beth-shemesh with its outskirts;

在便雅悯支派的地中，得了迦巴与其郊野，阿勒篾与其郊野，亚拿突与其郊野。他们诸家所得的城共十三座。
And from the tribe of Benjamin: Geba with its outskirts, and Alemeth with its outskirts, and Anathoth with its outskirts. All their towns among their families were thirteen towns.

哥辖族其余的人又拈阄，在玛拿西半支派的地中得了十座城。
And to the rest of the sons of Kohath there were given by the Lord's decision ten towns out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim and out of the tribe of Dan and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh.

革顺族按着宗族，在以萨迦支派的地中，亚设支派的地中，拿弗他利支派的地中，巴珊内玛拿西支派的地中，得了十三座城。
And to the sons of Gershom, by their families, out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen towns.

米拉利族按着宗族拈阄，在流便支派的地中，迦得支派的地中，西布伦支派的地中，得了十二座城。
And to the sons of Merari, by their families, twelve towns were given by the Lord's decision, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun.

以色列人将这些城与其郊野给了利未人。
And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the towns with their outskirts.

这以上录名的城，在犹大，西缅，便雅悯三支派的地中，以色列人拈阄给了他们。
And they gave by the Lord's decision out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these towns whose names are given.

哥辖族中有几家在以法莲支派的地中也得了城邑，
And to the families of the sons of Kohath were given towns by the Lord's decision out of the tribe of Ephraim.

在以法莲山地得了逃城示剑与其郊野，又得了基色与其郊野，
And they gave them the town to which men might go in flight and be safe, Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim with its outskirts, and Gezer with its outskirts,

约缅与其郊野，伯和仑与其郊野，
And Jokmeam with its outskirts, and Beth-horon with its outskirts,

亚雅仑与其郊野，迦特临门与其郊野。
And Aijalon with its outskirts, and Gath-rimmon with its outskirts;

哥辖族其余的人在玛拿西半支派的地中得了亚乃与其郊野，比连与其郊野。
And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Aner with its outskirts, and Bileam with its outskirts, for the rest of the family of the sons of Kohath.

革顺族在玛拿西半支派的地中得了巴珊的哥兰与其郊野，亚斯他录与其郊野。
To the sons of Gershom were given, out of the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its outskirts, and Ashtaroth with its outskirts;

又在以萨迦支派的地中得了基低斯与其郊野，大比拉与其郊野，
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedesh with its outskirts, and Daberath with its outskirts,

拉末与其郊野，亚年与其郊野。
And Ramoth with its outskirts, and Anem with its outskirts;

在亚设支派的地中得了玛沙与其郊野，押顿与其郊野，
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mashal with its outskirts, and Abdon with its outskirts,

户割与其郊野，利合与其郊野。
And Hukok with its outskirts, and Rehob with its outskirts;

在拿弗他利支派的地中得了加利利的基低斯与其郊野，哈们与其郊野，基列亭与其郊野。
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its outskirts, and Hammon with its outskirts, and Kiriathaim with its outskirts.

还有米拉利族的人在西布伦支派的地中得了临摩挪与其郊野，他泊与其郊野。
To the rest of the Levites, the sons of Merari, were given, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with its outskirts, Tabor with its outskirts;

又在耶利哥的约旦河东，在流便支派的地中得了旷野的比悉与其郊野，雅哈撒与其郊野，
And on the other side of Jordan, at Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, were given them, out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the waste land with its outskirts, and Jahzah with its outskirts,

基底莫与其郊野，米法押与其郊野。
And Kedemoth with its outskirts, and Mephaath with its outskirts;

又在迦得支派的地中得了基列的拉末与其郊野，玛哈念与其郊野，
And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its outskirts, and Mahanaim with its outskirts,

希实本与其郊野，雅谢与其郊野。
And Heshbon with its outskirts, and Jazer with its outskirts.

以萨迦的儿子是陀拉，普瓦，雅述（雅述创世记第四十六章十三节作约伯），伸仑，共四人。
And of the sons of Issachar: Tola and Puah, Jashub and Shimron, four.

陀拉的儿子是乌西，利法雅，耶勒，雅买，易伯散，示母利，都是陀拉的族长，是大能的勇士。到大卫年间，他们的人数共有二万二千六百名。
And the sons of Tola: Uzzi and Rephaiah and Jeriel and Jahmai and Ibsam and Shemuel, heads of their families; they were men of war; in the record of their generations their number in the time of David was twenty-two thousand, six hundred.

乌西的儿子是伊斯拉希。伊斯拉希的儿子是米迦勒，俄巴底亚，约珥，伊示雅，共五人，都是族长。
And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah; and the sons of Izrahiah: Michael and Obadiah and Joel and Isshiah, five; all of them chiefs.

他们所率领的，按着宗族出战的军队，共有三万六千人，因为他们的妻和子众多。
And with them, recorded in generations by their families, were bands of fighting-men, thirty-six thousand of them, for they had a great number of wives and sons.

他们的族弟兄在以萨迦各族中都是大能的勇士，按着家谱计算共有八万七千人。
And there were recorded among all the families of Issachar, great men of war, eighty-seven thousand.

便雅悯的儿子是比拉，比结，耶叠，共三人。
The sons of Benjamin: Bela and Becher and Jediael, three.

比拉的儿子是以斯本，乌西，乌薛，耶利摩，以利，共五人，都是族长，是大能的勇士。按着家谱计算，他们的子孙共有二万二千零三十四人。
And the sons of Bela: Ezbon and Uzzi and Uzziel and Jerimoth and Iri, five; heads of their families, great men of war; there were twenty-two thousand and thirty-four of them recorded by their families.

比结的儿子是细米拉，约阿施，以利以谢，以利约乃，暗利，耶利摩，亚比雅，亚拿突，亚拉篾。这都是比结的儿子。
And the sons of Becher: Zemirah and Joash and Eliezer and Elioenai and Omri and Jerimoth and Abijah and Anathoth and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.

他们都是族长，是大能的勇士。按着家谱计算，他们的子孙共有二万零二百人。
And they were recorded by their generations, heads of their families, great men of war, twenty thousand, two hundred.

耶叠的儿子是比勒罕。比勒罕的儿子是耶乌施，便雅悯，以忽，基拿拿，细坦，他施，亚希沙哈。
And the sons of Jediael: Bilhan; and the sons of Bilhan: Jeush and Benjamin and Ehud and Chenaanah and Zethan and Tarshish and Ahishahar.

这都是耶叠的儿子，都是族长，是大能的勇士。他们的子孙能上阵打仗的，共有一万七千二百人。
All these were the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their families, seventeen thousand, two hundred men of war, able to go out with the army for war.

还有以珥的儿子书品，户品，并亚黑的儿子户伸。
And Shuppim and Huppim. The sons of Dan, Hushim his son, one.

拿弗他利的儿子是雅薛，沽尼，耶色，沙龙。这都是辟拉的子孙。
The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel and Guni and Jezer and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.

玛拿西的儿子亚斯列是他妾亚兰人所生的，又生了基列之父玛吉。
The sons of Manasseh by his servant-wife, the Aramaean woman: she gave birth to Machir, the father of Gilead;

玛吉娶的妻是户品，书品的妹子，名叫玛迦。玛拿西的次子名叫西罗非哈。西罗非哈但有几个女儿。
(And Gilead took a wife, whose name was Maacah, and his sister's name was Hammoleketh;) and the name of his brother was Zelophehad, who was the father of daughters.

玛吉的妻玛迦生了一个儿子，起名叫毗利施。毗利施的兄弟名叫示利施。示利施的儿子是乌兰和利金。
And Maacah, the wife of Gilead, gave birth to a son to whom she gave the name Peresh; and his brother was named Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.

乌兰的儿子是比但。这都是基列的子孙。基列是玛吉的儿子，玛吉是玛拿西的儿子。
And the son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir the son of Manasseh.

基列的妹子哈摩利吉生了伊施荷，亚比以谢，玛拉。
And his sister Hammoleketh was the mother of Ishhod and Abiezer and Mahlah.

示米大的儿子是亚现，示剑，利克希，阿尼安。
And the sons of Shemida were Ahian and Shechem and Likhi and Aniam.

以法莲的儿子是书提拉。书提拉的儿子是比列。比列的儿子是他哈。他哈的儿子是以拉大。以拉大的儿子是他哈。
And the sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his son, and Tahath his son,

他哈的儿子是撒拔。撒拔的儿子是书提拉。以法莲又生以谢，以列。这二人因为下去夺取迦特人的牲畜，被本地的迦特人杀了。
And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer and Elead, whom the men of Gath, who had been living in the land from their birth, put to death, because they came down to take away their cattle.

他们的父亲以法莲为他们悲哀了多日，他的弟兄都来安慰他。
And for a long time Ephraim their father went on weeping for them, and his brothers came to give him comfort.

以法莲与妻同房，他妻就怀孕生了一子，以法莲因为家里遭祸，就给这儿子起名叫比利亚。
After that, he had connection with his wife, and she became with child and gave birth to a son, to whom his father gave the name of Beriah, because trouble had come on his family.

他的女儿名叫舍伊拉，就是建筑上伯和仑，下伯和仑与乌羡舍伊拉的。
And his daughter was Sheerah, the builder of Beth-horon the lower and the higher, and Uzzen-sheerah.

比利阿的儿子是利法和利悉。利悉的儿子是他拉。他拉的儿子是他罕。
And Rephah was his son, and Resheph; his son was Telah, and his son was Tahan;

他罕的儿子是拉但。拉但的儿子是亚米忽。亚米忽的儿子是以利沙玛。
Ladan was his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,

以利沙玛的儿子是嫩。嫩的儿子是约书亚。
Nun his son, Joshua his son.

以法莲人的地业和住处是伯特利与其村庄。东边拿兰，西边基色与其村庄。示剑与其村庄，直到迦萨与其村庄。
Their heritage and their living-places were Beth-el and its daughter-towns, and Naaran to the east, and Gezer to the west, with its daughter-towns, as well as Shechem and its daughter-towns as far as Azzah and its daughter-towns;

还有靠近玛拿西人的境界，伯善与其村庄。他纳与其村庄。米吉多与其村庄。多珥与其村庄。以色列儿子约瑟的子孙住在这些地方。
And by the limits of the children of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its daughter-towns, Taanach, Megiddo, and Dor, with their daughter-towns. In these the children of Joseph, the son of Israel, were living.

亚设的儿子是音拿，亦施瓦，亦施韦，比利亚，还有他们的妹子西拉。
The sons of Asher: Imnah and Ishvah and Ishvi and Beriah and Serah, their sister.

比利亚的儿子是希别，玛结。玛结是比撒威的父亲。
And the sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.

希别生雅弗勒，朔默，何坦，和他们的妹子书雅。
And Heber was the father of Japhlet and Shomer and Hotham and Shua, their sister.

雅弗勒的儿子是巴萨，宾哈，亚施法。这都是雅弗勒的儿子。
And the sons of Japhlet: Pasach and Bimhal and Ashvath. These are the sons of Japhlet.

朔默的儿子是亚希，罗迦，耶户巴，亚兰。
And the sons of Shomer: Ahi and Rohgah, Jehubbah and Aram.

朔默兄弟希连的儿子是琐法，音那，示利斯，亚抹。
And the sons of Hotham, his brother: Zophah and Imna and Shelesh and Amal.

琐法的儿子是书亚，哈尼弗，书阿勒，比利，音拉，
The sons of Zophah: Suah and Harnepher and Shual and Beri and Imrah,

比悉，河得，珊玛，施沙，益兰，比拉。
Bezer and Hod and Shamma and Shilshah and Ithran and Beera.

益帖的儿子是耶孚尼，毗斯巴，亚拉。
And the sons of Jether: Jephunneh and Pispah and Ara.

乌拉的儿子是亚拉，汉尼业，利写。
And the sons of Ulla: Arah and Hanniel and Rizia.

这都是亚设的子孙，都是族长，是精壮大能的勇士，也是首领中的头目，按着家谱计算，他们的子孙能出战的共有二万六千人。
All these were the children of Asher, heads of their families, specially strong men of war, chiefs of the rulers. They were recorded in the army for war, twenty-six thousand men in number.

便雅悯的长子比拉，次子亚实别，三子亚哈拉，
And Benjamin was the father of Bela his oldest son, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,

四子挪哈，五子拉法。
Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.

比拉的儿子是亚大，基拉，亚比忽，
And Bela had sons, Addar and Gera, the father of Ehud,

亚比书，乃幔，亚何亚，
And Abishua and Naaman and Ahoah

基拉，示孚汛，户兰。
And Gera and Shephuphan and Huram.

以忽的儿子作迦巴居民的族长，被掳到玛拿辖。
And these are the sons of Ehud, heads of families of those living in Geba: Iglaam and Alemeth

以忽的儿子乃幔，亚希亚，基拉也被掳去。基拉生乌撒，亚希忽。
And Naaman and Ahijah and Gera; and Iglaam was the father of Uzza and Ahihud.

沙哈连休他二妻户伸和巴拉之后，在摩押地生了儿子。
And Shaharaim became the father of children in the country of the Moabites after driving out Hushim and Beerah his wives;

他与妻贺得同房，生了约巴，洗比雅，米沙，玛拉干，
And by Hodesh his wife he became the father of Jobab and Zibia and Mesha and Malcam.

耶乌斯，沙迦，米玛。他这些儿子都是族长。
And Jeuz and Shachia and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of families.

他的妻户伸给他生的儿子有亚比突，以利巴力。
And Hushim became the father of Abitub and Elpaal.

以利巴力的儿子是希伯，米珊，沙麦。沙麦建立阿挪和罗德二城与其村庄。
And the sons of Elpaal: Eber and Misham and Shemed (he was the builder of Ono and Lod and their daughter-towns);

又有比利亚和示玛是亚雅仑居民的族长，是驱逐迦特人的。
And Beriah and Shema, who were heads of the families of those who were living in Aijalon, who put to flight the people living in Gath;

亚希约，沙煞，耶利末，
And their brothers Shashak and Jeremoth.

西巴第雅，亚拉得，亚得，
And Zebadiah and Arad and Eder

米迦勒，伊施巴，约哈都是比利亚的儿子。
And Michael and Ishpah and Joha, the sons of Beriah;

西巴第雅，米书兰，希西基，希伯，
And Zebadiah and Meshullam and Hizki and Heber

伊施米莱，伊斯利亚，约巴都是以利巴力的儿子。
And Ishmerai and Izliah and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal;

雅金，细基利，撒底，
And Jakim and Zichri and Zabdi

以利乃，洗勒太，以列，
And Elienai and Zillethai and Eliel

亚大雅，比拉雅，申拉都是示每的儿子。
And Adaiah and Beraiah and Shimrath, the sons of Shimei;

伊施班，希伯，以列，
And Ishpan and Eber and Eliel

亚伯顿，细基利，哈难，
And Abdon and Zichri and Hanan

哈拿尼雅，以拦，安陀提雅，
And Hananiah and Elam and Anathothijah

伊弗底雅，毗努伊勒都是沙煞的儿子。
And Iphdeiah and Penuel, the sons of Shashak;

珊示莱，示哈利，亚他利雅，
And Shamsherai and Shehariah and Athaliah

雅利西，以利亚，细基利都是耶罗罕的儿子。
And Jaareshiah and Elijah and Zichri, the sons of Jeremoth.

这些人都是著名的族长，住在耶路撒冷。
These were heads of families in their generations; chief men: these were living in Jerusalem.

在基遍住的有基遍的父亲耶利。他的妻名叫玛迦。
And in Gibeon was living the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah;

他长子是亚伯顿。他又生苏珥，基士，巴力，拿答，
And his oldest son Abdon, and Zur and Kish and Baal and Ner and Nadab

基多，亚希约，撒迦，米基罗。
And Gedor and Ahio and Zechariah and Mikloth.

米基罗生示米暗。这些人和他们的弟兄在耶路撒冷对面居住。
And Mikloth was the father of Shimeah. And they were living with their brothers in Jerusalem opposite their brothers.

尼珥生基士。基士生扫罗。扫罗生约拿单，麦基舒亚，亚比拿达，伊施巴力。
And Ner was the father of Abner, and Kish was the father of Saul, and Saul was the father of Jonathan and Malchi-shua and Abinadab and Eshbaal.

约拿单的儿子是米力巴力（米力巴力撒母耳下四章四节作米非波设）。米力巴力生米迦。
And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal was the father of Micah.

米迦的儿子是毗敦，米勒，他利亚，亚哈斯。
And the sons of Micah: Pithon and Melech and Tarea and Ahaz.

亚哈斯生耶何阿达。耶何阿达生亚拉篾，亚斯玛威，心利。心利生摩撒。
And Ahaz was the father of Jehoaddah; and Jehoaddah was the father of Alemeth and Azmaveth and Zimri; and Zimri was the father of Moza;

摩撒生比尼亚。比尼亚的儿子是拉法。拉法的儿子是以利亚萨。以利亚萨的儿子是亚悉。
And Moza was the father of Binea: Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son;

亚悉有六个儿子，他们的名字是亚斯利干，波基路，以实玛利，示亚利雅，俄巴底雅，哈难。这都是亚悉的儿子。
And Azel had five sons, whose names are: Azrikam, his oldest, and Ishmael and Sheariah and Obadiah and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.

亚悉兄弟以设的长子是乌兰，次子耶乌施，三子是以利法列。
And the sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his oldest son, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.

乌兰的儿子都是大能的勇士，是弓箭手，他们有许多的子孙，共一百五十名，都是便雅悯人。
And the sons of Ulam were men of war, bowmen, and had a great number of sons and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. All these were the sons of Benjamin.

以色列人都按家谱计算，写在以色列诸王记上。犹大人因犯罪就被掳到巴比伦。
So all Israel was listed by their families; and, truly, they are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel. And Judah was taken away as prisoners to Babylon because of their sin.

先从巴比伦回来，住在自己地业城邑中的有以色列人，祭司，利未人，尼提宁的首领。
Now the first to take up their heritage in their towns were: Israel, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.

住在耶路撒冷的有犹大人，便雅悯人，以法莲人，玛拿西人。
And in Jerusalem there were living some of the sons of Judah, and of Benjamin, and of Ephraim and Manasseh;

犹大儿子法勒斯的子孙中有乌太。乌太是亚米忽的儿子。亚米忽是暗利的儿子。暗利是音利的儿子。音利是巴尼的儿子。
Uthai, the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the sons of Perez, the son of Judah.

示罗的子孙中有长子亚帅雅和他的众子。
And of the Shilonites: Asaiah the oldest, and his sons.

谢拉的子孙中有耶乌利和他的弟兄，共六百九十人。
And of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel, and their brothers, six hundred and ninety.

便雅悯人中有哈西努的曾孙，何达威雅的孙子，米书兰的儿子撒路，
And of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu, the son of Meshullam, Judah, the son of Hassenuah,

又有耶罗罕的儿子伊比尼雅，米基立的孙子，乌西的儿子以拉，伊比尼雅的曾孙，流珥的孙子，示法提雅的儿子米书兰，
And Ibneiah, the son of Jeroham, and Elah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah;

和他们的族弟兄，按着家谱计算共有九百五十六名。这些人都是他们的族长。
And their brothers, in the list of their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were heads of families, listed by the names of their fathers.

祭司中有耶大雅，耶何雅立，雅斤，
And of the priests: Jedaiah and Jehoiarib and Jachin

还有管理神殿希勒家的儿子亚萨利雅。希勒家是米书兰的儿子。米书兰是撒督的儿子。撒督是米拉约的儿子。米拉约是亚希突的儿子。
And Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;

有玛基雅的曾孙，巴施户珥的孙子，耶罗罕的儿子亚大雅，又有亚第业的儿子玛赛。亚第业是雅希细拉的儿子。雅希细拉是米书兰的儿子。米书兰是米实利密的儿子。米实利密是音麦的儿子。
And Adaiah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasai, the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;

他们和众弟兄都是族长，共有一千七百六十人，是善于作神殿使用之工的。
And their brothers, heads of their families, a thousand and seven hundred and sixty: able men, doing the work of the house of God.

利未人米拉利的子孙中，有哈沙比雅的曾孙，押利甘的孙子，哈述的儿子示玛雅。
And of the Levites: Shemaiah, the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;

有拔巴甲，黑勒施，迦拉，并亚萨的曾孙，细基利的孙子，米迦的儿子玛探雅，
And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah, the son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;

又有耶杜顿的曾孙，迦拉的孙子，示玛雅的儿子俄巴底，还有以利加拿的孙子，亚撒的儿子比利家。他们都住在尼陀法人的村庄。
And Obadiah, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah, the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who were living in the small towns of the Netophathites.

守门的是沙龙，亚谷，达们，亚希幔，和他们的弟兄。沙龙为长。
And the door-keepers: Shallum and Akkub and Talmon and Ahiman and their brothers: Shallum was the chief.

从前这些人看守朝东的王门，如今是利未营中守门的。
Up till then they had been at the king's door to the east. They were door-keepers for the tents of the sons of Levi.

可拉的曾孙，以比雅撒的孙子，可利的儿子沙龙，和他的族弟兄可拉人都管理使用之工，并守会幕的门。他们的祖宗曾管理耶和华的营盘，又把守营门。
And Shallum, the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brothers, of his family, the Korahites, were responsible for everything which had to be done in connection with the order of worship, keepers of the doors of the Tent; their fathers had had the care of the tents of the Lord, being keepers of the doorway.

从前以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈管理他们，耶和华也与他同在。
In the past Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, had been ruler over them; may the Lord be with him!

米施利米雅的儿子撒迦利雅是看守会幕之门的。
Zechariah, the son of Meshelemiah, was keeper of the door of the Tent of meeting.

被选守门的人共有二百一十二名。他们在自己的村庄，按着家谱计算，是大卫和先见撒母耳所派当这紧要职任的。
There were two hundred and twelve whose business it was to keep the doorway. These were listed by families in the country places where they were living, whom David and Samuel the seer put in their responsible positions.

他们和他们的子孙按着班次看守耶和华殿的门，就是会幕的门。
So they and their sons had the care of the doors of the house of the Lord, the house of the Tent, as watchers.

在东西南北，四方都有守门的。
There were keepers of the doors on the four sides, to the east, west, north, and south.

他们的族弟兄住在村庄，每七日来与他们换班。
And their brothers, in the country places where they were living, were to come in every seven days to be with them from time to time.

这四个门领都是利未人，各有紧要的职任，看守神殿的仓库。
For the four chief door-keepers, who were Levites, had a special position, looking after the rooms and the store-houses of the house of God.

他们住在神殿的四围，是因委托他们守殿，要每日早晨开门。
Their sleeping-rooms were round the house of God, for they had the care of it, and were responsible for opening it morning by morning.

利未人中有管理使用器皿的，按着数目拿出拿入。
Certain of them had the care of the vessels used in worship, to keep an account of them when they came in and when they were taken out again.

又有人管理器具和圣所的器皿，并细面，酒，油，乳香，香料。
And some of them were responsible for the holy things and for the vessels of the holy place, and the meal and the wine and the oil and the perfume and the spices.

祭司中有人用香料作膏油。
And some of the sons of the priests were responsible for crushing the spices.

利未人玛他提雅是可拉族沙龙的长子，他紧要的职任是管理盘中烤的物。
And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, the oldest son of Shallum the Korahite, was responsible for cooking the flat cakes.

他们族弟兄哥辖子孙中，有管理陈设饼的，每安息日预备摆列。
And some of their brothers, sons of the Kohathites, were responsible for the holy bread which was put in order before the Lord, to get it ready every Sabbath.

歌唱的有利未人的族长，住在属殿的房屋，昼夜供职，不作别样的工。
And these were those who had the ordering of the music and songs, heads of families of the Levites, who were living in the rooms, and were free from other work, for their work went on day and night.

以上都是利未人著名的族长，住在耶路撒冷。
These were heads of families of the Levites in their generations, chief men; they were living at Jerusalem.

在基遍住的有基遍的父亲耶利。他的妻名叫玛迦。
And in Gibeon was living the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah;

他长子是亚伯顿。他又生苏珥，基士，巴力，尼珥，拿答，
And Abdon his oldest son, and Zur and Kish and Baal and Ner and Nadab

基多，亚希约，撒迦利雅，米基罗。
And Gedor and Ahio and Zechariah and Mikloth

米基罗生示米暗。这些人和他们的弟兄在耶路撒冷对面居住。
Mikloth was the father of Shimeam. They were living with their brothers in Jerusalem opposite their brothers.

尼珥生基士。基士生扫罗。扫罗生约拿单，麦基舒亚，亚比拿达，伊施巴力。
And Ner was the father of Kish; and Kish was the father of Saul; and Saul was the father of Jonathan and Malchi-shua and Abinadab and Eshbaal.

约拿单的儿子是米力巴力（米力巴力即米非波设）。米力巴力生米迦。
And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal; and Merib-baal was the father of Micah.

米迦的儿子是毗敦，米勒，他利亚，亚哈斯。
And the sons of Micah: Pithon and Melech and Tahrea and Ahaz.

亚哈斯生雅拉。雅拉生亚拉篾，亚斯玛威，心利。心利生摩撒。
And Ahaz was the father of Jarah; and Jarah was the father of Alemeth and Azmaveth and Zimri; and Zimri was the father of Moza.

摩撒生比尼亚。比尼亚生利法雅。利法雅的儿子是以利亚萨。以利亚萨的儿子是亚悉。
And Moza was the father of Binea; and Rephaiah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.

亚悉有六个儿子，他们的名字是亚斯利干，波基路，以实玛利，示亚利雅，俄巴底雅，哈难。这都是亚悉的儿子。
And Azel had five sons, whose names are: Azrikam, his oldest son, and Ishmael and Sheariah and Obadiah and Hanan: these were the sons of Azel.

非利士人与以色列人争战，以色列人在非利士人面前逃跑，在基利波山有被杀仆倒的。
Now the Philistines were fighting against Israel; and the men of Israel went in flight before the Philistines, falling down wounded in Mount Gilboa.

非利士人紧追扫罗和他儿子们，就杀了扫罗的儿子约拿单，亚比拿达，麦基舒亚。
And the Philistines went hard after Saul and his sons, and put to death Jonathan and Abinadab and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.

势派甚大，扫罗被弓箭手追上，射伤甚重，
And the fight was going against Saul, and the archers came across him, and he was wounded by the archers.

就吩咐拿他兵器的人说，你拔出刀来，将我刺死，免得那些未受割礼的人来凌辱我。但拿兵器的人甚惧怕，不肯刺他。
Then Saul said to the servant who had the care of his arms, Take your sword and put it through me, before these men without circumcision come and make sport of me. But his servant, full of fear, would not do so. Then Saul took out his sword, falling on it himself.

扫罗就自己伏在刀上死了。拿兵器的人见扫罗已死，也伏在刀上死了。
And when his servant saw that Saul was dead, he did the same, and came to his death.

这样，扫罗和他三个儿子，并他的全家都一同死亡。
So death overtook Saul and his three sons; all his family came to an end together.

住平原的以色列众人见以色列军兵逃跑，扫罗和他儿子都死了，也就弃城逃跑，非利士人便来住在其中。
And when all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that the men of Israel had gone in flight and that Saul and his sons were dead, they went in flight away from their towns; and the Philistines came and took them for themselves.

次日，非利士人来剥那被杀之人的衣服，看见扫罗和他儿子仆倒在基利波山，
Now the day after, when the Philistines came to take their goods from the dead, they saw Saul and his sons dead in Mount Gilboa.

就剥了他的军装，割下他的首级，打发人到非利士地的四境（到或作送到）报信与他们的偶像和众民，
And they took everything off him, and took his head and his war-dress, and sent word into the land of the Philistines round about to give the news to their gods and to the people.

又将扫罗的军装放在他们神的庙里，将他的首级钉在大衮庙中。
And they put his war-dress in the house of their gods, and put up his head in the house of Dagon.

基列雅比人听见非利士人向扫罗所行的一切事，
And when the news came to Jabesh-gilead of what the Philistines had done to Saul,

他们中间所有的勇士就起身前去，将扫罗和他儿子的尸身送到雅比，将他们的尸骨葬在雅比的橡树下，就禁食七日。
All the fighting-men came up and took away Saul's body and the bodies of his sons, and took them to Jabesh, and put their bones to rest under the oak-tree in Jabesh, and took no food for seven days.

这样，扫罗死了。因为他干犯耶和华，没有遵守耶和华的命。又因他求问交鬼的妇人，
So death came to Saul because of the sin which he did against the Lord, that is, because of the word of the Lord which he kept not; and because he went for directions to one who had an evil spirit,

没有求问耶和华，所以耶和华使他被杀，把国归于耶西的儿子大卫。
And not to the Lord: for this reason, he put him to death and gave the kingdom to David, the son of Jesse.

以色列众人聚集到希伯仑见大卫，说，我们原是你的骨肉。
Then all Israel came together to David at Hebron, and said, Truly, we are your bone and your flesh.

从前扫罗作王的时候，率领以色列人出入的是你。耶和华你的神也曾应许你说，你必牧养我的民以色列，作以色列的君。
In the past, when Saul was king, it was you who went at the head of Israel when they went out or came in; and the Lord your God said to you, You are to be the keeper of my people Israel, and their ruler.

于是以色列的长老都来到希伯仑见大卫王。大卫在希伯仑耶和华面前与他们立约，他们就膏大卫作以色列的王，是照耶和华借撒母耳所说的话。
So all the responsible men of Israel came to the king at Hebron; and David made an agreement with them in Hebron before the Lord; and they put the holy oil on David and made him king over Israel, as the Lord had said by Samuel.

大卫和以色列众人到了耶路撒冷，就是耶布斯。那时耶布斯人住在那里。
Then David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (which is Jebus); and the Jebusites, the people of the land, were there.

耶布斯人对大卫说，你决不能进这地方。然而大卫攻取锡安的保障，就是大卫的城。
And the people of Jebus said to David, You will not come in here. But still, David took the strong place of Zion, which is the town of David.

大卫说，谁先攻打耶布斯人，必作首领元帅。洗鲁雅的儿子约押先上去，就作了元帅。
And David said, The first to overcome the Jebusites will be chief and captain. And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, went up first, and became chief.

大卫住在保障里，所以那保障叫作大卫城。
And David took the strong tower for his living-place, so it was named the town of David.

大卫又从米罗起，四围建筑城墙，其余的是约押修理。
And he took in hand the building of the town all round, starting from the Millo; and Joab put the rest of the town in order.

大卫日见强盛，因为万军之耶和华与他同在。
And David became greater and greater in power, because the Lord of armies was with him.

以下记录跟随大卫勇士的首领，就是奋勇帮助他得国，照着耶和华吩咐以色列人的话，与以色列人一同立他作王的。
Now these are the chief of David's men of war who were his strong supporters in the kingdom, and, with all Israel, made him king, as the Lord had said about Israel.

大卫勇士的数目记在下面，哈革摩尼的儿子雅朔班，他是军长的统领，一时举枪杀了三百人。
This is the list of David's men of war: Ishbaal, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the three: he put to death three hundred at one time with his spear.

其次是亚合人朵多的儿子以利亚撒，他是三个勇士里的一个。
And after him was Eleazar, the son of Dodo the Ahohite, who was one of the three great fighters.

他从前与大卫在巴斯达闵，非利士人聚集要打仗。那里有一块长满大麦的田，众民就在非利士人面前逃跑。
He was with David at Pas-dammim, where the Philistines had come together for the fight, near a bit of land full of barley; and the people went in flight before the Philistines.

这勇士便站在那田间击杀非利士人，救护了那田。耶和华使以色列人大获全胜。
And he took up his position in the middle of the bit of land, and kept back their attack, and overcame the Philistines; and the Lord gave a great salvation.

三十个勇士中的三个人下到磐石那里，进了亚杜兰洞见大卫。非利士的军队在利乏音谷安营。
And three of the thirty went down to David, to the rock, into the strong place of Adullam; and the army of the Philistines had taken up their position in the valley of Rephaim.

那时大卫在山寨，非利士人的防营在伯利恒。
At that time David had taken cover in the strong place, and an armed force of the Philistines was in Beth-lehem.

大卫渴想，说，甚愿有人将伯利恒城门旁井里的水打来给我喝。
And David, moved by a strong desire, said, If only someone would give me a drink of the water from the water-hole of Beth-lehem by the doorway into the town!

这三个勇士就闯过非利士人的营盘，从伯利恒城门旁的井里打水，拿来奉给大卫。他却不肯喝，将水奠在耶和华面前，
So the three, forcing a way through the Philistine army, got water from the water-hole of Beth-lehem, by the doorway into the town, and took it back to David; but David would not take it, but made an offering of it, draining it out to the Lord,

说，我的神阿，这三个人冒死去打水，这水好像他们的血一般，我断不敢喝。如此，大卫不肯喝。这是三个勇士所作的事。
Saying, By my God, far be it from me to do this! How may I take as drink the life-blood of these men who have put their lives in danger? so he did not take it. These things did the three great men of war.

约押的兄弟亚比筛是这三个勇士的首领。他举枪杀了三百人，就在三个勇士里得了名。
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, was chief of the thirty, for he put to death three hundred with his spear, but he had not a name among the three.

他在这三个勇士里是最尊贵的，所以作他们的首领。只是不及前三个勇士。
Of the thirty, he was the noblest, and was made their captain, but he was not equal to the first three.

有甲薛勇士耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅行过大能的事，他杀了摩押人亚利伊勒的两个儿子，又在下雪的时候下坑里去杀了一个狮子，
Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, a fighting-man of Kabzeel, had done great acts; he put to death two young lions going into their secret place; and he went down into a hole and put a lion to death in time of snow.

又杀了一个埃及人。埃及人身高五肘，手里拿着枪，枪杆粗如织布的机轴。比拿雅只拿着棍子下去，从埃及人手里夺过枪来，用那枪将他刺死。
And he made an attack on an Egyptian, a very tall man about five cubits high, armed with a spear like a cloth-worker's rod; he went down to him with a stick, and pulling his spear out of the hand of the Egyptian, put him to death with that same spear.

这是耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅所行的事，就在三个勇士里得了名。
These were the acts of Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, who had a great name among the thirty men of war.

他比那三十个勇士都尊贵，只是不及前三个勇士。大卫立他作护卫长。
He was honoured over the thirty, but he was not equal to the first three: and David put him over his servants.

军中的勇士有约押的兄弟亚撒黑，伯利恒人朵多的儿子伊勒哈难，
And these were the great men of war: Asahel, the brother of Joab, Elhanan, the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem,

哈律人沙玛，比伦人希利斯，
Shammoth the Harodite, Helez the Pelonite,

提哥亚人益吉的儿子以拉，亚拿突人亚比以谢，
Ira, the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,

户沙人西比该，亚合人以来，
Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,

尼陀法人玛哈莱，尼陀法人巴拿的儿子希立，
Maharai the Netophathite, Heled, the son of Baanah the Netophathite,

便雅悯族基比亚人利拜的儿子以太，比拉顿人比拿雅，
Ithai, the son of Ribai of Gibeah, of the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,

迦实溪人户莱，亚拉巴人亚比，
Hurai of Nahale-gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,

巴路米人押斯玛弗，沙本人以利雅哈巴，
Azmaveth of Bahurim, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,

基孙人哈深的众子，哈拉人沙基的儿子约拿单，
The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan, the son of Shage the Hararite,

哈拉人沙甲的儿子亚希暗，吾珥的儿子以利法勒，
Ahiam, the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal, the son of Ur,

米基拉人希弗，比伦人亚希雅，
Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,

迦密人希斯罗，伊斯拜的儿子拿莱，
Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai, the son of Ezbai,

拿单的兄弟约珥，哈基利的儿子弥伯哈，
Joel, the brother of Nathan, Mibhar, the son of Hagri,

亚扪人洗勒，比录人拿哈莱，拿哈莱是给洗鲁雅的儿子约押拿兵器的。
Zelek the Ammonite, and Naharai the Berothite, the servant who had the care of the arms of Joab, the son of Zeruiah;

以帖人以拉，以帖人迦立，
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,

赫人乌利亚，亚莱的儿子撒拔，
Uriah the Hittite, Zabad, the son of Ahlai,

流便人示撒的儿子亚第拿，他是流便支派中的一个族长，率领三十人。
Adina, the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with him;

玛迦的儿子哈难，弥特尼人约沙法，
Hanan, the son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,

亚施他拉人乌西亚，亚罗珥人何坦的儿子沙玛，耶利，
Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel, the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,

提洗人申利的儿子耶叠和他的兄弟约哈，
Jediael, the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,

玛哈未人以利业，伊利拿安的儿子耶利拜，约沙未雅，摩押人伊特玛，
Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,

以利业，俄备得，并米琐八人雅西业。
Eliel and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

大卫因怕基士的儿子扫罗，躲在洗革拉的时候，有勇士到他那里帮助他打仗。
Now these are the men who came to David at Ziklag, while he was still shut up, because of Saul, the son of Kish; they were among the strong men, his helpers in war.

他们善于拉弓，能用左右两手甩石射箭，都是便雅悯人扫罗的族弟兄。
They were armed with bows, and were able to send stones, and arrows from the bow, with right hand or left: they were Saul's brothers, of Benjamin.

为首的是亚希以谢，其次是约阿施，都是基比亚人示玛的儿子。还有亚斯玛威的儿子耶薛和毗力，又有比拉迦，并亚拿突人耶户，
Ahiezer was their chief, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Beracah and Jehu the Anathothite;

基遍人以实买雅，他在三十人中是勇士，管理他们，且有耶利米，雅哈悉，约哈难，和基得拉人约撒拔，
And Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a great man among the thirty, and their chief; and Jeremiah and Jehaziel and Johanan and Jozabad the Gederathite;

伊利乌赛，耶利摩，比亚利雅，示玛利雅，哈律弗人示法提雅，
Eluzai and Jerimoth and Bealiah and Shemariah and Shephatiah the Haruphite;

可拉人以利加拿，耶西亚，亚萨列，约以谢，雅朔班，
Elkanah and Isshiah and Azarel and Joezer and Jashobeam, the Korahites;

基多人耶罗罕的儿子犹拉和西巴第雅。
And Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.

迦得支派中有人到旷野的山寨投奔大卫，都是大能的勇士，能拿盾牌和枪的战士。他们的面貌好像狮子，快跑如同山上的鹿。
And some of the Gadites, siding with David, went to his strong place in the waste land, great and strong men, trained for war, expert in the use of arms, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and they were quick-footed like roes on the mountains;

第一以薛，第二俄巴底雅，第三以利押，
Ezer their chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,

第四弥施玛拿，第五耶利米，
Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,

第六亚太，第七以利业，
Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,

第八约哈难，第九以利萨巴，
Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,

第十耶利米，第十一末巴奈。
Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.

这都是迦得人中的军长，至小的能抵一百人，至大的能抵一千人。
These Gadites were captains of the army; the least of them was captain over a hundred men, and the greatest over a thousand.

正月，约旦河水涨过两岸的时候，他们过河，使一切住平原的人东奔西逃。
It was they who went over Jordan in the first month, when the river was overflowing, and put to flight all the people of the valleys, to the east and to the west.

又有便雅悯和犹大人到山寨大卫那里。
And some of the children of Benjamin and Judah came to David in his strong place.

大卫出去迎接他们，对他们说，你们若是和和平平地来帮助我，我心就与你们相契。你们若是将我这无罪的人卖在敌人手里，愿我们列祖的神察看责罚。
And David went out to them, and said to them, If you have come in peace to give me help, my heart will be united with yours; but if you have come to give me up to those who would take my life, though my hands are clean from wrongdoing, then may the God of our fathers see it and give you punishment.

那时神的灵感动那三十个勇士的首领亚玛撒，他就说，大卫阿，我们是归于你的。耶西的儿子阿，我们是帮助你的。愿你平平安安，愿帮助你的也都平安。因为你的神帮助你。大卫就收留他们，立他们作军长。
Then the spirit came on Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and he said, We are yours, David, we are on your side, O son of Jesse: may peace be with you and peace be with your helpers; for God is your helper. Then David took them into his army and made them captains of the band.

大卫从前与非利士人同去，要与扫罗争战，有些玛拿西人来投奔大卫，他们却没有帮助非利士人。因为非利士人的首领商议，打发他们回去，说，恐怕大卫拿我们的首级，归降他的主人扫罗。
And some of the men of Manasseh came over to David, when he went with the Philistines to the war against Saul, but he gave them no help: for the lords of the Philistines, after discussion, sent him away, saying, He will go back to his master Saul, at the price of our lives.

大卫往洗革拉去的时候，有玛拿西人的千夫长押拿，约撒拔，耶叠，米迦勒，约撒拔，以利户，洗勒太都来投奔他。
Then when he went back to Ziklag, there came over to him, of the men of Manasseh, Adnah and Jozabad and Jediael and Michael and Jozabad and Elihu and Zillethai, captains of thousands from the armies of Manasseh.

这些人帮助大卫攻击群贼。他们都是大能的勇士，且作军长。
And they gave David help against the armed bands, for they were all great men of war, and captains in the army.

那时天天有人来帮助大卫，以致成了大军，如神的军一样。
And from day to day more supporters came to David, till he had a great army like the army of God.

预备打仗的兵来到希伯仑见大卫，要照着耶和华的话将扫罗的国位归与大卫。他们的数目如下，
These are the numbers of the chiefs of the armed men, ready for war, who came to David at Hebron, to give the kingdom of Saul into his hands, as the Lord had said.

犹大支派，拿盾牌和枪预备打仗的有六千八百人。
There were six thousand, eight hundred spearmen of the children of Judah, armed for war;

西缅支派，能上阵大能的勇士有七千一百人。
Seven thousand, one hundred of the children of Simeon, great men of war;

利未支派有四千六百人。
Of the children of Levi, four thousand, six hundred.

耶何耶大是亚伦家的首领，跟从他的有三千七百人。
And Jehoiada, chief of the family of Aaron, and with him three thousand, seven hundred men;

还有少年大能的勇士撒督，同着他的有族长二十二人。
And Zadok, a young man, great and strong in war, with twenty-two captains from his father's people.

便雅悯支派，扫罗的族弟兄也有三千人，他们向来大半归顺扫罗家。
And of the children of Benjamin, the brothers of Saul, three thousand; for up to that time the greater part of them had been true to Saul.

以法莲支派大能的勇士，在本族著名的有二万零八百人。
And of the children of Ephraim, twenty thousand, eight hundred great men of war, men of great name in their families.

玛拿西半支派，册上有名的共一万八千人，都来立大卫作王。
And from the half-tribe of Manasseh, eighteen thousand, listed by name, came to make David king.

以萨迦支派，有二百族长都通达时务，知道以色列人所当行的。他们族弟兄都听从他们的命令。
And of the children of Issachar, there were two hundred chiefs, men who had expert knowledge of the times and what it was best for Israel to do, and all their brothers were under their orders.

西布伦支派，能上阵用各样兵器打仗，行伍整齐，不生二心的有五万人。
Of Zebulun, there were fifty thousand men, who went out with the army, expert in ordering the fight, to give help with all sorts of arms; true-hearted men.

拿弗他利支派，有一千军长。跟从他们，拿盾牌和枪的有三万七千人。
And of Naphtali, a thousand captains with thirty-seven thousand spearmen.

但支派，能摆阵的有二万八千六百人。
And of the Danites, twenty-eight thousand, six hundred, expert in ordering the fight.

亚设支派，能上阵打仗的有四万人。
And of Asher, forty thousand who went out with the army, expert in ordering the fight.

约旦河东的流便支派，迦得支派，玛拿西半支派，拿着各样兵器打仗的有十二万人。
From the other side of Jordan, there were a hundred and twenty thousand of the Reubenites and the Gadites and the men of the half-tribe of Manasseh, armed with every sort of instrument of war.

以上都是能守行伍的战士，他们都诚心来到希伯仑，要立大卫作以色列的王。以色列其余的人也都一心要立大卫作王。
All these men of war, expert in ordering the fight, came to Hebron with the full purpose of making David king over all Israel; and all the rest of Israel were united in their desire to make David king.

他们在那里三日，与大卫一同吃喝，因为他们的族弟兄给他们预备了。
For three days they were there with David, feasting at his table, for their brothers had made ready food for them.

靠近他们的人以及以萨迦，西布伦，拿弗他利人将许多面饼，无花果饼，干葡萄，酒，油，用驴，骆驼，骡子，牛驮来，又带了许多的牛和羊来，因为以色列人甚是欢乐。
And those who were near, as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, came with food on asses and camels and mules and oxen, with meal for food and cakes of figs and masses of grapes, and wine and oil and oxen and sheep in great numbers, for there was joy in Israel.

大卫与千夫长，百夫长，就是一切首领商议。
Then David had discussions with the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds and with every chief.

大卫对以色列全会众说，你们若以为美，见这事是出于耶和华我们的神，我们就差遣人走遍以色列地，见我们未来的弟兄，又见住在有郊野之城的祭司利未人，使他们都到这里来聚集。
And David said to all the men of Israel who had come together there, If it seems good to you and if it is the purpose of the Lord our God, let us send to all the rest of our brothers, everywhere in the land of Israel, and to the priests and the Levites in their towns and the country round them, and get them to come together here to us;

我们要把神的约柜运到我们这里来。因为在扫罗年间，我们没有在约柜前求问神。
And let us get back for ourselves the ark of our God: for in the days of Saul we did not go to it for directions.

全会众都说可以如此行。这事在众民眼中都看为好。
And all the people said they would do so, for it seemed right to them.

于是，大卫将以色列人从埃及的西曷河直到哈马口都招聚了来，要从基列耶琳将神的约柜运来。
So David sent for all Israel to come together, from Shihor, the river of Egypt, as far as the way into Hamath, to get the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.

大卫率领以色列众人上到巴拉，就是属犹大的基列耶琳，要从那里将约柜运来。这约柜就是坐在二基路伯上耶和华神留名的约柜。
And David went up, with all Israel, to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim in Judah, to get up from there the ark of God, over which the holy Name is named, the name of the Lord whose place is between the winged ones.

他们将神的约柜从亚比拿达的家里抬出来，放在新车上。乌撒和亚希约赶车。
And they put the ark of God on a new cart, and took it out of the house of Abinadab; and Uzza and Ahio were the drivers of the cart.

大卫和以色列众人在神前用琴，瑟，锣，鼓，号作乐，极力跳舞歌唱。
Then David and all Israel made melody before God with all their strength, with songs and corded instruments of music, and with brass instruments and horns.

到了基顿的禾场（基顿撒母耳下六章六节作拿艮）。因为牛失前蹄（或作惊跳），乌撒就伸手扶住约柜。
And when they came to the grain-floor of Chidon, Uzza put out his hand to keep the ark in its place, for the oxen were slipping.

耶和华向他发怒，因他伸手扶住约柜击杀他，他就死在神面前。
And the wrath of the Lord, burning against Uzza, sent destruction on him because he had put his hand on the ark, and death came to him there before God.

大卫因耶和华击杀（原文作闯杀）乌撒，心里愁烦，就称那地方为毗列斯乌撒，直到今日。
And David was angry because of the Lord's outburst of wrath against Uzza, and he gave that place the name Perez-uzza, to this day.

那日，大卫惧怕神，说，神的约柜怎可运到我这里来。
And so great was David's fear of God that day, that he said, How may I let the ark of God come to me?

于是大卫不将约柜运进大卫的城，却运到迦特人俄别以东的家中。
So David did not let the ark come back to him to the town of David, but had it turned away and put into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.

神的约柜在俄别以东家中三个月，耶和华赐福给俄别以东的家和他一切所有的。
And the ark of God was in the house of Obed-edom for three months; and the Lord sent a blessing on the house of Obed-edom and on all he had.

推罗王希兰将香柏木运到大卫那里，又差遣使者和石匠，木匠给大卫建造宫殿。
And Hiram, king of Tyre, sent men to David with cedar-trees, and stoneworkers and woodworkers for the building of his house.

大卫就知道耶和华坚立他作以色列王，又为自己的民以色列，使他的国兴旺。
And David saw that the Lord had made his position safe as king over Israel, lifting up his kingdom on high because of his people Israel.

大卫在耶路撒冷又立后妃，又生儿女。
And while he was living in Jerusalem, David took more wives and became the father of more sons and daughters.

在耶路撒冷所生的众子是沙母亚，朔吧，拿单，所罗门，
These are the names of the children he had in Jerusalem: Shammua and Shobab, Nathan and Solomon

益辖，以利书亚，以法列，
And Ibhar and Elishua and Elpelet

挪迦，尼斐，雅非亚，
And Nogah and Nepheg and Japhia

以利沙玛，比利雅大，以利法列。
And Elishama and Beeliada and Eliphelet.

非利士人听见大卫受膏作以色列众人的王，非利士众人就上来寻索大卫。大卫听见，就出去迎敌。
And when the Philistines had news that David had been made king over all Israel, they went up in search of David, and David, hearing of it, went out against them.

非利士人来了，布散在利乏音谷。
Now the Philistines had come, and had gone out in every direction in the valley of Rephaim.

大卫求问神，说，我可以上去攻打非利士人吗？你将他们交在我手里吗？耶和华说，你可以上去，我必将他们交在你手里。
And David, desiring directions from God, said, Am I to go up against the Philistines? and will you give them into my hands? And the Lord said, Go up; for I will give them into your hands.

非利士人来到巴力毗拉心，大卫在那里杀败他们。大卫说，神借我的手冲破敌人，如同水冲去一般。因此称那地方为巴力毗拉心。
So they went up to Baal-perazim, and David overcame them there, and David said, God has let the forces fighting against me be broken by my hand, as a wall is broken down by rushing water; so they gave that place the name of Baal-perazim.

非利士人将神像撇在那里，大卫吩咐人用火焚烧了。
And the Philistines did not take their images with them in their flight; and at David's orders they were burned with fire.

非利士人又布散在利乏音谷。
Then the Philistines again went out in every direction in the valley.

大卫又求问神。神说，不要一直地上去，要转到他们后头，从桑林对面攻打他们。
And David went for directions to God; and God said to him, You are not to go up after them; but, turning away from them, come face to face with them opposite the spice-trees.

你听见桑树梢上有脚步的声音，就要出战，因为神已经在你前头去攻打非利士人的军队。
And at the sound of footsteps in the tops of the trees, go out to the fight, for God has gone out before you to overcome the army of the Philistines.

大卫就遵着神所吩咐的，攻打非利士人的军队，从基遍直到基色。
And David did as the Lord had said; and they overcame the army of the Philistines, attacking them from Gibeon as far as Gezer.

于是大卫的名传扬到列国，耶和华使列国都惧怕他。
And David's name was honoured in all lands; and the Lord put the fear of him on all nations.

大卫在大卫城为自己建造宫殿，又为神的约柜预备地方，支搭帐幕。
And David made houses for himself in the town of David; and he got ready a place for the ark of God, and put up a tent for it.

那时大卫说，除了利未人之外，无人可抬神的约柜。因为耶和华拣选他们抬神的约柜，且永远事奉他。
Then David said, The ark of God may not be moved by any but the Levites, for they have been marked out by God to take the ark of God, and to do his work for ever.

大卫招聚以色列众人到耶路撒冷，要将耶和华的约柜抬到他所预备的地方。
And David made all Israel come together at Jerusalem, to take the ark of the Lord to its place, which he had got ready for it.

大卫又聚集亚伦的子孙和利未人。
And David got together the sons of Aaron, and the Levites;

哥辖子孙中有族长乌列和他的弟兄一百二十人。
Of the sons of Kohath: Uriel the chief, and his brothers, a hundred and twenty;

米拉利子孙中有族长亚帅雅和他的弟兄二百二十人。
Of the sons of Merari: Asaiah the chief, and his brothers, two hundred and twenty;

革顺子孙中有族长约珥和他的弟兄一百三十人。
Of the sons of Gershom: Joel the chief, and his brothers, a hundred and thirty;

以利撒反子孙中有族长示玛雅和他的弟兄二百人。
Of the sons of Elizaphan: Shemaiah the chief, and his brothers, two hundred;

希伯仑子孙中有族长以列和他的弟兄八十人。
Of the sons of Hebron: Eliel the chief, and his brothers, eighty;

乌薛子孙中有族长亚米拿达和他的弟兄一百一十二人。
Of the sons of Uzziel: Amminadab the chief, and his brothers, a hundred and twelve.

大卫将祭司撒督和亚比亚他，并利未人乌列，亚帅雅，约珥，示玛雅，以列，亚米拿达召来，
And David sent for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, Uriel, Asaiah and Joel, Shemaiah and Eliel and Amminadab,

对他们说，你们是利未人的族长，你们和你们的弟兄应当自洁，好将耶和华以色列神的约柜抬到我所预备的地方。
And said to them, You are the heads of the families of the Levites: make yourselves holy, you and your brothers, so that you may take the ark of the Lord, the God of Israel, to the place which I have made ready for it.

因你们先前没有抬这约柜，按定例求问耶和华我们的神，所以他刑罚（原文作闯杀）我们。
For because you did not take it at the first, the Lord our God sent punishment on us, because we did not get directions from him in the right way.

于是祭司利未人自洁，好将耶和华以色列神的约柜抬上来。
So the priests and the Levites made themselves holy to take up the ark of the Lord, the God of Israel.

利未子孙就用杠，肩抬神的约柜，是照耶和华借摩西所吩咐的。
And the sons of the Levites took up the ark of God, lifting it by its rods, as the Lord had said to Moses.

大卫吩咐利未人的族长，派他们歌唱的弟兄用琴瑟和钹作乐，欢欢喜喜地大声歌颂。
And David gave orders to the chief of the Levites to put their brothers the music-makers in position, with instruments of music, corded instruments and brass, with glad voices making sounds of joy.

于是利未人派约珥的儿子希幔和他弟兄中比利家的儿子亚萨，并他们族弟兄米拉利子孙里古沙雅的儿子以探。
So Heman, the son of Joel, and, of his brothers, Asaph, the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brothers, Ethan, the son of Kushaiah, were put in position by the Levites;

其次还有他们的弟兄撒迦利雅，便雅薛，示米拉末，耶歇，乌尼，以利押，比拿雅，玛西雅，玛他提雅，以利斐利户，弥克尼雅，并守门的俄别以东和耶利。
And with them their brothers of the second order, Zechariah, Bani and Jaaziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and Unni, Eliab and Benaiah and Maaseiah and Mattithiah and Eliphelehu and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom and Jeiel, the door-keepers.

这样，派歌唱的希幔，亚萨，以探敲铜钹，大发响声。
So those who made melody, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were put in position, with brass instruments, sounding loudly;

派撒迦利雅，雅薛，示米拉末，耶歇，乌尼，以利押，玛西雅，比拿雅鼓瑟，调用女音。
And Zechariah and Aziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel, Unni and Eliab and Maaseiah and Benaiah, with corded instruments put to Alamoth.

又派玛他提雅，以利斐利户，弥克尼雅，俄别以东，耶利，亚撒西雅领首弹琴，调用第八。
And Mattithiah and Eliphelehu and Mikneiah and Obed-edom and Jeiel and Azaziah, with corded instruments on the octave, to give the first note of the song.

利未人的族长基拿尼雅是歌唱人的首领，又教训人歌唱，因为他精通此事。
And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was master of the music: he gave directions about the song, because he was expert.

比利家，以利加拿是约柜前守门的。
And Berechiah and Elkanah were door-keepers for the ark.

祭司示巴尼，约沙法，拿坦业，亚玛赛，撒迦利雅，比拿亚，以利以谢在神的约柜前吹号。俄别以东和耶希亚也是约柜前守门的。
And Shebaniah and Joshaphat and Nethanel and Amasai and Zechariah and Benaiah and Eliezer, the priests, made music on the horns before the ark of God; and Obed-edom and Jehiah were door-keepers for the ark.

于是，大卫和以色列的长老，并千夫长都去从俄别以东的家欢欢喜喜地将耶和华的约柜抬上来。
So David, and the responsible men of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went with joy to get the ark of the agreement of the Lord out of the house of Obed-edom.

神赐恩与抬耶和华约柜的利未人，他们就献上七只公牛，七只公羊。
And when God gave help to the Levites who were lifting up the ark of the agreement of the Lord, they made an offering of seven oxen and seven sheep.

大卫和抬约柜的利未人，并歌唱人的首领基拿尼雅，以及歌唱的人，都穿着细麻布的外袍。大卫另外穿着细麻布的以弗得。
And David was clothed with a robe of fair linen, as were all the Levites who took up the ark, and those who made melody, and Chenaniah the master of those who made melody; and David had on a linen ephod;

这样，以色列众人欢呼吹角，吹号，敲钹，鼓瑟，弹琴，大发响声，将耶和华的约柜抬上来。
So all Israel took up the ark of the agreement of the Lord, with loud cries and with horns and brass and corded instruments sounding loudly.

耶和华的约柜进了大卫城的时候，扫罗的女儿米甲从窗户里观看，见大卫王踊跃跳舞，心里就轻视他。
And when the ark of the agreement of the Lord came into the town of David, Michal, the daughter of Saul, looking out of the window, saw King David dancing and playing; and to her mind he seemed foolish.

众人将神的约柜请进去，安放在大卫所搭的帐幕里，就在神面前献燔祭和平安祭。
Then they took in the ark of God and put it inside the tent which David had put up for it; and they made offerings, burned offerings and peace-offerings before God.

大卫献完了燔祭和平安祭，就奉耶和华的名给民祝福，
And when David had come to an end of making the burned offerings and peace-offerings, he gave the people a blessing in the name of the Lord.

并且分给以色列人，无论男女，每人一个饼，一块肉，一个葡萄饼。
And he gave to everyone, every man and woman of Israel, a cake of bread, some meat, and a cake of dry grapes.

大卫派几个利未人在耶和华的约柜前事奉，颂扬，称谢，赞美耶和华以色列的神，
And he put some of the Levites before the ark of the Lord as servants, to keep the acts of the Lord in memory, and to give worship and praise to the Lord, the God of Israel:

为首的是亚萨，其次是撒迦利雅，雅薛，示米拉末，耶歇，玛他提雅，以利押，比拿雅，俄别以东，耶利，鼓瑟弹琴。惟有亚萨敲钹，大发响声。
Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Uzziel and Shemiramoth and Jehiel and Mattithiah and Eliab and Benaiah and Obed-edom and Jeiel, with corded instruments of music; and Asaph, with brass instruments sounding loudly;

祭司比拿雅和雅哈悉常在神的约柜前吹号。
And Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests, blowing horns all the time before the ark of the agreement of God.

那日，大卫初次借亚萨和他的弟兄以诗歌称颂耶和华，说，
Then on that day David first made the giving of praise to the Lord the work of Asaph and his brothers.

你们要称谢耶和华，求告他的名，在万民中传扬他的作为。
O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.

要向他唱诗，歌颂，谈论他一切奇妙的作为。
Let your voice be sounded in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.

要以他的圣名夸耀。寻求耶和华的人，心中应当欢喜。
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.

要寻求耶和华与他的能力，时常寻求他的面。
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.

他仆人以色列的后裔，他所拣选雅各的子孙哪，你们要记念他奇妙的作为和他的奇事，并他口中的判语。
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;


O you seed of Israel his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.

他是耶和华我们的神，全地都有他的判断。
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.

你们要记念他的约，直到永远。他所吩咐的话，直到千代，
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;

就是与亚伯拉罕所立的约，向以撒所起的誓。
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;

他又将这约向雅各定为律例，向以色列定为永远的约，
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;

说，我必将迦南地赐给你，作你产业的分。
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:

当时你们人丁有限，数目稀少，并且在那地为寄居的。
When you were still small in number, and strange in the land;

他们从这邦游到那邦，从这国行到那国。
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people;

耶和华不容什么人欺负他们，为他们的缘故责备君王，
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,

说，不可难为我受膏的人，也不可恶待我的先知。
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.

全地都要向耶和华歌唱。天天传扬他的救恩，
Make songs to the Lord, all the earth; give the good news of his salvation day by day.

在列邦中述说他的荣耀，在万民中述说他的奇事。
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.

因耶和华为大，当受极大的赞美。他在万神之上，当受敬畏。
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; and he is more to be feared than all other gods.

外邦的神都属虚无，惟独耶和华创造诸天。
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.

有尊荣和威严在他面前，有能力和喜乐在他圣所。
Honour and glory are before him: strength and joy are in his holy place.

民中的万族阿，你们要将荣耀能力归给耶和华，都归给耶和华。
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.

要将耶和华的名所当得的荣耀归给他，拿供物来奉到他面前。当以圣洁的妆饰（的或作为）敬拜耶和华。
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come before him; give worship to the Lord in holy robes.

全地要在他面前战抖，世界也坚定不得动摇。
Be in fear before him, all the earth: the world is ordered so that it may not be moved.

愿天欢喜，愿地快乐。愿人在列邦中说，耶和华作王了。
Let the heavens have joy and let the earth be glad; let them say among the nations, The Lord is King.

愿海和其中所充满的澎湃。愿田和其中所有的都欢乐。
Let the sea be thundering with all its waters; let the field be glad, and everything which is in it;

那时，林中的树木都要在耶和华面前欢呼，因为他来要审判全地。
Then let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy before the Lord, for he is come to be the judge of the earth.

应当称谢耶和华。因他本为善，他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

要说，拯救我们的神阿，求你救我们，聚集我们，使我们脱离外邦，我们好称赞你的圣名，以赞美你为夸胜。
And say, Be our saviour, O God of our salvation, and let us come back, and give us salvation from the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name and have glory in your praise.

耶和华以色列的神，从亘古直到永远，是应当称颂的。众民都说，阿们。并且赞美耶和华。
Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, for ever and for ever. And all the people said, So be it; and gave praise to the Lord.

大卫派亚萨和他的弟兄在约柜前常常事奉耶和华，一日尽一日的职分。
So he made Asaph and his brothers keep their places there before the ark of the agreement of the Lord, to do whatever had to be done before the ark at all times day by day:

又派俄别以东和他的弟兄六十八人，与耶杜顿的儿子俄别以东，并何萨作守门的。
And Obed-edom, the son of Jeduthun, and Hosah, with their brothers, sixty-eight of them, to be door-keepers:

且派祭司撒督和他弟兄众祭司在基遍的丘坛，耶和华的帐幕前燔祭坛上，每日早晚，照着耶和华律法书上所吩咐以色列人的，常给耶和华献燔祭。
And Zadok the priest, with his brothers the priests, before the House of the Lord in the high place at Gibeon;


To give burned offerings to the Lord on the altar of burned offerings morning and evening, every day, as it is ordered in the law of the Lord which he gave to Israel;

与他们一同被派的有希幔，耶杜顿，和其余被选名字录在册上的，称谢耶和华，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest who were marked out by name to give praise to the Lord, for his mercy is unchanging for ever;

希幔，耶杜顿同着他们吹号，敲钹，大发响声，并用别的乐器随着歌颂神。耶杜顿的子孙作守门的。
And Heman and Jeduthun had horns and brass instruments sounding loudly, and instruments of music for the songs of God; and the sons of Jeduthun were to be at the door.

于是众民各归各家。大卫也回去为家眷祝福。
And all the people went away, every man to his house; and David went back to give a blessing to his family.

大卫住在自己宫中，对先知拿单说，看哪，我住在香柏木的宫中，耶和华的约柜反在幔子里。
Now when David was living in his house, he said to Nathan the prophet, See, I am living in a house of cedar-wood, but the ark of the Lord's agreement is under the curtains of a tent.

拿单对大卫说，你可以照你的心意而行，因为神与你同在。
And Nathan said to David, Do whatever is in your heart, for God is with you.

当夜，神的话临到拿单，说，
But that same night, the word of God came to Nathan, saying,

你去告诉我仆人大卫，说耶和华如此说，你不可建造殿宇给我居住。
Go and say to David my servant, The Lord says, You are not to make me a house for my living-place:

自从我领以色列人出埃及，直到今日，我未曾住过殿宇，乃从这会幕到那会幕，从这帐幕到那帐幕。
For from the day when I took Israel up, till this day, I have had no house, but have gone from tent to tent, and from living-place to living-place.

凡我同以色列人所走的地方，我何曾向以色列的一个士师，就是我吩咐牧养我民的说，你为何不给我建造香柏木的殿宇呢？
In all the places where I have gone with all Israel, did I ever say to any of the judges of Israel, whom I made the keepers of my people, Why have you not made for me a house of cedar?

现在你要告诉我仆人大卫，说万军之耶和华如此说，我从羊圈中将你召来，叫你不再跟从羊群，立你作我民以色列的君。
So now, say to my servant David, The Lord of armies says, I took you from the fields, from keeping sheep, so that you might be a ruler over my people Israel;

你无论往哪里去，我常与你同在，剪除你的一切仇敌。我必使你得大名，好像世上大大有名的人一样。
And I have been with you wherever you went, cutting off before you all those who were against you; and I will make your name like the name of the greatest ones of the earth.

我必为我民以色列选定一个地方，栽培他们，使他们住自己的地方，不再迁移。凶恶之子也不像从前扰害他们，
And I will make a resting-place for my people Israel, planting them there, so that they may be in the place which is theirs and never again be moved; and never again will they be made waste by evil men, as they were at first,

并不像我命士师治理我民以色列的时候一样。我必治服你的一切仇敌，并且我耶和华应许你，必为你建立家室。
From the time when I put judges over my people Israel; and I will overcome all those who are against you; and I will make you great and the head of a line of kings.

你寿数满足归你列祖的时候，我必使你的后裔接续你的位，我也必坚定他的国。
And when the time comes for you to go to your fathers, I will put in your place your seed after you, one of your sons, and I will make his kingdom strong.

他必为我建造殿宇。我必坚定他的国位直到永远。
He will be the builder of my house, and I will make the seat of his authority certain for ever.

我要作他的父，他要作我的子。并不使我的慈爱离开他，像离开在你以前的扫罗一样。
I will be to him a father and he will be to me a son; and I will not take my mercy away from him as I took it from him who was before you;

我却要将他永远坚立在我家里和我国里。他的国位也必坚定，直到永远。
But I will make his place in my house and in my kingdom certain for ever; and the seat of his authority will never be overturned.

拿单就按这一切话，照这默示告诉大卫。
So Nathan gave David an account of all these words and this vision.

于是大卫王进去，坐在耶和华面前，说，耶和华神阿，我是谁？我的家算什么，你竟使我到这地步呢？
Then David the king went in and took his seat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my family, that you have been my guide till now?

神阿，这在你眼中还看为小，又应许你仆人的家至于久远。耶和华神阿，你看顾我好像看顾高贵的人。
And this was only a small thing to you, O God; but your words have even been about the far-off future of your servant's family, looking on me as on one of high position, O Lord God.

你加于仆人的尊荣，我还有何言可说呢？因为你知道你的仆人。
What more may David say to you? for you have knowledge of your servant.

耶和华阿，你行了这大事，并且显明出来，是因你仆人的缘故，也是照你的心意。
O Lord, because of your servant, and from your heart, you have done all these great things and let them be seen.

耶和华阿，照我们耳中听见，没有可比你的，除你以外再无神。
O Lord, there is no one like you, and no other God but you, as is clear from everything which has come to our ears.

世上有何民能比你的民以色列呢？你神从埃及救赎他们作自己的子民，又在你赎出来的民面前行大而可畏的事，驱逐列邦人，显出你的大名。
And what other nation in the earth, like your people Israel, did a god go out to take for himself, to be his people, making his name great and to be feared, driving out the nations from before your people whom you made free and took out of Egypt?

你使以色列人作你的子民，直到永远。你耶和华也作他们的神。
For your people Israel you made yours for ever; and you, Lord, became their God.

耶和华阿，你所应许仆人和仆人家的话，求你坚定，直到永远，照你所说的而行。
And now, Lord, let your words about your servant and about his family be made certain for ever, and do as you have said.

愿你的名永远坚立，被尊为大，说，万军之耶和华是以色列的神，是治理以色列的神。这样，你仆人大卫的家必在你面前坚立。
So let your words be made certain and your name be made great, when men say, The Lord of armies is the God of Israel; and when the family of David your servant is made strong before you.

我的神阿，因你启示仆人说，我必为你建立家室，所以仆人大胆在你面前祈祷。
For you, O my God, have let your servant see that you will make him head of a line of kings; and so it has come into your servant's heart to make his prayer to you.

耶和华阿，惟有你是神，你也应许将这福气赐给仆人。
And now, O Lord, you are God, and you have said you will give this good thing to your servant:

现在你喜悦赐福与仆人的家，可以永存在你面前。耶和华阿，你已经赐福，还要赐福到永远。
And now you have been pleased to give your blessing to the family of your servant, so that it may go on for ever before you; you, O Lord, have given your blessing, and a blessing will be on it for ever.

此后，大卫攻打非利士人，把他们治服，从他们手下夺取了迦特和属迦特的村庄。
And it came about after this that David made an attack on the Philistines and overcame them, and took Gath with its daughter-towns out of the hands of the Philistines.

又攻打摩押，摩押人就归服大卫，给他进贡。
And he overcame Moab, and the Moabites became his servants and gave him offerings.

琐赐王哈大利谢（撒母耳下八章三节作哈大底谢）往伯拉河去，要坚定自己的国权，大卫就攻打他，直到哈马，
Then David overcame Hadadezer, king of Zobah, near Hamath, when he was going to make his power seen by the river Euphrates.

夺了他的战车一千，马兵七千，步兵二万，将拉战车的马砍断蹄筋，但留下一百辆车的马。
And David took from him a thousand war-carriages and seven thousand horsemen and twenty thousand footmen: and he had the leg-muscles of all the horses cut, keeping only enough of them for a hundred war-carriages.

大马色的亚兰人来帮助琐巴王哈大利谢，大卫就杀了亚兰人二万二千。
And when the Aramaeans of Damascus came to the help of Hadadezer, king of Zobah, David put to the sword twenty-two thousand Aramaeans.

于是大卫在大马色的亚兰地设立防营，亚兰人就归服他，给他进贡。大卫无论往哪里去，耶和华都使他得胜。
Then David put armed forces in Damascus, and the Aramaeans became his servants and gave him offerings. And the Lord made David overcome wherever he went.

他夺了哈大利谢臣仆所拿的金盾牌带到耶路撒冷。
And the gold body-covers of the servants of Hadadezer, David took to Jerusalem.

大卫又从属哈大利谢的提巴（提巴或作比他）和均二城中夺取了许多的铜。后来所罗门用此制造铜海，铜柱，和一切的铜器。
And from Tibhath and from Cun, towns of Hadadezer, David took a great store of brass, of which Solomon made the great brass water-vessel and the brass pillars and vessels.

哈马王陀乌听见大卫杀败琐巴王哈大利谢的全军，
Now when Tou, king of Hamath, had news that David had overcome all the army of Hadadezer, king of Zobah,

就打发他儿子哈多兰去见大卫王，问他的安，为他祝福，因为他杀败了哈大利谢，原来陀乌与哈大利谢常常争战。哈多兰带了金银铜的各样器皿来。
He sent his son Hadoram to King David, to give him words of peace and blessing, because he had overcome Hadadezer in the fight, for Hadadezer had been at war with Tou; and he gave him all sorts of vessels of gold and silver and brass.

大卫王将这些器皿，并从各国夺来的金银，就是从以东，摩押，亚扪，非利士，亚玛力人所夺来的，都分别为圣献给耶和华。
These King David made holy to the Lord, together with the silver and gold he had taken from all nations; from Edom and Moab and from the children of Ammon and from the Philistines and from Amalek.

洗鲁雅的儿子亚比筛在盐谷击杀了以东一万八千人。
And when he came back from putting to the sword eighteen thousand of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt,

大卫在以东地设立防营，以东人就都归服他。大卫无论往哪里去，耶和华都使他得胜。
David put armed forces in all the towns of Edom; and all the Edomites became servants to David. The Lord made David overcome wherever he went.

大卫作以色列众人的王，又向众民秉公行义。
So David was king over all Israel, judging and giving right decisions for all his people.

洗鲁雅的儿子约押作元帅。亚希律的儿子约沙法作史官。
And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the army; and Jehoshaphat, son of Ahilud, was keeper of the records.

亚希突的儿子撒督和亚比亚他的儿子亚希米勒作祭司长。沙威沙作书记。
And Zadok, the son of Ahitub; and Ahimelech, the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Shavsha was the scribe;

耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅统辖基利提人和比利提人。大卫的众子都在王的左右作领袖。
And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief of those whose places were at the king's side.

此后，亚扪人的王拿辖死了，他儿子接续他作王。
Now it came about after this that death came to Nahash, the king of the children of Ammon, and his son became king in his place.

大卫说，我要照哈嫩的父亲拿辖厚待我的恩典厚待哈嫩。于是大卫差遣使者为他丧父安慰他。大卫的臣仆到了亚扪人的境内见哈嫩，要安慰他，
And David said, I will be a friend to Hanun, the son of Nahash, because his father was a friend to me. So David sent men to him, to give him words of comfort on account of his father. And the servants of David came to Hanun, to the land of the children of Ammon, offering him comfort.

但亚扪人的首领对哈嫩说，大卫差人来安慰你，你想他是尊敬你父亲吗？他的臣仆来见你不是为详察窥探，倾覆这地吗？
But the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Does it seem to you that David is honouring your father, by sending comforters to you? is it not clear that these men have only come to go through the land and to make secret observation of it so that they may overcome it?

哈嫩便将大卫臣仆的胡须剃去一半，又割断他们下半截的衣服，使他们露出下体，打发他们回去。
So Hanun took David's servants, and cutting off their hair and the skirts of their robes up to the middle, sent them away.

有人将臣仆所遇的事告诉大卫，他就差人去迎接他们，因为他们甚觉羞耻。告诉他们说，可以住在耶利哥，等到胡须长起再回来。
Then certain men went and gave David word of what had been done to them. And he sent out with the purpose of meeting them; for the men were greatly shamed. And the king said, Keep where you are at Jericho till your hair is long again, and then come back.

亚扪人知道大卫憎恶他们，哈嫩和亚扪人就打发人拿一千他连得银子，从米所波大米，亚兰，玛迦，琐巴雇战车和马兵，
And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves hated by David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver as payment for war-carriages and horsemen from Mesopotamia and Aram-maacah and Zobah.

于是雇了三万二千辆战车和玛迦王并他的军兵。他们来安营在米底巴前。亚扪人也从他们的城里出来，聚集交战。
So with this money they got thirty-two thousand war-carriages, and the help of the king of Maacah and his people, who came and took up their position in front of Medeba. And the children of Ammon came together from their towns for the fight.

大卫听见了，就差派约押统带勇猛的全军出去。
And David, hearing of it, sent Joab with all the army of fighting-men.

亚扪人出来在城门前摆阵，所来的诸王另在郊野摆阵。
So the children of Ammon came out and put their forces in position on the way into the town; and the kings who had come were stationed by themselves in the field.

约押看见敌人在他前后摆阵，就从以色列军中挑选精兵，使他们对着亚兰人摆阵。
Now when Joab saw that their forces were in position against him in front and at his back, he took all the best men of Israel, and put them in line against the Aramaeans;

其余的兵交与他兄弟亚比筛，对着亚扪人摆阵。
And the rest of the people he put in position against the children of Ammon with Abishai, his brother, at their head.

约押对亚比筛说，亚兰人若强过我，你就来帮助我。亚扪人若强过你，我就去帮助你。
And he said, If the Aramaeans are stronger and get the better of me, then come to my help; and if the children of Ammon get the better of you, I will come to your help.

我们都当刚强，为本国的民和神的城邑作大丈夫，愿耶和华凭他的意旨而行。
Take heart, and let us be strong for our people and for the towns of our God; and may the Lord do what seems good to him.

于是约押和跟随他的人前进攻打亚兰人。亚兰人在约押面前逃跑。
So Joab and the people who were with him went forward into the fight against the Aramaeans, and they went in flight before him.

亚扪人见亚兰人逃跑，他们也在约押的兄弟亚比筛面前逃跑进城。约押就回耶路撒冷去了。
And when the children of Ammon saw the flight of the Aramaeans, they themselves went in flight from Abishai, his brother, and came into the town. Then Joab came back to Jerusalem.

亚兰人见自己被以色列人打败，就打发使者将大河那边的亚兰人调来，哈大利谢的将军朔法率领他们。
And when the Aramaeans saw that Israel had overcome them, they sent men to get the Aramaeans who were on the other side of the River, with Shophach, the captain of Hadadezer's army, at their head.

有人告诉大卫，他就聚集以色列众人过约旦河，来到亚兰人那里，迎着他们摆阵。大卫既摆阵攻击亚兰人，亚兰人就与他打仗。
And word of this was given to David; and he got all Israel together and went over Jordan and came to Helam and put his forces in position against them. And when David's forces were in position against the Aramaeans, the fight was started.

亚兰人在以色列人面前逃跑。大卫杀了亚兰七千辆战车的人，四万步兵，又杀了亚兰的将军朔法。
And the Aramaeans went in flight before Israel; and David put to the sword the men of seven thousand Aramaean war-carriages and forty thousand footmen, and put to death Shophach, the captain of the army.

属哈大利谢的诸王见自己被以色列人打败，就与大卫和好，归服他。于是亚兰人不敢再帮助亚扪人了。
And when the servants of Hadadezer saw that they were overcome by Israel, they made peace with David and became his servants: and the Aramaeans would give no more help to the children of Ammon.

过了一年，到列王出战的时候，约押率领军兵毁坏亚扪人的地，围攻拉巴。大卫仍住在耶路撒冷。约押攻打拉巴，将城倾覆。
Now in the spring, at the time when kings go out to war, Joab went out at the head of the armed forces and made waste all the land of the Ammonites and put his men in position before Rabbah, shutting it in. But David was still at Jerusalem. And Joab took Rabbah and made it waste.

大卫夺了亚扪人之王所戴的金冠冕（王或作玛勒堪。玛勒堪即米勒公，亚扪族之神名），其上的金子重一他连得，又嵌着宝石。人将这冠冕戴在大卫头上。大卫从城里夺了许多财物，
And David took the crown of Milcom from off his head; its weight was a talent of gold and it had stones of great price in it; and it was put on David's head, and he took a great store of goods from the town.

将城里的人拉出来，放在锯下，或铁耙下，或铁斧下（或作强他们用锯，或用打粮食的铁器，或用铁斧作工），大卫待亚扪各城的居民都是如此。其后大卫和众军都回耶路撒冷去了。
And he took the people out of the town and put them to work with wood-cutting instruments, and iron grain-crushers, and axes. And this he did to all the towns of the children of Ammon. Then David and all the people went back to Jerusalem.

后来，以色列人在基色与非利士人打仗。户沙人西比该杀了伟人的一个儿子细派，非利士人就被制伏了。
Now after this there was war with the Philistines at Gezer; then Sibbecai the Hushathite put to death Sippai, one of the offspring of the Rephaim; and they were overcome.

又与非利士人打仗。睚珥的儿子伊勒哈难杀了迦特人歌利亚的兄弟拉哈米。这人的枪杆粗如织布的机轴。
And again there was war with the Philistines; and Elhanan, the son of Jair, put to death Lahmi, the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the stem of whose spear was like a cloth-worker's rod.

又在迦特打仗。那里有一个身量高大的人，手脚都是六指，共有二十四个指头，他也是伟人的儿子。
And again there was war at Gath, where there was a very tall man, who had twenty-four fingers and toes, six fingers on his hands and six toes on his feet; he was one of the offspring of the Rephaim.

这人向以色列人骂阵，大卫的哥哥示米亚的儿子约拿单就杀了他。
And when he put shame on Israel, Jonathan, the son of Shimea, David's brother, put him to death.

这三个人是迦特伟人的儿子，都死在大卫和他仆人的手下。
These were of the offspring of the Rephaim in Gath; they came to their death by the hands of David and his servants.

撒但起来攻击以色列人，激动大卫数点他们。
Now Satan, designing evil against Israel, put into David's mind the impulse to take the number of Israel.

大卫就吩咐约押和民中的首领说，你们去数点以色列人，从别是巴直到但，回来告诉我，我好知道他们的数目。
And David said to Joab and the captains of the people, Now let all Israel, from Beer-sheba to Dan, be numbered; and give me word so that I may be certain of their number.

约押说，愿耶和华使他的百姓比现在加增百倍。我主我王阿，他们不都是你的仆人吗？我主为何吩咐行这事，为何使以色列人陷在罪里呢？
And Joab said, May the Lord make his people a hundred times more in number than they are; but, my lord king, are they not all my lord's servants? why would my lord have this done? why will he become a cause of sin to Israel?

但王的命令胜过约押。约押就出去，走遍以色列地，回到耶路撒冷，
But the king's word was stronger than Joab's. So Joab went out and went through all Israel and came to Jerusalem.

将百姓的总数奏告大卫，以色列人拿刀的有一百一十万。犹大人拿刀的有四十七万。
And Joab gave David the number of all the people; all the men of Israel, able to take up arms, were one million, one hundred thousand men; and those of Judah were four hundred and seventy thousand men, able to take up arms.

惟有利未人和便雅悯人没有数在其中，因为约押厌恶王的这命令。
But Levi and Benjamin were not numbered among them, for Joab was disgusted with the king's order.

神不喜悦这数点百姓的事，便降灾给以色列人。
And God was not pleased with this thing; so he sent punishment on Israel.

大卫祷告神说，我行这事大有罪了。现在求你除掉仆人的罪孽，因我所行的甚是愚昧。
Then David said to God, Great has been my sin in doing this; but now, be pleased to take away the sin of your servant, for I have done very foolishly.

耶和华吩咐大卫的先见迦得说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Gad, David's seer, saying,

你去告诉大卫说，耶和华如此说，我有三样灾，随你选择一样，我好降与你。
Go and say to David, The Lord says, Three things are offered to you: say which of them you will have, so that I may do it to you.

于是，迦得来见大卫，对他说，耶和华如此说，你可以随意选择，
So Gad came to David and said to him, The Lord says, Take whichever you will:

或三年的饥荒。或败在你敌人面前，被敌人的刀追杀三个月。或在你国中有耶和华的刀，就是三日的瘟疫，耶和华的使者在以色列的四境施行毁灭。现在你要想一想，我好回覆那差我来的。
Three years when there will not be enough food; or three months of war, when you will go in flight before your haters, being in great danger of the sword; or three days of the sword of the Lord, disease in the land, and the angel of the Lord taking destruction through all the land of Israel. Now give thought to the answer I am to take back to him who sent me.

大卫对迦得说，我甚为难。我愿落在耶和华的手里，因为他有丰盛的怜悯。我不愿落在人的手里。
And David said to Gad, This is a hard decision for me to make: let me come into the hands of the Lord, for great are his mercies: let me not come into the hands of men.

于是，耶和华降瘟疫与以色列人，以色列人就死了七万。
So the Lord sent disease on Israel, causing the death of seventy thousand men.

神差遣使者去灭耶路撒冷，刚要灭的时候，耶和华看见后悔，就不降这灾了，吩咐灭城的天使说，够了，住手吧。那时，耶和华的使者站在耶布斯人阿珥楠的禾场那里。
And God sent an angel to Jerusalem for its destruction: and when he was about to do so, the Lord saw, and had regret for the evil, and said to the angel of destruction, It is enough; do no more. Now the angel of the Lord was by the grain-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

大卫举目，看见耶和华的使者站在天地间，手里有拔出来的刀，伸在耶路撒冷以上。大卫和长老都身穿麻衣，面伏于地。
And David, lifting up his eyes, saw the angel of the Lord there between earth and heaven, with an uncovered sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the responsible men, clothed in haircloth, went down on their faces.

大卫祷告神说，吩咐数点百姓的不是我吗？我犯了罪，行了恶，但这群羊作了什么呢？愿耶和华我神的手攻击我和我的父家，不要攻击你的民，降瘟疫与他们。
And David said to God, Was it not I who gave the order for the people to be numbered? It is I who have done the sin and the great wrong; but these are only sheep; what have they done? let your hand, O Lord God, be lifted up against me and against my family, but not against your people to send disease on them.

耶和华的使者吩咐迦得去告诉大卫，叫他上去，在耶布斯人阿珥楠的禾场上为耶和华筑一座坛。
Then the angel of the Lord gave orders to Gad to say to David that he was to go and put up an altar to the Lord on the grain-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

大卫就照着迦得奉耶和华名所说的话上去了。
And David went up, as Gad had said in the name of the Lord.

那时阿珥楠正打麦子，回头看见天使，就和他四个儿子都藏起来了。
And Ornan, turning back, saw the angel, and his four sons who were with him went to a secret place. Now Ornan was crushing his grain.

大卫到了阿珥楠那里，阿珥楠看见大卫，就从禾场上出去，脸伏于地，向他下拜。
And when David came, Ornan, looking, saw him, and came out from the grain-floor and went down on his face to the earth before him.

大卫对阿珥楠说，你将这禾场与相连之地卖给我，我必给你足价，我好在其上为耶和华筑一座坛，使民间的瘟疫止住。
Then David said to Ornan, Give me the place where this grain-floor is, so that I may put up an altar here to the Lord: let me have it for its full price; so that this disease may be stopped among the people.

阿珥楠对大卫说，你可以用这禾场，愿我主我王照你所喜悦的去行。我也将牛给你作燔祭，把打粮的器具当柴烧，拿麦子作素祭。这些我都送给你。
And Ornan said to David, Take it, and let my lord the king do what seems right to him. See, I give you the oxen for burned offerings and the grain-cleaning instruments for fire-wood, and the grain for the meal offering; I give it all.

大卫王对阿珥楠说，不然。我必要用足价向你买。我不用你的物献给耶和华，也不用白得之物献为燔祭。
And King David said to Ornan, No; I will certainly give you the full price for it, because I will not take for the Lord what is yours, or give a burned offering without payment.

于是大卫为那块地平了六百舍客勒金子给阿珥楠。
So David gave Ornan six hundred shekels of gold by weight for the place.

大卫在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛，献燔祭和平安祭，求告耶和华。耶和华就应允他，使火从天降在燔祭坛上。
And David put up an altar there to the Lord, offering burned offerings and peace-offerings with prayers to the Lord; and he gave him an answer from heaven, sending fire on the altar of burned offering.

耶和华吩咐使者，他就收刀入鞘。
Then the Lord gave orders to the angel, and he put back his sword into its cover.

那时，大卫见耶和华在耶布斯人阿珥楠的禾场上应允了他，就在那里献祭。
At that time, when David saw that the Lord had given him an answer on the grain-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he made an offering there.

摩西在旷野所造之耶和华的帐幕和燔祭坛都在基遍的高处。
For the House of the Lord, which Moses had made in the waste land, and the altar of burned offerings, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.

只是大卫不敢前去求问神，因为惧怕耶和华使者的刀。
But David was not able to go before it to get directions from the Lord, so great was his fear of the sword of the angel of the Lord.

大卫说，这就是耶和华神的殿，为以色列人献燔祭的坛。
大卫吩咐聚集住以色列地的外邦人，从其中派石匠凿石头，要建造神的殿。
Then David said, This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar for Israel's burned offerings.

大卫预备许多铁作门上的钉子和钩子，又预备许多铜，多得无法可称。
And David gave orders to get together all the men from strange lands who were in the land of Israel; and he put stone-cutters to work, cutting stones for building the house of God.

又预备无数的香柏木，因为西顿人和推罗人给大卫运了许多香柏木来。
And he got together a great store of iron, for the nails for the doors and for the joins; and brass, more in weight than might be measured;

大卫说，我儿子所罗门还年幼娇嫩，要为耶和华建造的殿宇必须高大辉煌，使名誉荣耀传遍万国。所以我要为殿预备材料。于是，大卫在未死之先预备的材料甚多。
And cedar-trees without number, for the Zidonians and the men of Tyre came with a great amount of cedar-trees for David.

大卫召了他儿子所罗门来，嘱咐他给耶和华以色列的神建造殿宇，
And David said, Solomon my son is young and untested, and the house which is to be put up for the Lord is to be very great, a thing of wonder and glory through all countries; so I will make ready what is needed for it. So David got ready a great store of material before his death.

对所罗门说，我儿阿，我心里本想为耶和华我神的名建造殿宇，
Then he sent for his son Solomon, and gave him orders for the building of a house for the Lord, the God of Israel.

只是耶和华的话临到我说，你流了多人的血，打了多次大仗，你不可为我的名建造殿宇，因为你在我眼前使多人的血流在地上。
And David said to Solomon, My son, it was my desire to put up a house for the name of the Lord my God.

你要生一个儿子，他必作太平的人。我必使他安静，不被四围的仇敌扰乱。他的名要叫所罗门（即太平之意）。他在位的日子，我必使以色列人平安康泰。
But the word of the Lord came to me saying, You have taken lives without number and made great wars; I will not let you be the builder of a house for my name, because of the lives you have taken on the earth before my eyes.

他必为我的名建造殿宇。他要作我的子。我要作他的父。他作以色列王。我必坚定他的国位，直到永远。
But you will have a son who will be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from wars on every side. His name will be Solomon, and in his time I will give Israel peace and quiet;

我儿阿，现今愿耶和华与你同在，使你亨通，照他指着你说的话，建造耶和华你神的殿。
He will be the builder of a house for my name; he will be to me a son, and I will be to him a father; and I will make the seat of his rule over Israel certain for ever.

但愿耶和华赐你聪明智慧，好治理以色列国，遵行耶和华你神的律法。
Now, my son, may the Lord be with you; and may you do well, and put up the house of the Lord your God, as he has said of you.

你若谨守遵行耶和华借摩西吩咐以色列的律例典章，就得亨通。你当刚强壮胆，不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。
Only may the Lord give you wisdom, and knowledge of his orders for Israel, so that you may keep the law of the Lord your God.

我在困难之中为耶和华的殿预备了金子十万他连得，银子一百万他连得，铜和铁多得无法可称。我也预备了木头，石头，你还可以增添。
And all will go well for you, if you take care to keep the laws and the rules which the Lord gave to Moses for Israel: be strong and take heart; have no fear and do not be troubled.

你有许多匠人，就是石匠，木匠，和一切能作各样工的巧匠，
Now see, poor though I am, I have got ready for the house of the Lord a hundred thousand talents of gold and a million talents of silver; and a weight of brass and iron greater than may be measured; and wood and stone have I made ready, and you may put more to it.

并有无数的金银铜铁。你当起来办事，愿耶和华与你同在。
And you have a great number of workmen, cutters and workers of stone and wood, and experts in every sort of work,

大卫又吩咐以色列的众首领帮助他儿子所罗门，说，
In gold and silver and brass and iron more than may be numbered. Up! then, and to work; and may the Lord be with you.

耶和华你们的神不是与你们同在吗？不是叫你们四围都平安吗？因他已将这地的居民交在我手中，这地就在耶和华与他百姓面前制伏了。
Then David gave orders to all the chiefs of Israel to give their help to Solomon his son, saying,

现在你们应当立定心意，寻求耶和华你们的神。也当起来建造耶和华神的圣所，好将耶和华的约柜和供奉神的圣器皿都搬进为耶和华名建造的殿里。
Is not the Lord your God with you? and has he not given you rest on every side? for the Lord has given the people of the land into my hands, and the land is overcome before the Lord and before his people.

大卫年纪老迈，日子满足，就立他儿子所罗门作以色列的王。
Now David was old and full of days; and he made his son Solomon king over Israel.

大卫招聚以色列的众首领和祭司利未人。
And he got together all the chiefs of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.

利未人从三十岁以外的都被数点，他们男丁的数目共有三万八千。
And the Levites, all those of thirty years old and over, were numbered; and the number of them, by heads, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand.

其中有二万四千人管理耶和华殿的事，有六千人作官长和士师，
Of these, twenty-four thousand were to be overseers of the work of the house of the Lord, and six thousand were judges and men of authority;

有四千人作守门的，又有四千人用大卫所作的乐器颂赞耶和华。
Four thousand were door-keepers; and four thousand gave praise to the Lord with the instruments which I made, said David, for giving praise.

大卫将利未人革顺，哥辖，米拉利的子孙分了班次。
And David put them into divisions under the names of the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

革顺的子孙有拉但和示每。
Of the Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei.

拉但的长子是耶歇，还有细坦和约珥，共三人。
The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, and Zetham and Joel, three.

示每的儿子是示罗密，哈薛，哈兰三人。这是拉但族的族长。
The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth and Haziel and Haran, three; these were the heads of the families of Ladan.

示每的儿子是雅哈，细拿，耶乌施，比利亚共四人。
And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zizah and Jeush and Beriah; these four were the sons of Shimei.

雅哈是长子，细撒是次子。但耶乌施和比利亚的子孙不多，所以算为一族。
Jahath was the chief and Zizah the second; but Jeush and Beriah had only a small number of sons, so they were grouped together as one family.

哥辖的儿子是暗兰，以斯哈，希伯伦，乌薛共四人。
The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.

暗兰的儿子是亚伦，摩西。亚伦和他的子孙分出来，好分别至圣的物，在耶和华面前烧香，事奉他，奉他的名祝福，直到永远。
The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses; and Aaron was made separate and holy, he and his sons for ever, for the care of the most holy things and the burning of offerings before the Lord, to do his work and give blessings in his name for ever.

至于神人摩西，他的子孙名字记在利未支派的册上。
And the sons of Moses, the man of God, were put into the list of the tribe of Levi.

摩西的儿子是革舜和以利以谢。
The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.

革舜的长子是细布业。
The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the first.

以利以谢的儿子是利哈比雅。以利以谢没有别的儿子，但利哈比雅的子孙甚多。
And the sons of Eliezer: Rehabiah the first; and Eliezer had no other sons, but Rehabiah had a great number.

以斯哈的长子是示罗密。
The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the first.

希伯伦的长子是耶利雅，次子是亚玛利亚，三子是雅哈悉，四子是耶加面。
The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.

乌薛的长子是米迦，次子是耶西雅。
The sons of Uzziel: Micah the first, and Isshiah the second.

米拉利的儿子是抹利，母示。抹利的儿子是以利亚撒，基士。
The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.

以利亚撒死了，没有儿子，只有女儿，他们本族基士的儿子娶了她们为妻。
And at his death Eleazar had no sons, but only daughters, and their relations, the sons of Kish, took them as wives.

母示的儿子是末力，以得，耶利摩共三人。
The sons of Mushi: Mahli and Eder and Jeremoth, three.

以上利未子孙作族长的，照着男丁的数目，从二十岁以外，都办耶和华殿的事务。
These were the sons of Levi, grouped by families, the heads of the families of those who were numbered by name, by heads, all those of twenty years old and over who did the work of the house of the Lord.

大卫说，耶和华以色列的神已经使他的百姓平安，他永远住在耶路撒冷。
For David said, The Lord, the God of Israel, has given his people rest, and he has made his resting-place in Jerusalem for ever;

利未人不必再抬帐幕和其中所用的一切器皿了。
And from now, there will be no need for the House of the Lord, and the vessels used in it, to be moved about by the Levites.

照着大卫临终所吩咐的，利未人从二十岁以外的都被数点。
So among the last acts of David was the numbering of the sons of Levi, from twenty years old and over.

他们的职任是服事亚伦的子孙，在耶和华的殿和院子，并屋中办事，洁净一切圣物，就是办神殿的事务，
Their place was by the side of the sons of Aaron in all the work of the house of the Lord, in the open spaces and in the rooms, in the making clean of all the holy things, in doing all the work of the house of the Lord,

并管理陈设饼，素祭的细面，或无酵薄饼，或用盘烤，或用油调和的物，又管理各样的升斗尺度。
The holy bread was in their care, and the crushed grain for the meal offering, of unleavened cakes or meal cooked over the fire or in water; they had control of all sorts of weights and measures;

每日早晚，站立称谢赞美耶和华，
They had to take their places every morning to give praise and make melody to the Lord, and in the same way at evening;

又在安息日，月朔，并节期，按数照例，将燔祭常常献给耶和华。
At every offering of burned offerings to the Lord, on Sabbaths, and at the new moons, and on the regular feasts, in the number ordered by the law, at all times before the Lord;

又看守会幕和圣所，并守耶和华吩咐他们弟兄亚伦子孙的，办耶和华殿的事。
And they had the care of the Tent of meeting and the holy place, under the direction of the sons of Aaron their brothers, for the work of the house of the Lord.

亚伦子孙的班次记在下面，亚伦的儿子是拿答，亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛。
Now the divisions into which the sons of Aaron were grouped were these: the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

拿答，亚比户死在他们父亲之先，没有留下儿子。故此，以利亚撒，以他玛供祭司的职分。
But Nadab and Abihu came to their end before their father, and had no children; so Eleazar and Ithamar did the work of priests.

以利亚撒的子孙撒督和以他玛的子孙亚希米勒，同着大卫将他们的族弟兄分成班次。
And David, with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, made distribution of them into their positions for their work.

以利亚撒子孙中为首的比以他玛子孙中为首的更多，分班如下，以利亚撒的子孙中有十六个族长，以他玛的子孙中有八个族长。
And there were more chiefs among the sons of Eleazar than among the sons of Ithamar; and this is how they were grouped: of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen, all heads of families; and of the sons of Ithamar, heads of families, there were eight.

都掣签分立，彼此一样。在圣所和神面前作首领的有以利亚撒的子孙，也有以他玛的子孙。
So they were put into groups, by the Lord's decision, one with another; for there were rulers of the holy place and rulers of the house of God among the sons of Eleazar and the sons of Ithamar.

作书记的利未人拿坦业的儿子示玛雅在王和首领，与祭司撒督，亚比亚他的儿子亚希米勒，并祭司利未人的族长面前记录他们的名字。在以利亚撒的子孙中取一族，在以他玛的子孙中取一族。
And Shemaiah, the son of Nethanel the scribe, who was a Levite, put down their names in writing, the king being present with the rulers, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech, the son of Abiathar, and the heads of families of the priests and the Levites; one family being taken for Eleazar and then one for Ithamar, and so on.

掣签的时候，第一掣出来的是耶何雅立，第二是耶大雅，
Now the first name to come out was that of Jehoiarib; the second Jedaiah,

第三是哈琳，第四是梭琳，
The third Harim, the fourth Seorim,

第五是玛基雅，第六是米雅民，
The fifth Malchijah, the sixth Mijamin,

第七是哈歌斯，第八是亚比雅，
The seventh Hakkoz, the eighth Abijah,

第九是耶书亚，第十是示迦尼，
The ninth Jeshua, the tenth Shecaniah,

第十一是以利亚实，第十二是雅金，
The eleventh Eliashib, the twelfth Jakim,

第十三是胡巴，第十四是耶是比押，
The thirteenth Huppah, the fourteenth Jeshebeab,

第十五是璧迦，第十六是音麦，
The fifteenth Bilgah, the sixteenth Immer,

第十七是希悉，第十八是哈辟悉，
The seventeenth Hezir, the eighteenth Happizzez,

第十九是毗他希雅，第二十是以西结，
The nineteenth Pethahiah, the twentieth Jehezkel,

第二十一是雅斤，第二十二是迦末，
The twenty-first Jachin, the twenty-second Gamul,

第二十三是第来雅，第二十四是玛西亚。
The twenty-third Delaiah, the twenty-fourth Maaziah.

这就是他们的班次，要照耶和华以色列的神借他们祖宗亚伦所吩咐的条例，进入耶和华的殿办理事务。
So they were put into their different groups, to take their places in the house of the Lord, in agreement with the rules made by Aaron their father, as the Lord, the God of Israel, had given him orders.

利未其余的子孙如下，暗兰的子孙里有书巴业。书巴业的子孙里有耶希底亚。
And of the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.

利哈比雅的子孙里有长子伊示雅。
Of Rehabiah; of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.

以斯哈的子孙里有示罗摩。示罗摩的子孙里有雅哈。
Of the Izharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.

希伯伦的子孙里有长子耶利雅，次子亚玛利亚，三子雅哈悉，四子耶加面。
And the sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.

乌薛的子孙里有米迦。米迦的子孙里有沙密。
The sons of Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir.

米迦的兄弟是伊示雅。伊示雅的子孙里有撒迦利雅。
The brother of Micah, Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.

米拉利的儿子是抹利，母示，雅西雅。雅西雅的儿子有比挪。
The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah.

米拉利的子孙里有雅西雅的儿子比挪，朔含，撒刻，伊比利。
The sons of Merari: of Jaaziah, Shoham and Zaccur and Ibri.

抹利的儿子是以利亚撒。以利亚撒没有儿子。
Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.

基士的子孙里有耶拉篾。
Of Kish: the sons of Kish, Jerahmeel.

母示的儿子是末力，以得，耶利摩。按着宗族这都是利未的子孙。
And the sons of Mushi: Mahli and Eder and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites by their families.

他们在大卫王和撒督，并亚希米勒与祭司利未人的族长面前掣签，正如他们弟兄亚伦的子孙一般。各族的长者与兄弟没有分别。
Selection was made of these in the same way as of their brothers the sons of Aaron, David the king being present, with Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the heads of families of the priests and of the Levites; the families of the chief in the same way as those of his younger brother.

大卫和众首领分派亚萨，希幔，并耶杜顿的子孙弹琴，鼓瑟，敲钹，唱歌（唱歌原文作说预言本章同）。他们供职的人数记在下面，
Further, David and the chiefs of the servants of the holy place made selection of certain of the sons of Asaph and of Heman and of Jeduthun for the work of prophets, to make melody with corded instruments and brass; and the number of the men for the work they had to do was:

亚萨的儿子撒刻，约瑟，尼探雅，亚萨利拉都归亚萨指教，遵王的旨意唱歌。
Of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur and Joseph and Nethaniah and Asharelah, sons of Asaph; under the direction of Asaph, acting as a prophet under the orders of the king;

耶杜顿的儿子基大利，西利，耶筛亚，哈沙比雅，玛他提雅，示每共六人，都归他们父亲耶杜顿指教，弹琴，唱歌，称谢，颂赞耶和华。
Of Jeduthun: the six sons of Jeduthun, Gedaliah and Zeri and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah and Mattithiah; under the direction of their father Jeduthun who, acting as a prophet, with corded instruments gave praise and glory to the Lord.

希幔的儿子布基雅，玛探雅，乌薛，细布业，耶利摩，哈拿尼雅，哈拿尼，以利亚他，基大利提，罗幔提以谢，约施比加沙，玛罗提，何提，玛哈秀。
Of Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti and Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth;

这都是希幔的儿子，吹角颂赞。希幔奉神之命作王的先见。神赐给希幔十四个儿子，三个女儿，
All these were sons of Heman, the king's seer in the words of God. And to make great his power God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.

都归他们父亲指教，在耶和华的殿唱歌，敲钹，弹琴，鼓瑟，办神殿的事务。亚萨，耶杜顿，希幔都是王所命定的。
All these, under the direction of their father, made music in the house of the Lord, with brass and corded instruments, for the worship of the house of God; Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman being under the orders of the king.

他们和他们的弟兄学习颂赞耶和华。善于歌唱的共有二百八十八人。
And the number of them, with their brothers who were trained and expert in making melody to the Lord, was two hundred and eighty-eight.

这些人无论大小，为师的，为徒的，都一同掣签分了班次。
And selection was made of them for their special work, all having equal chances, small as well as great, the teacher as the learner.

掣签的时候，第一掣出来的是亚萨的儿子约瑟。第二是基大利。他和他弟兄并儿子共十二人。
Now of the group of Asaph, the first name to come out was Joseph; the second Gedaliah; he and his brothers and sons were twelve?

第三是撒刻。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The third Zaccur, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第四是伊洗利。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The fourth Izri, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第五是尼探雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The fifth Nethaniah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第六是布基雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The sixth Bukkiah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第七是耶萨利拉。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The seventh Jesharelah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第八是耶筛亚。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The eighth Jeshaiah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第九是玛探雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The ninth Mattaniah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十是示每。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The tenth Shimei, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十一是亚萨烈。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The eleventh Azarel, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十二是哈沙比雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twelfth Hashabiah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十三是书巴业。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The thirteenth Shubael, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十四是玛他提雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The fourteenth Mattithiah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十五是耶利摩。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The fifteenth Jeremoth, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十六是哈拿尼雅。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The sixteenth Hananiah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十七是约施比加沙。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The seventeenth Joshbekashah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十八是哈拿尼。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The eighteenth Hanani, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第十九是玛罗提。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The nineteenth Mallothi, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第二十是以利亚他。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twentieth Eliathah, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第二十一是何提。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twenty-first Hothir, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第二十二是基大利提。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twenty-second Giddalti, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第二十三是玛哈秀。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twenty-third Mahazioth, with his sons and his brothers, twelve;

第二十四是罗幔提以谢。他和他儿子并弟兄共十二人。
The twenty-fourth Romamti-ezer, with his sons and his brothers, twelve.

守门的班次记在下面，可拉族亚萨的子孙中，有可利的儿子米施利米雅。
For the divisions of the door-keepers: of the Korahites, Meshelemiah, the son of Kore, of the sons of Ebiasaph.

米施利米雅的长子是撒迦利亚，次子是耶叠，三子是西巴第雅，四子是耶提聂，
And Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the oldest, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,

五子是以拦，六子是约哈难，七子是以利约乃。
Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.

俄别以东的长子是示玛雅，次子是约萨拔，三子是约亚，四子是沙甲，五子是拿坦业，
And Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the oldest, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethanel the fifth,

六子是亚米利，七子是以萨迦，八子是毗乌利太，因为神赐福与俄别以东。
Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth; for the blessing of God was on him.

他的儿子示玛雅有几个儿子，都是大能的壮士，掌管父亲的家。
And Shemaiah his son had sons, rulers over the family of their father, for they were able men.

示玛雅的儿子是俄得尼，利法益，俄备得，以利萨巴。以利萨巴的弟兄是壮士，还有以利户和西玛迦。
The sons of Shemaiah: Othni and Rephael and Obed, Elzabad, whose brothers were great men of war, Elihu and Semachiah.

这都是俄别以东的子孙，他们和他们的儿子并弟兄，都是善于办事的壮士。俄别以东的子孙共六十二人。
All these were sons of Obed-edom: they and their sons and their brothers, able men and strong for the work; sixty-two sons of Obed-edom.

米施利米雅的儿子和弟兄都是壮士，共十八人。
Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, eighteen able men.

米拉利子孙何萨有几个儿子，长子是申利，他原不是长子，是他父亲立他作长子。
And Hosah, a son of the children of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief (for though he was not the oldest, his father made him chief);

次子是希勒家，三子是底巴利雅，四子是撒迦利亚。何萨的儿子并弟兄共十三人。
Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: Hosah had thirteen sons and brothers.

这些人都是守门的班长，与他们的弟兄一同在耶和华殿里按班供职。
Of these were the divisions of the door-keepers, men of authority, having responsible positions like their brothers to be servants in the house of the Lord.

他们无论大小，都按着宗族掣签分守各门。
And the families were taken by the decision of the Lord for every door; the small family had the same chance as the great.

掣签守东门的是示利米雅。他的儿子撒迦利亚是精明的谋士，掣签守北门。
And the care of the door on the east came out for Shelemiah. Then the name of Zechariah his son, a man wise in discussion, came out, and the door on the north was given to him.

俄别以东守南门，他的儿子守库房。
To Obed-edom, that on the south; and to his sons, the store-house.

书聘与何萨守西门，在靠近沙利基门，通着往上去的街道上，班与班相对。
To Hosah, the door on the west, by the door of Shallecheth, at the footway which goes up, watch by watch.

每日东门有六个利未人，北门有四个，南门有四个，库房有两个，又有两个轮班替换。
On the east were six Levites a day, and on the north and the south four a day, and for the store-house two and two.

在西面街道上有四个，在游廊上有两个。
For the pillared way, on the west, four at the footway and two at the pillared way itself.

以上是可拉子孙和米拉利子孙守门的班次。
These were the divisions of door-keepers, of the sons of the Korahites and of the sons of Merari.

利未子孙中有亚希雅掌管神殿的府库和圣物的府库。
And the Levites their brothers were responsible for the stores of the house of God and the holy things.

革顺族，拉但子孙里，作族长的是革顺族拉但的子孙耶希伊利。
The sons of Ladan: sons of the Gershonites of the family of Ladan, heads of families of Ladan the Gershonite, Jehieli.

耶希伊利的儿子西坦和他兄弟约珥掌管耶和华殿里的府库。
The sons of Jehieli: Zetham and Joel, his brother, had the care of the stores of the house of the Lord.

暗兰族，以斯哈族，希伯伦族，乌泄族也有职分。
Of the Amramites, of the Izharites, of the Hebronites, of the Uzzielites:

摩西的孙子，革舜的儿子细布业掌管府库。
And Shebuel, the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was controller of the stores.

还有他的弟兄以利以谢。以利以谢的儿子是利哈比雅。利哈比雅的儿子是耶筛亚。耶筛亚的儿子是约兰。约兰的儿子是细基利。细基利的儿子是示罗密。
And his brothers: of Eliezer, Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomoth his son.

这示罗密和他的弟兄掌管府库的圣物，就是大卫王和众族长，千夫长，百夫长，并军长所分别为圣的物。
Shelomoth and his brothers were responsible for all the store of holy things which David the king and the heads of families, the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and the captains of the army, had given to the Lord.

他们将争战时所夺的财物分别为圣，以备修造耶和华的殿。
From the goods taken in war, they gave, as a holy offering, materials for the building of the house of the Lord.

先见撒母耳，基士的儿子扫罗，尼珥的儿子押尼珥，洗鲁雅的儿子约押所分别为圣的物都归示罗密和他的弟兄掌管。
And everything Samuel the prophet and Saul, the son of Kish, and Abner, the son of Ner, and Joab, the son of Zeruiah, had made holy; whatever anyone had given, it was under the care of Shelomoth and his brothers.

以斯哈族有基拿尼雅和他众子作官长和士师，管理以色列的外事。
Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons had to do all the public business of Israel, in relation to judges and men in authority.

希伯伦族有哈沙比雅和他弟兄一千七百人，都是壮士，在约旦河西，以色列地办理耶和华与王的事。
Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, seventeen hundred able men, were overseers of Israel on the other side of the Jordan, to the west, being responsible for all the work of the Lord's house and for the work done by the king's servants.

希伯伦族中有耶利雅作族长。大卫作王第四十年，在基列的雅谢，从这族中寻得大能的勇士。
Of the Hebronites, Jerijah was the chief of all the Hebronites, in their generations by families. In the fortieth year of the rule of David a search was made, and able men were seen among them at Jazer of Gilead.

耶利雅的弟兄有二千七百人，都是壮士，且作族长。大卫王派他们在流便支派，迦得支派，玛拿西半支派中办理神和王的事。
And his brothers were two thousand, seven hundred able men, heads of families, whom King David made overseers over the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, in everything to do with God, and for the king's business.

以色列人的族长，千夫长，百夫长，和官长都分定班次，每班是二万四千人，周年按月轮流，替换出入服事王。
Now the number of the children of Israel, that is, the heads of families, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and the men in authority who were servants of the king in anything to do with the divisions which came in and went out month by month through all the months of the year, in every division were twenty-four thousand.

正月第一班的班长是撒巴第业的儿子雅朔班。他班内有二万四千人。
Over the first division for the first month was Ishbaal, the son of Zabdiel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

他是法勒斯的子孙，统管正月班的一切军长。
He was of the sons of Perez, and the chief of all the captains of the army for the first month.

二月的班长是亚哈希人朵代，还有副官密基罗。他班内有二万四千人。
And over the division for the second month was Eleazar, the son of Dodai the Ahohite, the ruler; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

三月第三班的班长（原文作军长下同）是祭司耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅。他班内有二万四千人。
The third captain of the army for the third month was Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the priest; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

这比拿雅是那三十人中的勇士，管理那三十人。他班内又有他儿子暗米萨拔。
This is the same Benaiah who was the great man of the thirty, chief of the thirty; and in his division was Ammizabad his son.

四月第四班的班长是约押的兄弟亚撒黑。接续他的是他儿子西巴第雅。他班内有二万四千人。
The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel, the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

五月第五班的班长是伊斯拉人珊合。他班内有二万四千人。
The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

六月第六班的班长是提哥亚人益吉的儿子以拉。他班内有二万四千人。
The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira, the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

七月第七班的班长是以法莲族比伦人希利斯。他班内有二万四千人。
The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

八月第八班的班长是谢拉族户沙人西比该。他班内有二万四千人。
The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

九月第九班的班长是便雅悯族亚拿突人亚比以谢。他班内有二万四千人。
The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjamites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

十月第十班的班长是谢拉族尼陀法人玛哈莱。他班内有二万四千人。
The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

十一月第十一班的班长是以法莲族比拉顿人比拿雅。他班内有二万四千人。
The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

十二月第十二班的班长是俄陀聂族尼陀法人黑玳。他班内有二万四千人。
The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.

管理以色列众支派的记在下面，管流便人的是细基利的儿子以利以谢。管西缅人的是玛迦的儿子示法提雅。
And over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites was Eliezer, the son of Zichri; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah, the son of Maacah;

管利未人的是基母利的儿子哈沙比雅。管亚伦子孙的是撒督。
Of Levi, Hashabiah, the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok;

管犹大人的是大卫的一个哥哥以利户，管以萨迦人的是米迦勒的儿子暗利。
Of Judah, Elihu, one of the brothers of David; of Issachar, Omri, the son of Michael;

管西布伦人的是俄巴第雅的儿子伊施玛雅。管拿弗他利人的是亚斯列的儿子耶利摩。
Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah, the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth, the son of Azriel;

管以法莲人的是阿撒细雅的儿子何细亚。管玛拿西半支派的是毗大雅的儿子约珥。
Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea, the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel, the son of Pedaiah;

管基列地玛拿西那半支派的是撒迦利亚的儿子易多。管便雅悯人的是押尼珥的儿子雅西业。
Of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo, the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel, the son of Abner;

管但人的是耶罗罕的儿子亚萨列。以上是以色列众支派的首领。
Of Dan, Azarel, the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.

以色列人二十岁以内的，大卫没有记其数目。因耶和华曾应许说，必加增以色列人如天上的星那样多。
But David did not take the number of those who were under twenty years old, for the Lord had said that he would make Israel like the stars of heaven in number.

洗鲁雅的儿子约押动手数点，当时耶和华的烈怒临到以色列人。因此，没有点完，数目也没有写在大卫王记上。
The numbering was started by Joab, the son of Zeruiah, but he did not go on to the end; and because of it, wrath came on Israel and the number was not recorded in the history of King David.

掌管王府库的是亚叠的儿子押斯马威。掌管田野城邑村庄保障之仓库的是乌西雅的儿子约拿单。
And Azmaveth, the son of Adiel, was controller of the king's property; Jonathan, the son of Uzziah, had control of all store-houses in country places and in the towns and little towns and strong places;

掌管耕田种地的是基绿的儿子以斯利。
Ezri, the son of Chelub, had authority over the field-workers and farmers;

掌管葡萄园的是拉玛人示每。掌管葡萄园酒窖的是实弗米人撒巴底。
Shimei the Ramathite was responsible for the vine-gardens; Zabdi the Shiphmite was responsible for the produce of the vine-gardens and for all the stores of wine;

掌管高原橄榄树和桑树的是基第利人巴勒哈南。掌管油库的是约阿施。
Baal-hanan the Gederite was responsible for the olive-trees and the sycamore-trees in the lowlands; and Joash for the stores of oil;

掌管沙仑牧放牛群的是沙仑人施提赉。掌管山谷牧养牛群的是亚第赉的儿子沙法。
And Shitrai the Sharonite was responsible for the herds in the grass-lands of Sharon, and Shaphat, the son of Adlai, for those in the valleys;

掌管驼群的是以实玛利人阿比勒。掌管驴群的是米仑人耶希底亚。掌管羊群的是夏甲人雅悉。
Obil the Ishmaelite had control of the camels and Jehdeiah the Meronothite of the she-asses;

这都是给大卫王掌管产业的。
The flocks were in the care of Jaziz the Hagarite. All these were the controllers of King David's property.

大卫的叔叔约拿单作谋士。这人有智慧，又作书记。哈摩尼的儿子耶歇作王众子的师傅。
Now Jonathan, David's father's brother, expert in discussion, and a man of good sense, was a scribe; and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni, had the care of the king's sons;

亚希多弗也作王的谋士。亚基人户筛作王的陪伴。
And Ahithophel was the king's expert in discussion and Hushai the Archite was the king's friend.

亚希多弗之后，有比拿雅的儿子耶何耶大和亚比亚他接续他作谋士。约押作王的元帅。
After Ahithophel was Jehoiada, the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar; and the captain of the king's army was Joab.

大卫招聚以色列各支派的首领和轮班服事王的军长，与千夫长，百夫长，掌管王和王子产业牲畜的，并太监，以及大能的勇士，都到耶路撒冷来。
And David got together at Jerusalem all the rulers of Israel, the chiefs of the tribes and the captains of the divisions waiting on the king in turn, and the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds and the controllers of all the goods and property of the king and his sons, with the unsexed servants and the great men of war.

大卫王就站起来，说，我的弟兄，我的百姓阿，你们当听我言，我心里本想建造殿宇，安放耶和华的约柜，作为我神的脚凳。我已经预备建造的材料。
Then David the king got up and said, Give ear to me, my brothers and my people; it was my desire to put up a house, a resting-place for the ark of the Lord's agreement, and for the foot-rest of our God; and I had got material ready for the building of it.

只是神对我说，你不可为我的名建造殿宇。因你是战士，流了人的血。
But God said to me, You are not to be the builder of a house for my name, because you are a man of war and have taken life;

然而，耶和华以色列的神在我父的全家拣选我作以色列的王，直到永远。因他拣选犹大为首领。在犹大支派中拣选我父家，在我父的众子里喜悦我，立我作以色列众人的王。
Though the Lord, the God of Israel, took me out of all my father's family, to be king over Israel for ever, marking out Judah to be chief, and, of the people of Judah, my father's family; and among the sons of my father he was pleased to make me king over all Israel;

耶和华赐我许多儿子，在我儿子中拣选所罗门坐耶和华的国位，治理以色列人。
And of all my sons (for the Lord has given me a great number of sons) he has made selection of Solomon to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of the Lord over Israel.

耶和华对我说，你儿子所罗门必建造我的殿和院宇。因为我拣选他作我的子，我也必作他的父。
And he said to me, Solomon your son will be the builder of my house and the open spaces round it; for I have taken him to be my son, and I will be his father.

他若恒久遵行我的诫命典章如今日一样，我就必坚定他的国位，直到永远。
I will keep his kingdom in its place for ever, if he is strong at all times to do my orders and keep my rules, as at this day.

现今在耶和华的会中，以色列众人眼前所说的，我们的神也听见了。你们应当寻求耶和华你们神的一切诫命，谨守遵行，如此你们可以承受这美地，遗留给你们的子孙，永远为业。
So now, before the eyes of all Israel, the people of the Lord, and in the hearing of our God, keep and be true to the orders of the Lord your God; so that you may have this good land for yourselves and give it for a heritage to your children after you for ever.

我儿所罗门哪，你当认识耶和华你父的神，诚心乐意地事奉他。因为他鉴察众人的心，知道一切心思意念。你若寻求他，他必使你寻见。你若离弃他，他必永远丢弃你。
And you, Solomon my son, get knowledge of the God of your father, and be his servant with a true heart and with a strong desire, for the Lord is the searcher of all hearts, and has knowledge of all the designs of men's thoughts; if you make search for him, he will be near you; but if you are turned away from him, he will give you up for ever.

你当谨慎，因耶和华拣选你建造殿宇作为圣所。你当刚强去行。
Now then, take note; for the Lord has made selection of you to be the builder of a house for the holy place. Be strong and do it.

大卫将殿的游廊，旁屋，府库，楼房，内殿，和施恩所的样式指示他儿子所罗门，
Then David gave to his son Solomon the design of the doorway of the house of God and of its houses and its store-houses, and the higher rooms and the inner rooms and the place for the mercy-seat;

又将被灵感动所得的样式，就是耶和华神殿的院子，周围的房屋，殿的府库，和圣物府库的一切样式都指示他。
And the design of all he had in his heart for the outer squares of the house of the Lord, and for the rooms all round it, and for the store-houses of the house of the Lord, and for the store-houses for the holy things;

又指示他祭司和利未人的班次与耶和华殿里各样的工作，并耶和华殿里一切器皿的样式，
And for the divisions of the priests and Levites, and for all the work in connection with the worship of the house of the Lord, and all the vessels used in the house of the Lord;

以及各样应用金器的分两和各样应用银器的分两，
Of gold, by weight, for the vessels of gold, for all the vessels of different uses; and silver for all the vessels of silver by weight, for vessels of different uses;

金灯台和金灯的分两，银灯台和银灯的分两，轻重各都合宜。
And gold by weight for the light-supports and the vessels for the lights, the weight of gold needed for every support and every vessel for lights; and for the silver light-supports, the weight of silver needed for every support and for the different vessels as every one was to be used;

陈设饼金桌子的分两，银桌子的分两，
And gold by weight for the tables for the holy bread for every table, and silver for the silver tables;

精金的肉叉子，盘子，和爵的分两，各金碗与各银碗的分两，
Clear gold for the meat-hooks and the basins and the cups; for the gold basins, gold enough by weight for every basin; and silver by weight for every silver basin;

精金香坛的分两，并用金子作基路伯（原文作用金子作车式的基路伯）。基路伯张开翅膀，遮掩耶和华的约柜。
And the best gold for the altar of perfumes; and gold for the design of the carriage, for the winged ones whose wings were outstretched covering the ark of the Lord's agreement.

大卫说，这一切工作的样式都是耶和华用手划出来使我明白的。
All this, said David, the design for all these things, has been made dear to me in writing by the hand of the Lord.

大卫又对他儿子所罗门说，你当刚强壮胆去行。不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。因为耶和华神就是我的神，与你同在。他必不撇下你，也不丢弃你，直到耶和华殿的工作都完毕了。
And David said to his son Solomon, Be strong and of a good heart and do your work; have no fear and do not be troubled, for the Lord God, my God, is with you; he will not give you up, and his face will not be turned away from you, till all the work necessary for the house of the Lord is complete.

有祭司和利未人的各班，为要办理神殿各样的事，又有灵巧的人在各样的工作上乐意帮助你。并有众首领和众民一心听从你的命令。
And see, there are the divisions of the priests and Levites for all the work of the house of God; and every trained and expert workman will be ready to do for you whatever is needed; and the captains and the people will be under your orders in everything.

大卫王对会众说，我儿子所罗门是神特选的，还年幼娇嫩。这工程甚大，因这殿不是为人，乃是为耶和华神建造的。
And David the king said to all the people, Solomon my son, the only one who has been marked out by God, is still young and untested, and the work is great, for this great house is not for man, but for the Lord God.

我为我神的殿已经尽力，预备金子作金器，银子作银器，铜作铜器，铁作铁器，木作木器，还有红玛瑙可镶嵌的宝石，彩石和一切的宝石，并许多汉白玉。
Now as far as I am able, I have made ready what is needed for the house of my God; the gold for the things of gold, and the silver for the silver things, and the brass for the brass things, iron for the things of iron, and wood for the things of wood; beryls and jewels to be framed, and stones of different colours for ornament; all sorts of stones of great price, and polished building-stone, as much as is needed and more.

且因我心中爱慕我神的殿，就在预备建造圣殿的材料之外，又将我自己积蓄的金银献上，建造我神的殿，
And because this house of God is dear to me, I give my private store of gold and silver to the house of my God, in addition to all I have got ready for the holy house;

就是俄斐金三千他连得，精链的银子七千他连得，以贴殿墙。
Even three thousand talents of gold of Ophir and seven thousand talents of the best silver, for plating the walls of the house:

金子作金器，银子作银器，并借匠人的手制造一切。今日有谁乐意将自己献给耶和华呢？
Gold for the gold things, and silver for the silver things, and for every sort of work to be done by the expert workmen. Who then will come forward, offering himself this day for the Lord's work?

于是，众族长和以色列各支派的首领，千夫长，百夫长，并监管王工的官长，都乐意献上。
Then the heads of families and the chiefs of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the controllers of the king's business, freely gave themselves;

他们为神殿的使用献上金子五千他连得零一万达利克，银子一万他连得，铜一万八千他连得，铁十万他连得。
And they gave for the use of the house of the Lord, five thousand talents and ten thousand darics of gold, and ten thousand talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and a hundred thousand talents of iron.

凡有宝石的都交给革顺人耶歇，送入耶和华殿的府库。
And those who had stones of great price gave them to the store of the house of the Lord, under the care of Jehiel the Gershonite.

因这些人诚心乐意献给耶和华，百姓就欢喜，大卫王也大大欢喜。
Then the people were glad because their offerings were freely given, for with a true heart they freely gave what they had to the Lord; and David the king was full of joy.

所以，大卫在会众面前称颂耶和华说，耶和华我们的父，以色列的神是应当称颂，直到永永远远的。
So David gave praise to the Lord before all the people; and David said, Praise be to you, O Lord the God of Israel, our father for ever and ever.

耶和华阿，尊大，能力，荣耀，强胜，威严都是你的。凡天上地下的都是你的。国度也是你的，并且你为至高，为万有之首。
Yours, O Lord, is the strength and the power and the glory, and the authority and the honour: for everything in heaven and on earth is yours; yours is the kingdom, O Lord, and you are lifted up as head over all.

丰富尊荣都从你而来，你也治理万物。在你手里有大能大力，使人尊大强盛都出于你。
Wealth and honour come from you, and you are ruler over all, and in your hand is power and strength; it is in your power to make great, and to give strength to all.

我们的神阿，现在我们称谢你，赞美你荣耀之名。
So now, our God, we give you praise, honouring the glory of your name.

我算什么，我的民算什么，竟能如此乐意奉献。因为万物都从你而来，我们把从你而得的献给你。
But who am I and what is my people, that we have power to give so freely in this way? for all things come from you, and what we have given you is yours.

我们在你面前是客旅，是寄居的，与我们列祖一样。我们在世的日子如影儿，不能长存（或作没有长存的指望）。
For we, as all our fathers were, are like men from a strange country before you, who have got a place for a time in the land; our days on the earth are like a shade, and there is no hope of going on.

耶和华我们的神阿，我们预备这许多材料，要为你的圣名建造殿宇，都是从你而来，都是属你的。
O Lord our God, all this store, which we have made ready for the building of a house for your holy name, comes from your hand and is yours.

我的神阿，我知道你察验人心，喜悦正直。我以正直的心乐意献上这一切物。现在我喜欢见你的民在这里都乐意奉献与你。
And I am conscious, my God, that you are the searcher of hearts, taking pleasure in righteousness. As for me, with an upright heart I have freely given all these things; and I have seen with joy your people who are here to make their offerings freely to you.

耶和华我们列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，以色列的神阿，求你使你的民常存这样的心思意念，坚定他们的心归向你，
O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the deepest thoughts of your people, and let their hearts be fixed and true to you;

又求你赐我儿子所罗门诚实的心，遵守你的命令，法度，律例，成就这一切的事，用我所预备的建造殿宇。
And give to Solomon my son a true heart, to keep your orders, your rules, and your laws, and to do all these things, and to put up this great house for which I have made ready.

大卫对全会众说，你们应当称颂耶和华你们的神。于是会众称颂耶和华他们列祖的神，低头拜耶和华与王。
And David said to all the people, Now give praise to the Lord your God. And all the people gave praise to the Lord, the God of their fathers, with bent heads worshipping the Lord and the king.

次日，他们向耶和华献平安祭和燔祭，就是献公牛一千只，公绵羊一千只，羊羔一千只，并同献的奠祭。又为以色列众人献许多的祭。那日，他们在耶和华面前吃喝，大大欢乐。
And they made offerings to the Lord, and gave burned offerings to the Lord, on the day after, a thousand oxen, a thousand sheep, and a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings, and a great wealth of offerings for all Israel.

他们奉耶和华的命再膏大卫的儿子所罗门作王，又膏撒督作祭司。
And with great joy they made a feast before the Lord that day. And they made Solomon, the son of David, king a second time, putting the holy oil on him to make him holy to the Lord as ruler, and on Zadok as priest.

于是所罗门坐在耶和华所赐的位上，接续他父亲大卫作王，万事亨通。以色列众人也都听从他。
So Solomon was put on the seat of the Lord as king in place of his father David, and everything went well for him; and all Israel was under his authority.

众首领和勇士，并大卫王的众子，都顺服所罗门王。
And all the chiefs and the men of war and all the sons of King David put themselves under the authority of Solomon the king.

耶和华使所罗门在以色列众人眼前甚为尊大，极其威严，胜过在他以前的以色列王。
And the Lord made Solomon great in the eyes of all Israel, clothing him with glory and honour such as no other king in Israel had had before him.

耶西的儿子大卫作以色列众人的王，
Now David, the son of Jesse, was king over all Israel.

作王共四十年，在希伯仑作王七年，在耶路撒冷作王三十三年。
For forty years he was ruling as king over Israel, seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.

他年纪老迈，日子满足，享受丰富，尊荣，就死了。他儿子所罗门接续他作王。
And he came to his end after a long life, full of days and great wealth and honour; and Solomon his son became king in his place.

大卫王始终的事都写在先见撒母耳的书上和先知拿单并先见迦得的书上。
Now all the acts of David, first and last, are recorded in the words of Samuel the seer, and the words of Nathan the prophet, and the words of Gad the seer;

他的国事和他的勇力，以及他和以色列并列国所经过的事都写在这书上。
Together with all his rule and his power, and the events which took place in his time, in Israel and in all the kingdoms of other lands.

