哈迦利亚的儿子尼希米的言语如下。亚达薛西王二十年基斯流月，我在书珊城的宫中。
The history of Nehemiah, the son of Hacaliah. Now it came about, in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, when I was in Shushan, the king's town,

那时，有我一个弟兄哈拿尼，同着几个人从犹大来。我问他们那些被掳归回，剩下逃脱的犹大人和耶路撒冷的光景。
That Hanani, one of my brothers, came with certain men from Judah; and in answer to my request for news of the Jews who had been prisoners and had got away, and of Jerusalem,

他们对我说，那些被掳归回剩下的人，在犹大省遭大难，受凌辱。并且耶路撒冷的城墙拆毁，城门被火焚烧。
They said to me, The small band of Jews now living there in the land are in great trouble and shame: the wall of Jerusalem has been broken down, and its doorways burned with fire.

我听见这话，就坐下哭泣，悲哀几日。在天上的神面前禁食祈祷，说，
Then, after hearing these words, for some days I gave myself up to weeping and sorrow, seated on the earth; and taking no food I made prayer to the God of heaven,

耶和华天上的神，大而可畏的神阿，你向爱你，守你诫命的人守约施慈爱。
And said, O Lord, the God of heaven, the great God, greatly to be feared, keeping faith and mercy with those who have love for him and are true to his laws:

愿你睁眼看，侧耳听，你仆人昼夜在你面前，为你众仆人以色列民的祈祷，承认我们以色列人向你所犯的罪。我与我父家都有罪了。
Let your ear now take note and let your eyes be open, so that you may give ear to the prayer of your servant, which I make before you at this time, day and night, for the children of Israel, your servants, while I put before you the sins of the children of Israel, which we have done against you: truly, I and my father's people are sinners.

我们向你所行的甚是邪恶，没有遵守你借着仆人，摩西所吩咐的诫命，律例，典章。
We have done great wrong against you, and have not kept the orders, the rules, and the decisions, which you gave to your servant Moses.

求你记念所吩咐你仆人摩西的话，说，你们若犯罪，我就把你们分散在万民中。
Keep in mind, O Lord, the order you gave your servant Moses, saying, If you do wrong I will send you wandering among the peoples:

但你们若归向我，谨守遵行我的诫命，你们被赶散的人虽在天涯，我也必从那里将他们招聚回来，带到我所选择立为我名的居所。
But if you come back to me and keep my orders and do them, even if those of you who have been forced out are living in the farthest parts of heaven, I will get them from there, and take them back to the place marked out by me for the resting-place of my name.

这都是你的仆人，你的百姓，就是你用大力，和大能的手所救赎的。
Now these are your servants and your people, whom you have made yours by your great power and by your strong hand.

主阿，求你侧耳听你仆人的祈祷，和喜爱敬畏你名众仆人的祈祷，使你仆人现今亨通，在王面前蒙恩。我是作王酒政的。
O Lord, let your ear take note of the prayer of your servant, and of the prayers of your servants, who take delight in worshipping your name: give help, O Lord, to your servant this day, and let him have mercy in the eyes of this man. (Now I was the king's wine-servant.)

亚达薛西王二十年尼散月，在王面前摆酒，我拿起酒来奉给王。我素来在王面前没有愁容。
And it came about in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that I took up the wine and gave it to the king. Now I had never before been sad when the king was present.

王对我说，你既没有病，为什么面带愁容呢？这不是别的，必是你心中愁烦。于是我甚惧怕。
And the king said to me, Why is your face sad, seeing that you are not ill? this is nothing but sorrow of heart. Then I was full of fear;

我对王说，愿王万岁。我列祖坟墓所在的那城荒凉，城门被火焚烧，我岂能面无愁容吗？
And said to the king, May the king be living for ever: is it not natural for my face to be sad, when the town, the place where the bodies of my fathers are at rest, has been made waste and its doorways burned with fire?

王问我说，你要求什么。于是我默祷天上的神。
Then the king said to me, What is your desire? So I made prayer to the God of heaven.

我对王说，仆人若在王眼前蒙恩，王若喜欢，求王差遣我往犹大，到我列祖坟墓所在的那城去，我好重新建造。
And I said to the king, If it is the king's pleasure, and if your servant has your approval, send me to Judah, to the town where the bodies of my fathers are at rest, so that I may take in hand the building of it.

那时王后坐在王的旁边。王问我说，你去要多少日子。几时回来。我就定了日期。于是王喜欢差遣我去。
And the king said to me (the queen being seated by his side), How long will your journey take, and when will you come back? So the king was pleased to send me, and I gave him a fixed time.

我又对王说，王若喜欢，求王赐我诏书，通知大河西的省长准我经过，直到犹大。
Further, I said to the king, If it is the king's pleasure, let letters be given to me for the rulers across the river, so that they may let me go through till I come to Judah;

又赐诏书，通知管理王园林的亚萨，使他给我木料，作属殿营楼之门的横梁和城墙，与我自己房屋使用的。王就允准我，因我神施恩的手帮助我。
And a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king's park, so that he may give me wood to make boards for the doors of the tower of the house, and for the wall of the town, and for the house which is to be mine. And the king gave me this, for the hand of my God was on me.

王派了军长和马兵护送我。我到了河西的省长那里，将王的诏书交给他们。
Then I came to the rulers of the lands across the river and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me captains of the army and horsemen.

和伦人参巴拉，并为奴的亚扪人多比雅，听见有人来为以色列人求好处，就甚恼怒。
And Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, hearing of it, were greatly troubled because a man had come to the help of the children of Israel.

我到了耶路撒冷，在那里住了三日。
So I came to Jerusalem and was there three days.

我夜间起来，有几个人也一同起来，但神使我心里要为耶路撒冷做什么事，我并没有告诉人。除了我骑的牲口以外，也没有别的牲口在我那里。
And in the night I got up, taking with me a small band of men; I said nothing to any man of what God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem: and I had no beast with me but the one on which I was seated.

当夜我出了谷门，往野狗井去（野狗或作龙），到了粪厂门，察看耶路撒冷的城墙，见城墙拆毁，城门被火焚烧。
And I went out by night, through the doorway of the valley, and past the dragon's water-spring as far as the place where waste material was put, viewing the walls of Jerusalem which were broken down, and the doorways which had been burned with fire.

我又往前，到了泉门和王池，但所骑的牲口没有地方过去。
Then I went on to the door of the fountain and to the king's pool: but there was no room for my beast to get through.

于是夜间沿溪而上，察看城墙，又转身进入谷门，就回来了。
Then in the night, I went up by the stream, viewing the wall; then turning back, I went in by the door in the valley, and so came back.

我往哪里去，我做什么事，官长都不知道。我还没有告诉犹大平民，祭司，贵胄，官长，和其余做工的人。
And the chiefs had no knowledge of where I had been or what I was doing; and I had not then said anything to the Jews or to the priests or the great ones or the chiefs or the rest of those who were doing the work.

以后，我对他们说，我们所遭的难，耶路撒冷怎样荒凉，城门被火焚烧，你们都看见了。来吧，我们重建耶路撒冷的城墙，免得再受凌辱。
Then I said to them, You see what a bad condition we are in; how Jerusalem is a waste, and its doorways burned with fire: come, let us get to work, building up the wall of Jerusalem, so that we may no longer be put to shame.

我告诉他们我神施恩的手怎样帮助我，并王对我所说的话。他们就说，我们起来建造吧。于是他们奋勇做这善工。
Then I gave them an account of how the hand of my God was on me, helping me; and of the king's words which he had said to me. And they said, Let us get to work on the building. So they made their hands strong for the good work.

但和伦人参巴拉，并为奴的亚扪人多比雅，和亚拉伯人基善，听见就嗤笑我们，藐视我们，说，你们做什么呢？要背叛王吗？
But Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, hearing of it, made sport of us, laughing at us and saying, What are you doing? will you go against the king?

我回答他们说，天上的神必使我们亨通。我们作他仆人的，要起来建造。你们却在耶路撒冷无分，无权，无纪念。
Then answering them I said, The God of heaven, he will be our help; so we his servants will go on with our building: but you have no part or right or any name in Jerusalem.

那时，大祭司以利亚实，和他的弟兄众祭司，起来建立羊门，分别为圣，安立门扇。又筑城墙到哈米亚楼，直到哈楠业楼，分别为圣。
Then Eliashib, the chief priest, got up with his brothers the priests, and took in hand the building of the sheep doorway; they made it holy and put its doors in position; as far as the tower of Hammeah they made it holy, even to the tower of Hananel.

其次是耶利哥人建造。其次是音利的儿子撒刻建造。
And by his side the men of Jericho were building. And after them, Zaccur, the son of Imri.

哈西拿的子孙建立鱼门，架横梁，安门扇，和闩锁。
The sons of Hassenaah were the builders of the fish doorway; they put its boards in place and put up its doors, with their locks and rods.

其次是哈哥斯的孙子，乌利亚的儿子米利末修造。其次是米示萨别的孙子，比利迦的儿子米书兰修造。其次是巴拿的儿子撒督修造。
By their side Meremoth, the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, was making good the walls. Then Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel; and by him, Zadok, the son of Baana.

其次是提哥亚人修造。但是他们的贵胄不用肩担他们主的工作（肩原文作颈项）。
Near them, the Tekoites were at work; but their chiefs did not put their necks to the work of their Lord.

巴西亚的儿子，耶何耶大与比所玳的儿子，米书兰修造古门，架横梁，安门扇和闩锁。
Joiada, the son of Paseah, and Meshullam, the son of Besodeiah, made good the old doorway; they put its boards in place and put up its doors, with their locks and rods.

其次是基遍人米拉提，米伦人雅顿与基遍人，并属河西总督所管的米斯巴人修造。
By their side were working Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah from the seat of the ruler across the river.

其次是银匠，哈海雅的儿子乌薛修造。其次是做香的哈拿尼雅修造。这些人修坚耶路撒冷，直到宽墙。
Near them was working Uzziel, the son of Harhaiah, the gold-worker. And by him was Hananiah, one of the perfume-makers, building up Jerusalem as far as the wide wall.

其次是管理耶路撒冷一半，户珥的儿子利法雅修造。
Near them was working Rephaiah, the son of Hur, the ruler of half Jerusalem.

其次是哈路抹的儿子，耶大雅对着自己的房屋修造。其次是哈沙尼的儿子哈突修造。
By his side was Jedaiah, the son of Harumaph, opposite his house. And by him was Hattush, the son of Hashabneiah.

哈琳的儿子玛基雅，和巴哈摩押的儿子哈述修造一段，并修造炉楼。
Malchijah, the son of Harim, and Hasshub, the son of Pahath-moab, were working on another part, and the tower of the ovens.

其次是管理耶路撒冷那一半，哈罗黑的儿子沙龙，和他的女儿们修造。
Near them was Shallum, the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half Jerusalem, with his daughters.

哈嫩和撒挪亚的居民修造谷门，立门，安门扇和闩锁，又建筑城墙一千肘，直到粪厂门。
Hanun and the people of Zanoah were working on the doorway of the valley; they put it up and put up its doors, with their locks and rods, and a thousand cubits of wall as far as the doorway where the waste material was placed.

管理伯哈基琳，利甲的儿子玛基雅修造粪厂门，立门，安门扇和闩锁。
And Malchijah, the son of Rechab, the ruler of the division of Beth-haccherem, made good the doorway of the waste, building it up and putting up its doors, with their locks and rods.

管理米斯巴，各荷西的儿子沙仑修造泉门，立门，盖门顶，安门扇和闩锁，又修造靠近王园西罗亚池的墙垣，直到那从大卫城下来的台阶。
And Shallun, the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of the division of Mizpah, made good the doorway of the fountain, building it up and covering it and putting up its doors, with their locks and rods, with the wall of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, as far as the steps which go down from the town of David.

其次是管理伯夙一半，押卜的儿子尼希米修造，直到大卫坟地的对面，又到挖成的池子，并勇士的房屋。
By his side was working Nehemiah, the son of Azbuk, ruler of half the division of Beth-zur, as far as the place opposite the last resting-places of David's family, and the pool which was made and the house of the men of war.

其次是利未人，巴尼的儿子利宏修造。其次是管理基伊拉一半，哈沙比雅为他所管的本境修造。
Then came the Levites, Rehum, the son of Bani. By his side was working Hashabiah, ruler of half the division of Keilah, for his division.

其次是利未人弟兄中管理基伊拉那一半，希拿达的儿子巴瓦伊修造。
After him were working their brothers, Bavvai, the son of Henadad, ruler of half the division of Keilah.

其次是管理米斯巴，耶书亚的儿子以谢修造一段，对着武库的上坡，城墙转弯之处。
And by his side was working Ezer, the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, making good another part opposite the way up to the store of arms at the turning of the wall.

其次是萨拜的儿子，巴录竭力修造一段，从城墙转弯，直到大祭司以利亚实的府门。
After him Baruch, the son of Zabbai, was hard at work on another part, from the turning of the wall to the door of the house of Eliashib, the chief priest.

其次是哈哥斯的孙子，乌利亚的儿子米利末修造一段，从以利亚实的府门，直到以利亚实府的尽头。
After him Meremoth, the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz, was working on another part, from the door of the house of Eliashib as far as the end of his house.

其次是住平原的祭司修造。
After him were working the priests, the men of the lowland.

其次是便雅悯与哈述，对着自己的房屋修造。其次是亚难尼的孙子，玛西雅的儿子，亚撒利雅在靠近自己的房屋修造。
After them came Benjamin and Hasshub, opposite their house. After them Azariah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, made good the wall by the house where he himself was living.

其次是希拿达的儿子，宾内修造一段，从亚撒利雅的房屋直到城墙转弯，又到城角。
After him Binnui, the son of Henadad, was working on another part, from the house of Azariah as far as the turning of the wall and the angle.

乌赛的儿子，巴拉修造对着城墙的转弯，和王上宫凸出来的城楼，靠近护卫院的那一段。其次是巴录的儿子毗大雅修造。
Palal, the son of Uzai, made good the wall opposite the angle and the tower which comes out from the higher part of the king's house, by the open space of the watch. After him was Pedaiah, the son of Parosh.

（尼提宁住在俄斐勒，直到朝东水门的对面，和凸出来的城楼。）
(Now the Nethinim were living in the Ophel, as far as the place facing the water doorway to the east, and the tower which comes out.)

其次是提哥亚人又修一段，对着那凸出来的大楼，直到俄斐勒的墙。
After him the Tekoites were making good another part, opposite the great tower which comes out, and up to the wall of the Ophel.

从马门往上，众祭司各对自己的房屋修造。
Further on, past the horse doorway, the priests were at work, every one opposite his house.

其次是音麦的儿子，撒督对着自己的房屋修造。其次是守东门，示迦尼的儿子示玛雅修造。
After them Zadok, the son of Immer, was working opposite his house. And after him Shemaiah, the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east door.

其次是示利米雅的儿子哈拿尼雅，和萨拉的第六子哈嫩又修一段。其次是比利迦的儿子，米书兰对着自己的房屋修造。
After him Hananiah, the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun, the sixth son of Zalaph, were making good another part. After him Meshullam, the son of Berechiah, made good the wall opposite his room.

其次是银匠玛基雅修造到尼提宁，和商人的房屋，对着哈米弗甲门，直到城的角楼。
After him Malchijah, one of the gold-workers to the Nethinim and the traders, made good the wall opposite the doorway of Hammiphkad and as far as the way up to the angle.

银匠与商人在城的角楼，和羊门中间修造。
And between the way up to the angle and the sheep door, the gold-workers and the traders made good the wall.

参巴拉听见我们修造城墙就发怒，大大恼恨，嗤笑犹大人。
Now, Sanballat, hearing that we were building the wall, was very angry, and in his wrath made sport of the Jews.

对他弟兄和撒玛利亚的军兵说，这些软弱的犹大人做什么呢？要保护自己吗？要献祭吗？要一日成功吗？要从土堆里拿出火烧的石头再立墙吗？
And in the hearing of his countrymen and the army of Samaria he said, What are these feeble Jews doing? will they make themselves strong? will they make offerings? will they get the work done in a day? will they make the stones which have been burned come again out of the dust?

亚扪人多比雅站在旁边，说，他们所修造的石墙，就是狐狸上去也必？？倒。
Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Such is their building that if a fox goes up it, their stone wall will be broken down.

我们的神阿，求你垂听，因为我们被藐视。求你使他们的毁谤归于他们的头上，使他们在掳到之地作为掠物。
Give ear, O our God, for we are looked down on: let their words of shame be turned back on themselves, and let them be given up to wasting in a land where they are prisoners:

不要遮掩他们的罪孽，不要使他们的罪恶从你面前涂抹，因为他们在修造的人眼前惹动你的怒气。
Let not their wrongdoing be covered or their sin washed away from before you: for they have made you angry before the builders.

这样，我们修造城墙，城墙就都连络，高至一半，因为百姓专心做工。
So we went on building the wall; and all the wall was joined together half-way up: for the people were working hard.

参巴拉，多比雅，亚拉伯人，亚扪人，亚实突人听见修造耶路撒冷城墙，着手进行堵塞破裂的地方，就甚发怒。
But when it came to the ears of Sanballat and Tobiah and the Arabians and the Ammonites and the Ashdodites, that the building of the walls of Jerusalem was going forward and the broken places were being made good, they were full of wrath;

大家同谋要来攻击耶路撒冷，使城内扰乱。
And they made designs, all of them together, to come and make an attack on Jerusalem, causing trouble there.

然而，我们祷告我们的神，又因他们的缘故，就派人看守，昼夜防备。
But we made our prayer to God, and had men on watch against them day and night because of them.

犹大人说，灰土尚多，扛抬的人力气已经衰败，所以我们不能建造城墙。
And Judah said, The strength of the workmen is giving way, and there is much waste material; it is impossible for us to put up the wall.

我们的敌人且说，趁他们不知，不见，我们进入他们中间，杀他们，使工作止住。
And those who were against us said, Without their knowledge and without their seeing us, we will come among them and put them to death, causing the work to come to a stop.

那靠近敌人居住的犹大人，十次从各处来见我们，说，你们必要回到我们那里。
And it came about that when the Jews who were living near them came, they said to us ten times, From all directions they are coming against us.

所以我使百姓各按宗族拿刀，拿枪，拿弓站在城墙后边低洼的空处。
So in the lowest part of the space at the back of the walls, in the open places, I put the people by families, with their swords, their spears, and their bows.

我察看了，就起来对贵胄，官长，和其余的人说，不要怕他们。当记念主是大而可畏的。你们要为弟兄，儿女，妻子，家产争战。
And after looking, I got up and said to the great ones and to the chiefs and to the rest of the people, Have no fear of them: keep in mind the Lord who is great and greatly to be feared, and take up arms for your brothers, your sons, and your daughters, your wives and your houses.

仇敌听见我们知道他们的心意，见神也破坏他们的计谋，就不来了。我们都回到城墙那里，各作各的工。
And when it came to the ears of those who were against us, that we had knowledge of their designs and that God had made their purpose come to nothing, we all went back to the wall, everyone to his work

从那日起，我的仆人一半做工，一半拿枪，拿盾牌，拿弓，穿铠甲（穿或作拿），官长都站在犹大众人的后边。
And from that time, half of my servants were doing their part of the work, and half kept the spears and body-covers and the bows and the metal war-dresses; and the chiefs were at the back of the men of Judah.

修造城墙的，扛抬材料的，都一手做工一手拿兵器。
Those who were building the wall and those who were moving material did their part, everyone working with one hand, with his spear in the other;

修造的人都腰间佩刀修造，吹角的人在我旁边。
Every builder was working with his sword at his side. And by my side was a man for sounding the horn.

我对贵胄，官长，和其余的人说，这工程浩大，我们在城墙上相离甚远。
And I said to the great ones and the chiefs and the rest of the people, The work is great and widely spaced and we are far away from one another on the wall:

你们听见角声在哪里，就聚集到我们那里去。我们的神必为我们争战。
Wherever you may be when the horn is sounded, come here to us; our God will be fighting for us.

于是，我们做工，一半拿兵器，从天亮直到星宿出现的时候。
So we went on with the work: and half of them had spears in their hands from the dawn of the morning till the stars were seen.

那时，我又对百姓说，各人和他的仆人，当在耶路撒冷住宿，好在夜间保守我们，白昼做工。
And at the same time I said to the people, Let everyone with his servant come inside Jerusalem for the night, so that at night they may keep watch for us, and go on working by day.

这样，我和弟兄仆人，并跟从我的护兵都不脱衣服，出去打水也带兵器。
So not one of us, I or my brothers or my servants or the watchmen who were with me, took off his clothing, everyone went armed to the water.

百姓和他们的妻大大呼号，埋怨他们的弟兄犹大人。
Then there was a great outcry from the people and their wives against their countrymen the Jews.

有的说，我们和儿女人口众多，要去得粮食度命。
For there were some who said, We, our sons and our daughters, are a great number: let us get grain, so that we may have food for our needs.

有的说，我们典了田地，葡萄园，房屋，要得粮食充饥。
And there were some who said, We are giving our fields and our vine-gardens and our houses for debt: let us get grain because we are in need.

有的说，我们已经指着田地，葡萄园，借了钱给王纳税。
And there were others who said, We have given up our fields and our vine-gardens to get money for the king's taxes.

我们的身体与我们弟兄的身体一样。我们的儿女与他们的儿女一般。现在我们将要使儿女作人的仆婢，我们的女儿已有为婢的。我们并无力拯救，因为我们的田地，葡萄园已经归了别人。
But our flesh is the same as the flesh of our countrymen, and our children as their children: and now we are giving our sons and daughters into the hands of others, to be their servants, and some of our daughters are servants even now: and we have no power to put a stop to it; for other men have our fields and our vine-gardens.

我听见他们呼号说这些话，便甚发怒。
And on hearing their outcry and what they said I was very angry.

我心里筹划，就斥责贵胄和官长说，你们各人向弟兄取利。于是我招聚大会攻击他们。
And after turning it over in my mind, I made a protest to the chiefs and the rulers, and said to them, Every one of you is taking interest from his countryman. And I got together a great meeting of protest.

我对他们说，我们尽力赎回我们弟兄，就是卖与外邦的犹大人。你们还要卖弟兄，使我们赎回来吗？他们就静默不语，无话可答。
And I said to them, We have given whatever we were able to give, to make our brothers the Jews free, who were servants and prisoners of the nations: and would you now give up your brothers for a price, and are they to become our property? Then they said nothing, answering not a word.

我又说，你们所行的不善。你们行事不当敬畏我们的神吗？不然，难免我们的仇敌外邦人毁谤我们。
And I said, What you are doing is not good: is it not the more necessary for you to go in the fear of our God, because of the shame which the nations may put on us?

我和我的弟兄与仆人，也将银钱粮食借给百姓。我们大家都当免去利息。
Even I and my servants have been taking interest for the money and the grain we have let them have. So now, let us give up this thing.

如今我劝你们将他们的田地，葡萄园，橄榄园，房屋，并向他们所取的银钱，粮食，新酒，和油，百分之一的利息都归还他们。
Give back to them this very day their fields, their vine-gardens, their olive-gardens, and their houses, as well as a hundredth part of the money and the grain and the wine and the oil which you have taken from them.

众人说，我们必归还，不再向他们索要，必照你的话行。我就召了祭司来，叫众人起誓，必照着所应许的而行。
Then they said, We will give them back, and take nothing for them; we will do as you say. Then I sent for the priests and made them take an oath that they would keep this agreement.

我也抖着胸前的衣襟，说，凡不成就这应许的，愿神照样抖他离开家产和他劳碌得来的，直到抖空了。会众都说，阿们。又赞美耶和华。百姓就照着所应许的去行。
And shaking out the folds of my robe, I said, So may God send out from his house and his work every man who does not keep this agreement; even so let him be sent out and made as nothing. And all the meeting of the people said, So be it, and gave praise to the Lord. And the people did as they had said.

自从我奉派作犹大地的省长，就是从亚达薛西王二十年，直到三十二年，共十二年之久，我与我弟兄都没有吃省长的俸禄。
Now from the time when I was made ruler of the people in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year till the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the king, for twelve years, I and my servants have never taken the food which was the right of the ruler.

在我以前的省长加重百姓的担子，每日索要粮食和酒，并银子四十舍客勒，就是他们的仆人也辖制百姓。但我因敬畏神不这样行。
But earlier rulers who were before me made the people responsible for their upkeep, and took from them bread and wine at the rate of forty shekels of silver; and even their servants were lords over the people: but I did not do so, because of the fear of God.

并且我恒心修造城墙，并没有置买田地。我的仆人也都聚集在那里做工。
And I kept on with the work of this wall, and we got no land for ourselves: and all my servants were helping with the work.

除了从四围外邦中来的犹大人以外，有犹大平民和官长一百五十人在我席上吃饭。
And more than this, a hundred and fifty of the Jews and the rulers were guests at my table, in addition to those who came to us from the nations round about us.

每日预备一只公牛，六只肥羊，又预备些飞禽。每十日一次，多预备各样的酒。虽然如此，我并不要省长的俸禄，因为百姓服役甚重。
Now the food made ready for one day was one ox and six fat sheep, as well as fowls; and once in ten days a store of all sorts of wine: but all the same, I did not take the food to which the ruler had a right, because the people were crushed under a hard yoke.

我的神阿，求你记念我为这百姓所行的一切事，施恩与我。
Keep in mind, O my God, for my good, all I have done for this people.

参巴拉，多比雅，亚拉伯人基善，和我们其余的仇敌，听见我已经修完了城墙，其中没有破裂之处（那时我还没有安门扇）。
Now when word was given to Sanballat and Tobiah and to Geshem the Arabian and to the rest of our haters, that I had done the building of the wall and that there were no more broken places in it (though even then I had not put up the doors in the doorways);

参巴拉和基善就打发人来见我，说，请你来，我们在阿挪平原的一个村庄相会。他们却想害我。
Sanballat and Geshem sent to me saying, Come, let us have a meeting in one of the little towns in the lowland of Ono. But their purpose was to do me evil.

于是我差遣人去见他们，说，我现在办理大工，不能下去。焉能停工下去见你们呢？
And I sent men to them saying, I am doing a great work, so that it is not possible for me to come down: is the work to be stopped while I go away from it and come down to you?

他们这样四次打发人来见我，我都如此回答他们。
And four times they sent to me in this way, and I sent them the same answer.

参巴拉第五次打发仆人来见我，手里拿着未封的信，
Then Sanballat sent his servant to me a fifth time with an open letter in his hand;

信上写着说，外邦人中有风声，迦施慕（就是基善见二章十九节）也说，你和犹大人谋反，修造城墙，你要作他们的王。
And in it these words were recorded: It is said among the nations, and Geshem says so, that you and the Jews are hoping to make yourselves free from the king's authority; and that this is why you are building the wall: and they say that it is your purpose to be their king;

你又派先知在耶路撒冷指着你宣讲，说在犹大有王。现在这话必传与王知。所以请你来，与我们彼此商议。
And that you have prophets preaching about you in Jerusalem, and saying, There is a king in Judah: now an account of these things will be sent to the king. So come now, and let us have a discussion.

我就差遣人去见他，说，你所说的这事，一概没有，是你心里捏造的。
Then I sent to him, saying, No such things as you say are being done, they are only a fiction you have made up yourself.

他们都要使我们惧怕，意思说，他们的手必软弱，以致工作不能成就。神阿，求你坚固我的手。
For they were hoping to put fear in us, saying, Their hands will become feeble and give up the work so that it may not get done. But now, O God, make my hands strong.

我到了米希大别的孙子，第来雅的儿子示玛雅家里。那时，他闭门不出。他说，我们不如在神的殿里会面，将殿门关锁。因为他们要来杀你，就是夜里来杀你。
And I went to the house of Shemaiah, the son of Delaiah, the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us have a meeting in the house of God, inside the Temple, and let the doors be shut: for they will come to put you to death; truly, in the night they will come to put you to death.

我说，像我这样的人岂要逃跑呢？像我这样的人岂能进入殿里保全生命呢？我不进去。
And I said, Am I the sort of man to go in flight? what man, in my position, would go into the Temple to keep himself safe? I will not go in.

我看明神没有差遣他，是他自己说这话攻击我，是多比雅和参巴拉贿买了他。
Then it became clear to me that God had not sent him: he had given this word of a prophet against me himself: and Tobiah and Sanballat had given him money to do so.

贿买他的缘故，是要叫我惧怕，依从他犯罪，他们好传扬恶言毁谤我。
For this reason they had given him money, in order that I might be overcome by fear and do what he said and do wrong, and so they would have reason to say evil about me and put shame on me.

我的神阿，多比雅，参巴拉，女先知挪亚底，和其余的先知要叫我惧怕，求你记念他们所行的这些事。
Keep in mind, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat and what they did, and Noadiah, the woman prophet, and the rest of the prophets whose purpose was to put fear into me.

以禄月二十五日，城墙修完了，共修了五十二天。
So the wall was complete on the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty-two days.

我们一切仇敌，四围的外邦人听见了便惧怕，愁眉不展。因为见这工作完成是出乎我们的神。
And when our haters had news of this, all the nations round about us were full of fear and were greatly shamed, for they saw that this work had been done by our God.

在那些日子，犹大的贵胄屡次寄信与多比雅，多比雅也来信与他们。
And further, in those days the chiefs of Judah sent a number of letters to Tobiah, and his letters came to them.

在犹大有许多人与多比雅结盟。因他是亚拉的儿子，示迦尼的女婿，并且他的儿子，约哈难娶了比利迦儿子，米书兰的女儿为妻。
For in Judah there were a number of people who had made an agreement by oath with him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah, the son of Arah; and his son Jehohanan had taken as his wife the daughter of Meshullam, the son of Berechiah.

他们常在我面前说多比雅的善行，也将我的话传与他。多比雅又常寄信来，要叫我惧怕。
And they said much before me of the good he had done, and gave him accounts of my words. And Tobiah sent letters with the purpose of causing me fear.

城墙修完，我安了门扇，守门的，歌唱的，和利未人都已派定。
Now when the building of the wall was complete and I had put up the doors, and the door-keepers and the music-makers and the Levites had been given their places,

我就派我的弟兄哈拿尼，和营楼的宰官哈拿尼雅，管理耶路撒冷。因为哈拿尼雅是忠信的，又敬畏神过于众人。
I made my brother Hanani, and Hananiah, the ruler of the tower, responsible for the government of Jerusalem: for he was a man of good faith, fearing God more than most.

我吩咐他们说，等到太阳上升才可开耶路撒冷的城门。人尚看守的时候就要关门上闩。也当派耶路撒冷的居民，各按班次看守自己房屋对面之处。
And I said to them, Do not let the doors of Jerusalem be open till the sun is high; and while the watchmen are in their places, let the doors be shut and locked: and let the people of Jerusalem be put on watch, every one in his watch, opposite his house.

城是广大，其中的民却稀少，房屋还没有建造。
Now the town was wide and great: but the people in it were only a small number, and the houses had not been put up.

我的神感动我心，招聚贵胄，官长，和百姓，要照家谱计算。我找着第一次上来之人的家谱，其上写着。
And my God put it into my heart to get together the rulers and the chiefs and the people so that they might be listed by families. And I came across a record of the names of those who came up at the first, and in it I saw these words:

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒，从前掳去犹大省的人，现在他们的子孙从被掳到之地回耶路撒冷和犹大，各归本城。
These are the people of the divisions of the kingdom, among those who had been made prisoners by Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and taken away by him, who went back to Jerusalem and Judah, every one to his town;

他们是同着所罗巴伯，耶书亚，尼希米，亚撒利雅，拉米，拿哈玛尼，末底改，必珊，米斯毗列，比革瓦伊，尼宏，巴拿回来的。
Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:

以色列人民的数目记在下面。巴录的子孙二千一百七十二名。
The children of Parosh, two thousand, one hundred and seventy-two.

示法提雅的子孙三百七十二名。
The children of Shephatiah, three hundred and seventy-two.

亚拉的子孙六百五十二名。
The children of Arah, six hundred and fifty-two.

巴哈摩押的后裔，就是耶书亚和约押的子孙二千八百一十八名。
The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand, eight hundred and eighteen.

以拦的子孙一千二百五十四名。
The children of Elam, a thousand, two hundred and fifty-four.

萨土的子孙八百四十五名。
The children of Zattu, eight hundred and forty-five.

萨改的子孙七百六十名。
The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.

宾内的子孙六百四十八名。
The children of Binnui, six hundred and forty-eight.

比拜的子孙六百二十八名。
The children of Bebai, six hundred and twenty-eight.

押甲的子孙二千三百二十二名。
The children of Azgad, two thousand, three hundred and twenty-two.

亚多尼干的子孙六百六十七名。
The children of Adonikam, six hundred and sixty-seven.

比革瓦伊的子孙二千零六十七名。
The children of Bigvai, two thousand and sixty-seven.

亚丁的子孙六百五十五名。
The children of Adin, six hundred and fifty-five.

亚特的后裔，就是希西家的子孙九十八名。
The children of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight.

哈顺的子孙三百二十八名。
The children of Hashum, three hundred and twenty-eight.

比赛的子孙三百二十四名。
The children of Bezai, three hundred and twenty-four.

哈拉的子孙一百一十二名。
The children of Hariph, a hundred and twelve.

基遍人九十五名。
The children of Gibeon, ninety-five.

伯利恒人和尼陀法人共一百八十八名。
The men of Beth-lehem and Netophah, a hundred and eighty-eight.

亚拿突人一百二十八名。
The men of Anathoth, a hundred and twenty-eight.

伯亚斯玛弗人四十二名。
The men of Beth-azmaveth, forty-two.

基列耶琳人，基非拉人，比录人共七百四十三名。
The men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three.

拉玛人和迦巴人共六百二十一名。
The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred and twenty-one.

默玛人一百二十二名。
The men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty-two.

伯特利人和艾人共一百二十三名。
The men of Beth-el and Ai, a hundred and twenty-three.

别的尼波人五十二名。
The men of the other Nebo, fifty-two.

别的以拦子孙一千二百五十四名。
The children of the other Elam, a thousand, two hundred and fifty-four.

哈琳的子孙三百二十名。
The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.

耶利哥人三百四十五名。
The children of Jericho, three hundred and forty-five.

罗德人，哈第人，阿挪人共七百二十一名。
The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred and twenty-one.

西拿人三千九百三十名。
The children of Senaah, three thousand, nine hundred and thirty.

祭司。耶书亚家，耶大雅的子孙九百七十三名。
The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the family of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three.

音麦的子孙一千零五十二名。
The children of Immer, a thousand and fifty-two.

巴施户珥的子孙一千二百四十七名。
The children of Pashhur, a thousand, two hundred and forty-seven.

哈琳的子孙一千零一十七名。
The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.

利未人。何达威的后裔，就是耶书亚和甲篾的子孙七十四名。
The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the children of Hodevah, seventy-four.

歌唱的。亚萨的子孙一百四十八名。
The music-makers: the children of Asaph, a hundred and forty-eight.

守门的。沙龙的子孙，亚特的子孙，达们的子孙，亚谷的子孙，哈底大的子孙，朔拜的子孙，共一百三十八名。
The door-keepers: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, a hundred and thirty-eight.

尼提宁（就是殿役）。西哈的子孙，哈苏巴的子孙，答巴俄的子孙，
The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

基绿的子孙，西亚的子孙，巴顿的子孙，
The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,

利巴拿的子孙，哈迦巴的子孙，萨买的子孙，
The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Salmai,

哈难的子孙，吉德的子孙，迦哈的子孙，
The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar,

利亚雅的子孙，利汛的子孙，尼哥大的子孙，
The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda,

迦散的子孙，乌撒的子孙，巴西亚的子孙，
The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Paseah,

比赛的子孙，米乌宁的子孙，尼普心的子孙，
The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephushesim,

巴卜的子孙，哈古巴的子孙，哈忽的子孙，
The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

巴洗律的子孙，米希大的子孙，哈沙的子孙，
The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,

巴柯的子孙，西西拉的子孙，答玛的子孙，
The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Temah,

尼细亚的子孙，哈提法的子孙。
The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha.

所罗门仆人的后裔，就是琐太的子孙，琐斐列的子孙，比路大的子孙，
The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,

雅拉的子孙，达昆的子孙，吉德的子孙，
The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,

示法提雅的子孙，哈替的子孙，玻黑列哈斯巴音的子孙，亚们的子孙。
The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the children of Amon.

尼提宁和所罗门仆人的后裔共三百九十二名。
All the Nethinim and the children of Solomon's servants were three hundred and ninety-two.

从特米拉，特哈萨，基绿，亚顿，音麦上来的，不能指明他们的宗族谱系是以色列人不是。
All these were the people who went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but because they had no knowledge of their fathers' families or offspring, it was not certain if they were Israelites:

他们是第莱雅的子孙，多比雅的子孙，尼哥大的子孙，共六百四十二名。
The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and forty-two.

祭司中，哈巴雅的子孙，哈哥斯的子孙，巴西莱的子孙。因为他们的先祖娶了基列人，巴西莱的女儿为妻，所以起名叫巴西莱。
And of the priests: the children of Hobaiah, the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who was married to one of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and took their name.

这三家的人，在族谱之中寻查自己的谱系，却寻不着，因此算为不洁，不准供祭司的职任。
They made search for their record among the lists of families, but their names were nowhere to be seen, so they were looked on as unclean and no longer priests.

省长对他们说，不可吃至圣的物，直到有用乌陵和土明，决疑的祭司兴起来。
And the Tirshatha said that they were not to have the most holy things for their food, till a priest came to give decision by the Urim and Thummim.

会众共有四万二千三百六十名。
The number of all the people together was forty-two thousand, three hundred and sixty;

此外，还有他们的仆婢七千三百三十七名，又有歌唱的男女二百四十五名。
As well as their men-servants and their women-servants, of whom there were seven thousand, three hundred and thirty-seven; and they had two hundred and forty-five men and women to make music.

他们有马七百三十六匹，骡子二百四十五匹，
They had seven hundred and thirty-six horses, two hundred and forty-five transport beasts;

骆驼四百三十五只，驴六千七百二十匹。
Four hundred and thirty-five camels, six thousand, seven hundred and twenty asses.

有些族长为工程捐助。省长捐入库中的金子一千达利克，碗五十个，祭司的礼服五百三十件。
And some of the heads of families gave money for the work. The Tirshatha gave into the store a thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred and thirty priests' robes.

又有族长捐入工程库的金子，二万达利克，银子二千二百弥拿。
And some of the heads of families gave into the store for the work twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand, two hundred pounds of silver.

其余百姓所捐的金子，二万达利克，银子二千弥拿，祭司的礼服六十七件。
And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and sixty-seven priests' robes.

于是祭司，利未人，守门的，歌唱的，民中的一些人，尼提宁，并以色列众人，各住在自己的城里。
So the priests and the Levites and the door-keepers and the music-makers and some of the people and the Nethinim, and all Israel, were living in their towns.

到了七月，以色列人住在自己的城里。那时，他们如同一人聚集在水门前的宽阔处，请文士以斯拉，将耶和华借摩西传给以色列人的律法书带来。
And when the seventh month came, the children of Israel were in their towns. And all the people came together like one man into the wide place in front of the water-doorway; and they made a request to Ezra the scribe that he would put before them the book of the law of Moses which the Lord had given to Israel.

七月初一日，祭司以斯拉将律法书，带到听了能明白的男女会众面前。
And Ezra the priest put the law before the meeting of the people, before the men and women and all those who were able to take it in, on the first day of the seventh month.

在水门前的宽阔处，从清早到晌午，在众男女，一切听了能明白的人面前读这律法书。众民侧耳而听。
He was reading it in the wide place in front of the water-doorway, from early morning till the middle of the day, in the hearing of all those men and women whose minds were able to take it in; and the ears of all the people were open to the book of the law.

文士以斯拉站在为这事特备的木台上。玛他提雅，示玛，亚奈雅，乌利亚，希勒家，和玛西雅站在他的右边。毗大雅，米沙利，玛基雅，哈顺，哈拔大拿，撒迦利亚，和米书兰站在他的左边。
And Ezra the scribe took his place on a tower of wood which they had made for the purpose; and by his side were placed Mattithiah and Shema and Anaiah and Uriah and Hilkiah and Maaseiah on the right; and on the left, Pedaiah and Mishael and Malchijah and Hashum and Hashbaddanah, Zechariah and Meshullam.

以斯拉站在众民以上，在众民眼前展开这书。他一展开，众民就都站起来。
And Ezra took the book, opening it before the eyes of all the people (for he was higher than the people); and when it was open, all the people got to their feet:

以斯拉称颂耶和华至大的神。众民都举手应声说，阿们，阿们，就低头，面伏于地，敬拜耶和华。
And Ezra gave praise to the Lord, the great God. And all the people in answer said, So be it, so be it; lifting up their hands; and with bent heads they gave worship to the Lord, going down on their faces to the earth.

耶书亚，巴尼，示利比，雅悯，亚谷，沙比太，荷第雅，玛西雅，基利他，亚撒利雅，约撒拔，哈难，毗莱雅，和利未人使百姓明白律法。百姓都站在自己的地方。
And Jeshua and Bani and Sherebiah and Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites made the law clear to the people: and the people kept in their places.

他们清清楚楚地念神的律法书，讲明意思，使百姓明白所念的。
And they gave out the words of the book the law of God, clearly, and gave the sense of it, so that their minds were able to take it in.

省长尼希米和作祭司的文士以斯拉，并教训百姓的利未人，对众民说，今日是耶和华你们神的圣日，不要悲哀哭泣。这是因为众民听见律法书上的话都哭了。
And Nehemiah, who was the Tirshatha, and Ezra, the priest and scribe, and the Levites who were the teachers of the people, said to all the people, This day is holy to the Lord your God; let there be no sorrow or weeping; for all the people were weeping on hearing the words of the law.

又对他们说，你们去吃肥美的，喝甘甜的，有不能预备的，就分给他。因为今日是我们主的圣日。你们不要忧愁，因靠耶和华而得的喜乐是你们的力量。
Then he said to them, Go away now, and take the fat for your food and the sweet for your drink, and send some to him for whom nothing is made ready: for this day is holy to our Lord: and let there be no grief in your hearts; for the joy of the Lord is your strong place.

于是利未人使众民静默，说，今日是圣日。不要作声，也不要忧愁。
So the Levites made all the people quiet, saying, Be quiet, for the day is holy; and do not give way to grief.

众民都去吃喝，也分给人，大大快乐，因为他们明白所教训他们的话。
And all the people went away to take food and drink, and to send food to others, and to be glad, because the words which were said to them had been made clear.

次日，众民的族长，祭司，和利未人都聚集到文士以斯拉那里，要留心听律法上的话。
And on the second day the heads of families of all the people and the priests and the Levites came together to Ezra the scribe, to give attention to the words of the law.

他们见律法上写着，耶和华借摩西吩咐以色列人要在七月节住棚，
And they saw that it was recorded in the law that the Lord had given orders by Moses, that the children of Israel were to have tents for their living-places in the feast of the seventh month:

并要在各城和耶路撒冷宣传报告说，你们当上山，将橄榄树，野橄榄树，番石榴树，棕树，和各样茂密树的枝子取来，照着所写的搭棚。
And that they were to give out an order, and make it public in all their towns and in Jerusalem, saying, Go out to the mountain and get olive branches and branches of field olives and of myrtle, and palm branches and branches of thick trees, to make tents, as it says in the book.

于是百姓出去，取了树枝来，各人在自己的房顶上，或院内，或神殿的院内，或水门的宽阔处，或以法莲门的宽阔处搭棚。
And the people went out and got them and made themselves tents, every one on the roof of his house, and in the open spaces and in the open squares of the house of God, and in the wide place of the water-doorway, and the wide place of the doorway of Ephraim.

从掳到之地归回的全会众就搭棚，住在棚里。从嫩的儿子约书亚的时候直到这日，以色列人没有这样行。于是众人大大喜乐。
All the people who had been prisoners and had come back, made tents and were living in them: for from the time of Jeshua, the son of Nun, till that day, the children of Israel had not done so. And there was very great joy.

从头一天，直到末一天，以斯拉每日念神的律法书。众人守节七日，第八日照例有严肃会。
And day by day, from the first day till the last, he was reading from the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast for seven days: and on the eighth day there was a holy meeting, as it is ordered in the law.

这月二十四日，以色列人聚集禁食，身穿麻衣，头蒙灰尘。
Now on the twenty-fourth day of this month the children of Israel came together, taking no food and putting haircloth and dust on their bodies.

以色列人（人原文作种类）就与一切外邦人离绝，站着承认自己的罪恶和列祖的罪孽。
And the seed of Israel made themselves separate from all the men of other nations, publicly requesting forgiveness for their sins and the wrongdoing of their fathers.

那日的四分之一，站在自己的地方，念耶和华他们神的律法书，又四分之一认罪，敬拜耶和华他们的神。
And for a fourth part of the day, upright in their places, they were reading from the book of the law of their God; and for a fourth part of the day they were requesting forgiveness and worshipping the Lord their God.

耶书亚，巴尼，甲篾，示巴尼，布尼，示利比，巴尼，基拿尼站在利未人的台上，大声哀求耶和华他们的神。
Then Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani took their places on the steps of the Levites, crying in a loud voice to the Lord their God.

利未人耶书亚，甲篾，巴尼，哈沙尼，示利比，荷第雅，示巴尼，毗他希雅说，你们要站起来称颂耶和华你们的神，永世无尽。耶和华阿，你荣耀之名是应当称颂的。超乎一切称颂和赞美。
Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said, Get up and give praise to the Lord your God for ever and ever. Praise be to your great name which is lifted up high over all blessing and praise.

你，惟独你是耶和华。你造了天和天上的天，并天上的万象，地和地上的万物，海和海中所有的。这一切都是你所保存的。天军也都敬拜你。
You are the Lord, even you only; you have made heaven, the heaven of heavens with all their armies, the earth and all things in it, the seas and everything in them; and you keep them from destruction: and the armies of heaven are your worshippers.

你是耶和华神，曾拣选亚伯兰，领他出迦勒底的吾珥，给他改名叫亚伯拉罕。
You are the Lord, the God, who took Abram and made him yours, guiding him from Ur of the Chaldees, and gave him the name of Abraham;

你见他在你面前心里诚实，就与他立约。应许把迦南人，赫人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，耶布斯人，革迦撒人之地赐给他的后裔。且应验了你的话，因为你是公义的。
You saw that his heart was true to you, and made an agreement with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite and the Perizzite and the Jebusite and the Girgashite, even to give it to his seed, and you have done what you said; for righteousness is yours:

你曾看见我们列祖在埃及所受的困苦，垂听他们在红海边的哀求。
And you saw the trouble of our fathers in Egypt, and their cry came to your ears by the Red Sea;

就施行神迹奇事在法老，和他一切臣仆，并他国中的众民身上。你也得了名声，正如今日一样，因为你知道他们向我们列祖行事狂傲。
And you did signs and wonders on Pharaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land; for you saw how cruel they were to them. So you got yourself a name as it is today.

你又在我们列祖面前把海分开，使他们在海中行走干地，将追赶他们的人抛在深海，如石头抛在大水中。
By you the sea was parted before them, so that they went through the sea on dry land; and those who went after them went down into the deep, like a stone into great waters.

并且白昼用云柱引导他们，黑夜用火柱照亮他们当行的路。
And you went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light on the way they were to go.

你也降临在西乃山，从天上与他们说话，赐给他们正直的典章，真实的律法，美好的条例与诫命。
And you came down on Mount Sinai, and your voice came to them from heaven, giving them right decisions and true laws, good rules and orders:

又使他们知道你的安息圣日，并借你仆人摩西传给他们诫命，条例，律法。
And you gave them word of your holy Sabbath, and gave them orders and rules and a law, by the hand of Moses your servant:

从天上赐下粮食充他们的饥，从磐石使水流出解他们的渴，又吩咐他们进去得你起誓应许赐给他们的地。
And you gave them bread from heaven when they were in need, and made water come out of the rock for their drink, and gave them orders to go in and take for their heritage the land which your hand had been lifted up to give them.

但我们的列祖行事狂傲，硬着颈项不听从你的诫命。
But they and our fathers, in their pride, made their necks stiff, and gave no attention to your orders,

不肯顺从，也不记念你在他们中间所行的奇事，竟硬着颈项，居心背逆，自立首领，要回他们为奴之地。但你是乐意饶恕人，有恩典，有怜悯，不轻易发怒，有丰盛慈爱的神，并不丢弃他们。
And would not do them, and gave no thought to the wonders you had done among them; but made their necks stiff, and turning away from you, made a captain over themselves to take them back to their prison in Egypt: but you are a God of forgiveness, full of grace and pity, slow to wrath and great in mercy, and you did not give them up.

他们虽然铸了一只牛犊，彼此说，这是领你出埃及的神。因而大大惹动你的怒气。
Even when they had made for themselves an ox of metal, and said, This is your God who took you up out of Egypt, and had done so much to make you angry;

你还是大施怜悯，在旷野不丢弃他们。白昼，云柱不离开他们，仍引导他们行路。黑夜，火柱也不离开他们，仍照亮他们当行的路。
Even then, in your great mercy, you did not give them up in the waste land: the pillar of cloud still went before them by day, guiding them on their way, and the pillar of fire by night, to give them light, and make clear the way they were to go.

你也赐下你良善的灵教训他们，未尝不赐吗哪使他们糊口，并赐水解他们的渴。
And you gave your good spirit to be their teacher, and did not keep back your manna from their mouths, and gave them water when they had need of it.

在旷野四十年，你养育他们，他们就一无所缺。衣服没有穿破，脚也没有肿。
Truly, for forty years you were their support in the waste land, and they were in need of nothing; their clothing did not get old or their feet become tired.

并且你将列国之地照分赐给他们，他们就得了西宏之地，希实本王之地，和巴珊王噩之地。
And you gave them kingdoms and peoples, making distribution to them in every part of the land: so they took for their heritage the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og, king of Bashan.

你也使他们的子孙多如天上的星，带他们到你所应许他们列祖进入得为业之地。
And you made their children as great in number as the stars of heaven, and took them into the land, of which you had said to their fathers that they were to go in and take it for themselves.

这样，他们进去得了那地，你在他们面前制伏那地的居民，就是迦南人。将迦南人和其君王，并那地的居民，都交在他们手里，让他们任意而待。
So the children went in and took the land, and you overcame before them the people of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them up into their hands, with their kings and the people of the land, so that they might do with them whatever it was their pleasure to do.

他们得了坚固的城邑，肥美的地土，充满各样美物的房屋，凿成的水井，葡萄园，橄榄园，并许多果木树。他们就吃而得饱，身体肥胖，因你的大恩，心中快乐。
And they took walled towns and a fat land, and became the owners of houses full of all good things, water-holes cut in the rock, vine-gardens and olive-gardens and a wealth of fruit-trees: so they had food enough and became fat, and had joy in the good you gave them.

然而，他们不顺从，竟背叛你，将你的律法丢在背后，杀害那劝他们归向你的众先知，大大惹动你的怒气。
But they were hard-hearted, and went against your authority, turning their backs on your law, and putting to death your prophets, who gave witness against them with the purpose of turning them back again to you, and they did much to make you angry.

所以你将他们交在敌人的手中，磨难他们。他们遭难的时候哀求你，你就从天上垂听，照你的大怜悯赐给他们拯救者，救他们脱离敌人的手。
And so you gave them up into the hands of their haters who were cruel to them: and in the time of their trouble, when they made their prayer to you, you gave ear to them from heaven; and in your great mercy gave them saviours, who made them free from the hands of their haters.

但他们得平安之后，又在你面前行恶，所以你丢弃他们在仇敌的手中，使仇敌辖制他们。然而他们转回哀求你，你仍从天上垂听，屡次照你的怜悯拯救他们。
But when they had rest, they did evil again before you: so you gave them into the hands of their haters, who had rule over them: but when they came back and made their prayer to you, you gave ear to them from heaven; again and again, in your mercy, you gave them salvation;

又警戒他们，要使他们归服你的律法。他们却行事狂傲，不听从你的诫命，干犯你的典章（人若遵行就必因此活着），扭转肩头，硬着颈项，不肯听从。
And gave witness against them so that you might make them come back again to your law: but their hearts were lifted up, and they gave no attention to your orders and went against your decisions (which, if a man keeps them, will be life to him), and turning their backs on you, made their necks stiff and did not give ear.

但你多年宽容他们，又用你的灵借众先知劝戒他们，他们仍不听从，所以你将他们交在列国之民的手中。
Year after year you put up with them, and gave witness against them by your spirit through your prophets: still they did not give ear: and so you gave them up into the hands of the peoples of the lands.

然而你大发怜悯，不全然灭绝他们，也不丢弃他们。因为你是有恩典，有怜悯的神。
Even then, in your great mercy, you did not put an end to them completely, or give them up; for you are a God of grace and mercy.

我们的神阿，你是至大，至能，至可畏，守约施慈爱的神。我们的君王，首领，祭司，先知，列祖，和你的众民。从亚述列王的时候直到今日所遭遇的苦难，现在求你不要以为小。
And now, our God, the great, the strong, the God who is to be feared, who keeps faith and mercy, let not all this trouble seem small to you, which has come on us, and on our kings and our rulers and on our priests and our prophets and our fathers and on all your people from the time of the kings of Assyria till this day.

在一切临到我们的事上，你却是公义的。因你所行的是诚实，我们所做的是邪恶。
But still, you have been in the right in everything which has come on us; you have been true to us, but we have done evil:

我们的君王，首领，祭司，列祖都不遵守你的律法。不听从你的诫命和你警戒他们的话。
And our kings, our rulers, our priests, and our fathers have not kept your law or given attention to your orders and your witness, with which you gave witness against them.

他们在本国里沾你大恩的时候，在你所赐给他们这广大肥美之地上不事奉你，也不转离他们的恶行。
For they have not been your servants in their kingdom, and in all the good things you gave them, and in the great and fat land you gave them, and they have not been turned away from their evil-doing.

我们现今作了奴仆。至于你所赐给我们列祖享受其上的土产，并美物之地，看哪，我们在这地上作了奴仆。
Now, today, we are servants, and as for the land which you gave to our fathers, so that the produce of it and the good might be theirs, see, we are servants in it:

这地许多出产归了列王，就是你因我们的罪所派辖制我们的。他们任意辖制我们的身体和牲畜，我们遭了大难。
And it gives much increase to the kings whom you have put over us because of our sins: and they have power over our bodies and over our cattle at their pleasure, and we are in great trouble.

因这一切的事，我们立确实的约，写在册上。我们的首领，利未人，和祭司都签了名。
And because of all this we are making an agreement in good faith, and putting it in writing; and our rulers, our Levites, and our priests are putting their names to it.

签名的是，哈迦利亚的儿子省长尼希米，和西底家。
Now those who put down their names were Nehemiah the Tirshatha, the son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah,

祭司。西莱雅，亚撒利雅，耶利米，
Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,

巴施户珥，亚玛利雅，玛基雅，
Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,

哈突，示巴尼，玛鹿，
Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,

哈琳，米利末，俄巴底亚，
Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,

但以理，近顿，巴录，
Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,

米书兰，亚比雅，米雅民，
Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,

玛西亚，璧该，示玛雅。
Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these were the priests.

又有利未人，就是亚散尼的儿子耶书亚，希拿达的子孙宾内，甲篾。
And the Levites: by name, Jeshua, the son of Azaniah, Binnui, of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,

还有他们的弟兄示巴尼，荷第雅，基利他，毗莱雅，哈难，
And their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,

米迦，利合，哈沙比雅，
Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,

撒刻，示利比，示巴尼，
Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,

荷第雅，巴尼，比尼努。
Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.

又有民的首领，就是巴录，巴哈摩押，以拦，萨土，巴尼，
The chiefs of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,

布尼，押甲，比拜，
Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,

亚多尼雅，比革瓦伊，亚丁，
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,

亚特，希西家，押朔，
Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,

荷第雅，哈顺，比赛，
Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,

哈拉，亚拿突，尼拜，
Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,

抹比押，米书兰，希悉，
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,

米示萨别，撒督，押杜亚，
Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,

毗拉提，哈难，亚奈雅，
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,

何细亚，哈拿尼雅，哈述，
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,

哈罗黑，毗利哈，朔百，
Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,

利宏，哈沙拿，玛西雅，
Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,

亚希雅，哈难，亚难，
And Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,

玛鹿，哈琳，巴拿。
Malluch, Harim, Baanah.

其余的民，祭司，利未人，守门的，歌唱的，尼提宁，和一切离绝邻邦居民归服神律法的，并他们的妻子，儿女，凡有知识能明白的。
And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the door-keepers, the music-makers, the Nethinim, and all those who had made themselves separate from the peoples of the lands, to keep the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, everyone who had knowledge and wisdom;

都随从他们贵胄的弟兄，发咒起誓，必遵行神借他仆人摩西所传的律法，谨守遵行耶和华我们主的一切诫命，典章，律例。
They were united with their brothers, their rulers, and put themselves under a curse and an oath, to keep their steps in the way of God's law, which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to keep and do all the orders of the Lord, our Lord, and his decisions and his rules;

并不将我们的女儿嫁给这地的居民，也不为我们的儿子娶他们的女儿。
And that we would not give our daughters to the peoples of the lands, or take their daughters for our sons;

这地的居民若在安息日，或什么圣日，带了货物或粮食来卖给我们，我们必不买。每逢第七年必不耕种，凡欠我们债的必不追讨。
And if the peoples of the lands come to do trade in goods or food on the Sabbath day, that we would do no trade with them on the Sabbath or on a holy day: and that in the seventh year we would take no payment from any debtor.

我们又为自己定例，每年各人捐银一舍客勒三分之一，为我们神殿的使用，
And we made rules for ourselves, taxing ourselves a third of a shekel every year for the upkeep of the house of our God;

就是为陈设饼，常献的素祭，和燔祭，安息日，月朔，节期所献的与圣物，并以色列人的赎罪祭，以及我们神殿里一切的费用。
For the holy bread, and for the regular meal offering and the regular burned offering on the Sabbaths and at the new moon and the fixed feasts, and for the sin-offerings to take away the sin of Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.

我们的祭司，利未人，和百姓都掣签，看每年是哪一族按定期将献祭的柴奉到我们神的殿里。照着律法上所写的，烧在耶和华我们神的坛上。
And we, the priests and the Levites and the people, made selection, by the decision of the Lord, of those who were to take the wood offering into the house of God, by families at the regular times, year by year, to be burned on the altar of the Lord our God, as it is recorded in the law;

又定每年将我们地上初熟的土产，和各样树上初熟的果子，都奉到耶和华的殿里。
And to take the first-fruits of our land, and the first-fruits of every sort of tree, year by year, into the house of the Lord;

又照律法上所写的，将我们头胎的儿子，和首生的牛羊，都奉到我们神的殿，交给我们神殿里供职的祭司。
As well as the first of our sons and of our cattle, as it is recorded in the law, and the first lambs of our herds and of our flocks, which are to be taken to the house of our God, to the priests who are servants in the house of our God:

并将初熟之麦子所磨的面和举祭，各样树上初熟的果子，新酒与油奉给祭司，收在我们神殿的库房里，把我们地上所产的十分之一奉给利未人，因利未人在我们一切城邑的土产中当取十分之一。
And that we would take the first of our rough meal, and our lifted offerings, and the fruit of every sort of tree, and wine and oil, to the priests, to the rooms of the house of our God; and the tenth of the produce of our land to the Levites; for they, the Levites, take a tenth in all the towns of our ploughed land.

利未人取十分之一的时候，亚伦的子孙中，当有一个祭司与利未人同在。利未人也当从十分之一中取十分之一，奉到我们神殿的屋子里，收在库房中。
And the priest, the son of Aaron, is to be with the Levites, when the Levites take the tenths: and the Levites are to take a tenth of the tenths into the house of our God, to the rooms, into the store-house;

以色列人和利未人要将五谷，新酒，和油为举祭，奉到收存圣所器皿的屋子里，就是供职的祭司，守门的，歌唱的所住的屋子。这样，我们就不离弃我们神的殿。
For the children of Israel and the children of Levi are to take the lifted offering of the grain and wine and oil into the rooms where the vessels of the holy place are, together with the priests and the door-keepers and the makers of music: and we will not give up caring for the house of our God.

百姓的首领住在耶路撒冷。其余的百姓掣签，每十人中使一人来住在圣城耶路撒冷，那九人住在别的城邑。
And the rulers of the people were living in Jerusalem: the rest of the people made selection, by the decision of chance, of one out of every ten to be living in Jerusalem, the holy town; the other nine to go to the other towns.

凡甘心乐意住在耶路撒冷的，百姓都为他们祝福。
And the people gave a blessing to all the men who were freely offering to take up their places in Jerusalem.

以色列人，祭司，利未人，尼提宁，和所罗门仆人的后裔都住在犹大城邑，各在自己的地业中。本省的首领住在耶路撒冷的，记在下面。
Now these are the chiefs of the divisions of the country who were living in Jerusalem: but in the towns of Judah everyone was living on his heritage in the towns, that is, Israel, the priests, the Levites, the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants.

其中有些犹大人和便雅悯人。犹大人中有法勒斯的子孙，乌西雅的儿子亚他雅。乌西雅是撒迦利雅的儿子。撒迦利雅是亚玛利雅的儿子。亚玛利雅是示法提雅的儿子。示法提雅是玛勒列的儿子。
And in Jerusalem there were living certain of the children of Judah and of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah: Athaiah, the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of Perez;

又有巴录的儿子玛西雅。巴录是谷何西的儿子。谷何西是哈赛雅的儿子。哈赛雅是亚大雅的儿子。亚大雅是约雅立的儿子。约雅立是撒迦利雅的儿子。撒迦利雅是示罗尼的儿子。
And Maaseiah, the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.

住在耶路撒冷，法勒斯的子孙共四百六十八名，都是勇士。
All the sons of Perez living in Jerusalem were four hundred and sixty-eight men of good position.

便雅悯人中有米书兰的儿子撒路。米书兰是约叶的儿子。约叶是毗大雅的儿子。毗大雅是哥赖雅的儿子。哥赖雅是玛西雅的儿子。玛西雅是以铁的儿子。以铁是耶筛亚的儿子。
And these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu, the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.

其次有迦拜，撒来的子孙，共九百二十八名。
And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred and twenty-eight.

细基利的儿子约珥是他们的长官。哈西努亚的儿子，犹大是耶路撒冷的副官。
And Joel, the son of Zichri, was their overseer; and Judah, the son of Hassenuah, was second over the town.

祭司中有雅斤，又有约雅立的儿子耶大雅。
Of the priests: Jedaiah, the son of Joiarib, Jachin,

还有管理神殿的西莱雅，西莱雅是希勒家的儿子。希勒家是米书兰的儿子。米书兰是撒督的儿子。撒督是米拉约的儿子。米拉约是亚希突的儿子。
Seraiah, the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,

还有他们的弟兄在殿里供职的，共八百二十二名。又有耶罗罕的儿子亚大雅。耶罗罕是毗拉利的儿子。毗拉利是暗洗的儿子。暗洗是撒迦利亚的儿子。撒迦利亚是巴施户珥的儿子。巴施户珥是玛基雅的儿子。
And their brothers who did the work of the house, eight hundred and twenty-two; and Adaiah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,

还有他的弟兄作族长的，二百四十二名。又有亚萨列的儿子亚玛帅。亚萨列是亚哈赛的儿子。亚哈赛是米实利末的儿子。米实利末是音麦的儿子。
And his brothers, heads of families, two hundred and forty-two; and Amashsai, the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,

还有他们弟兄，大能的勇士共一百二十八名。哈基多琳的儿子撒巴第业是他们的长官。
And their brothers, men of war, a hundred and twenty-eight; and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim.

利未人中有哈述的儿子示玛雅。哈述是押利甘的儿子。押利甘是哈沙比雅的儿子。哈沙比雅是布尼的儿子。
And of the Levites: Shemaiah, the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni,

又有利未人的族长，沙比太和约撒拔管理神殿的外事。
And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chiefs of the Levites, who were responsible for the outside business of the house of God;

祈祷的时候，为称谢领首的是米迦的儿子玛他尼。米迦是撒底的儿子。撒底是亚萨的儿子。又有玛他尼弟兄中的八布迦为副。还有沙母亚的儿子押大。沙母亚是加拉的儿子。加拉是耶杜顿的儿子。
And Mattaniah, the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who had to give the first note of the song of praise in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brothers, and Abda, the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.

在圣城的利未人共二百八十四名。
All the Levites in the holy town were two hundred and eighty-four.

守门的是亚谷和达们，并守门的弟兄，共一百七十二名。
In addition the door-keepers, Akkub, Talmon, and their brothers who kept watch at the doors, were a hundred and seventy-two.

其余的以色列人，祭司，利未人都住在犹大的一切城邑，各在自己的地业中。
And the rest of Israel, of the priests, the Levites, were in all the towns of Judah, every one in his heritage.

尼提宁却住在俄斐勒。西哈和基斯帕管理他们。
But the Nethinim were living in the Ophel; and Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim.

在耶路撒冷，利未人的长官，管理神殿事务的是歌唱者亚萨的子孙，巴尼的儿子乌西。巴尼是哈沙比雅的儿子。哈沙比雅是玛他尼的儿子。玛他尼是米迦的儿子。
And the overseer of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi, the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the music-makers, who was over the business of the house of God.

王为歌唱的出命令，每日供给他们必有一定之粮。
For there was an order from the king about them and a regular amount for the music-makers, for their needs day by day.

犹大儿子谢拉的子孙，米示萨别的儿子毗他希雅，辅助王办理犹大民的事。
And Pethahiah, the son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah, the son of Judah, was the king's servant in everything to do with the people.

至于庄村和属庄村的田地，有犹大人住在基列亚巴，和属基列亚巴的乡村。底本和属底本的乡村。叶甲薛和属叶甲薛的庄村。
And for the daughter-towns with their fields, some of the men of Judah were living in Kiriath-arba and its daughter-towns, and in Dibon and its daughter-towns, and in Jekabzeel and its daughter-towns,

耶书亚，摩拉大，伯帕列，
And in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and Beth-pelet,

哈萨书亚，别是巴，和属别是巴的乡村。
And in Hazar-shual, and in Beer-sheba and its daughter-towns,

洗革拉，米哥拿，和属米哥拿的乡村。
And in Ziklag, and in Meconah and its daughter-towns,

音临门，琐拉，耶末，
And in En-rimmon, and in Zorah, and in Jarmuth,

撒挪亚，亚杜兰，和属这两处的庄村。拉吉和属拉吉的田地。亚西加和属亚西加的乡村。他们所住的地方是从别是巴直到欣嫩谷。
Zanoah, Adullam and their daughter-towns, Lachish and its fields, Azekah and its daughter-towns. So they were living from Beer-sheba to the valley of Hinnom.

便雅悯人从迦巴起，住在密抹，亚雅，伯特利和属伯特利的乡村。
And the children of Benjamin were living from Geba, at Michmash and Aija, and at Beth-el and its daughter-towns,

亚拿突，挪伯，亚难雅，
At Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,

夏琐，拉玛，基他音，
Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,

哈叠，洗编，尼八拉，
Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,

罗德，阿挪，匠人之谷。
Lod and Ono, the valley of expert workers.

利未人中有几班曾住在犹大地归于便雅悯的。
And of the Levites, certain divisions in Judah were joined to Benjamin.

同着撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，和耶书亚回来的祭司，与利未人记在下面。祭司是西莱雅，耶利米，以斯拉，
Now these are the priests and the Levites who went up with Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,

亚玛利雅，玛鹿，哈突，
Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,

示迦尼，利宏，米利末，
Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,

易多，近顿，亚比雅，
Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,

米雅民，玛底雅，璧迦，
Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,

示玛雅，约雅立，耶大雅，
Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,

撒路，亚木，希勒家，耶大雅。这些人在耶书亚的时候作祭司，和他们弟兄的首领。
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and of their brothers in the days of Jeshua.

利未人是耶书亚，宾内，甲篾，示利比，犹大，玛他尼。这玛他尼和他的弟兄管理称谢的事。
And the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who was over the music-makers, he and his brothers.

他们的弟兄八布迦，和乌尼照自己的班次与他们相对。
And Bakbukiah and Unno, their brothers, were opposite them in their watches.

耶书亚生约雅金。约雅金生以利亚实。以利亚实生耶何耶大。
And Jeshua was the father of Joiakim, and Joiakim was the father of Eliashib, and Eliashib was the father of Joiada,

耶何耶大生约拿单。约拿单生押杜亚。
And Joiada was the father of Jonathan, and Jonathan was the father of Jaddua.

在约雅金的时候，祭司作族长的西莱雅族（或作班本段同）有米拉雅。耶利米族有哈拿尼雅。
And in the days of Joiakim there were priests, heads of families: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;

以斯拉族有米书兰。亚玛利雅族有约哈难。
Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;

米利古族有约拿单。示巴尼族有约瑟。
Of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;

哈琳族有押拿。米拉约族有希勒恺。
Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;

易多族有撒迦利亚。近顿族有米书兰。
Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;

亚比雅族有细基利。米拿民族某。摩亚底族有毗勒太。
Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai;

璧迦族有沙母亚。示玛雅族有约拿单。
Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;

约雅立族有玛特乃。耶大雅族有乌西。
And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;

撒来族有加莱。亚木族有希伯。
Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;

希勒家族有哈沙比雅。耶大雅族有拿坦业。
Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.

至于利未人，当以利亚实，耶何耶大，约哈难，押杜亚的时候，他们的族长记在册上。波斯王大利乌在位的时候，作族长的祭司也记在册上。
The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, were listed as heads of families; and the priests, when Darius the Persian was king.

利未人作族长的记在历史上，直到以利亚实的儿子约哈难的时候。
The sons of Levi, heads of families, were recorded in the book of the histories, even till the days of Johanan, the son of Eliashib.

利未人的族长是哈沙比雅，示利比，甲篾的儿子耶书亚，与他们弟兄的班次相对，照着神人大卫的命令一班一班地赞美称谢。
And the chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua, the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers opposite them, to give blessing and praise as ordered by David, the man of God, watch against watch.

玛他尼，八布迦，俄巴底亚，米书兰，达们，亚谷是守门的，就是在库房那里守门。
Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were door-keepers keeping the watch at the store-houses of the doors.

这都是在约撒达的孙子，耶书亚的儿子约雅金，和省长尼希米，并祭司文士以斯拉的时候，有职任的。
These were in the days of Joiakim, the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the ruler and of Ezra the priest, the scribe.

耶路撒冷城墙告成的时候，众民就把各处的利未人，招到耶路撒冷，要称谢，歌唱，敲钹，鼓瑟，弹琴，欢欢喜喜地行告成之礼。
And when the time came for the wall of Jerusalem to be made holy, they sent for the Levites out of all their places to come to Jerusalem, to keep the feast with joy, and with praise and melody, with brass and corded instruments of music.

歌唱的人从耶路撒冷的周围，和尼陀法的村庄与伯吉甲，又从迦巴和押玛弗的田地聚集，因为歌唱的人在耶路撒冷四围为自己立了村庄。
And the sons of the music-makers came together from the lowland round about Jerusalem and from the daughter-towns of the Netophathites,


And from Beth-gilgal and from the fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the music-makers had made daughter-towns for themselves round about Jerusalem.

祭司和利未人就洁净自己，也洁净百姓和城门，并城墙。
And the priests and the Levites made themselves clean; and they made the people clean, and the doorways and the wall.

我带犹大的首领上城，使称谢的人分为两大队，排列而行。第一队在城上往右边向粪厂门行走。
Then I made the rulers of Judah come up on the wall, and I put in position two great bands of them who gave praise, walking in ordered lines; one went to the right on the wall, in the direction of the doorway where the waste was put;

在他们后头的有何沙雅，与犹大首领的一半。
And after them went Hoshaiah and half of the rulers of Judah,

又有亚撒利雅，以斯拉，米书兰，
And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,

犹大，便雅悯，示玛雅，耶利米。
Judah and Benjamin and Shemaiah and Jeremiah,

还有些吹号之祭司的子孙，约拿单的儿子撒迦利亚。约拿单是示玛雅的儿子。示玛雅是玛他尼的儿子。玛他尼是米该亚的儿子。米该亚是撒刻的儿子。撒刻是亚萨的儿子。
And certain of the priests' sons with wind instruments; Zechariah, the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,

又有撒迦利亚的弟兄示玛雅，亚撒利，米拉莱，基拉莱，玛艾，拿坦业，犹大，哈拿尼，都拿着神人大卫的乐器，文士以斯拉引领他们。
And his brothers, Shemaiah, and Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel and Judah, Hanani, with the music-instruments of David, the man of God; and Ezra the scribe was at their head;

他们经过泉门往前，从大卫城的台阶随地势而上，在大卫宫殿以上，直行到朝东的水门。
And by the doorway of the fountain and straight in front of them, they went up by the steps of the town of David, at the slope up of the wall, over the house of David, as far as the water-doorway to the east.

第二队称谢的人，要与那一队相迎而行。我和民的一半跟随他们，在城墙上过了炉楼，直到宽墙。
And the other band of those who gave praise went to the left, and I went after them with half the people, on the wall, over the tower of the ovens, as far as the wide wall;

又过了以法莲门，古门，鱼门，哈楠业楼，哈米亚楼，直到羊门，就在护卫门站住。
And over the doorway of Ephraim and by the old door and the fish door and the tower of Hananel and the tower of Hammeah, as far as the sheep door: and at the doorway of the watchmen they came to a stop.

于是，这两队称谢的人连我，和官长的一半，站在神的殿里。
So the two bands of those who gave praise took up their positions in the house of God, and I and half of the chiefs with me:

还有祭司以利亚金，玛西雅，米拿民，米该雅，以利约乃，撒迦利亚，哈楠尼亚吹号。
And the priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with wind instruments;

又有玛西雅，示玛雅，以利亚撒，乌西，约哈难，玛基雅，以拦，和以谢奏乐。歌唱的就大声歌唱，伊斯拉希雅管理他们。
And Maaseiah and Shemaiah and Eleazar and Uzzi and Jehohanan and Malchijah and Elam and Ezer. And the makers of melody made their voices loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.

那日，众人献大祭而欢乐。因为神使他们大大欢乐，连妇女带孩童也都欢乐，甚至耶路撒冷中的欢声听到远处。
And on that day they made great offerings and were glad; for God had made them glad with great joy; and the women and the children were glad with them: so that the joy of Jerusalem came to the ears of those who were far off.

当日，派人管理库房，将举祭，初熟之物，和所取的十分之一，就是按各城田地，照律法所定归给祭司和利未人的分，都收在里头。犹大人因祭司和利未人供职，就欢乐了。
And on that day certain men were put over the rooms where the things which had been given were stored, for the lifted offerings and the first-fruits and the tenths, and to take into them the amounts, from the fields of every town, fixed by the law for the priests and the Levites: for Judah was glad on account of the priests and the Levites who were in their places.

祭司利未人遵守神所吩咐的，并守洁净的礼。歌唱的，守门的，照着大卫和他儿子所罗门的命令也如此行。
And they kept the watch of their God, and were responsible for making things clean, and so did the music-makers and the door-keepers, as it was ordered by David and Solomon his son.

古时，在大卫和亚萨的日子，有歌唱的伶长，并有赞美称谢神的诗歌。
For in the days of David and Asaph in the past, there was a master of the music, and songs of blessing and praise to God.

当所罗巴伯和尼希米的时候，以色列众人将歌唱的，守门的，每日所当得的分供给他们，又给利未人当得的分。利未人又给亚伦的子孙当得的分。
And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah gave what was needed by the music-makers and the door-keepers day by day: and they made the offerings holy for the Levites; and the Levites did the same for the sons of Aaron.

当日，人念摩西的律法书给百姓听，遇见书上写着说，亚扪人和摩押人永不可入神的会。
On that day there was a reading from the book of Moses in the hearing of the people; and they saw that it said in the book that no Ammonite or Moabite might ever come into the meeting of God;

因为他们没有拿食物，和水来迎接以色列人，且雇了巴兰咒诅他们，但我们的神使那咒诅变为祝福。
Because they did not give the children of Israel bread and water when they came to them, but got Balaam to put a curse on them: though the curse was turned into a blessing by our God.

以色列民听见这律法，就与一切闲杂人绝交。
So after hearing the law, they took out of Israel all the mixed people.

先是蒙派管理我们神殿中库房，的祭司以利亚实与多比雅结亲。
Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who had been placed over the rooms of the house of our God, being a friend of Tobiah,

便为他预备一间大屋子，就是从前收存素祭，乳香，器皿，和照命令供给利未人，歌唱的，守门的五谷，新酒，和油的十分之一，并归祭司举祭的屋子。
Had made ready for him a great room, where at one time they kept the meal offerings, the perfume, and the vessels and the tenths of the grain and wine and oil which were given by order to the Levites and the music-makers and the door-keepers, and the lifted offerings for the priests.

那时我不在耶路撒冷。因为巴比伦王亚达薛西三十二年，我回到王那里。过了多日，我向王告假。
But all this time I was not at Jerusalem: for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes, king of Babylon, I went to the king; and after some days, I got the king to let me go,

我来到耶路撒冷，就知道以利亚实为多比雅在神殿的院内，预备屋子的那件恶事。
And I came to Jerusalem; and it was clear to me what evil Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in making ready for him a room in the buildings of the house of God.

我甚恼怒，就把多比雅的一切家具从屋里都抛出去。
And it was evil in my eyes: so I had all Tobiah's things put out of the room.

吩咐人洁净这屋子，遂将神殿的器皿和素祭，乳香又搬进去。
Then I gave orders, and they made the rooms clean: and I put back in them the vessels of the house of God, with the meal offerings and the perfume.

我见利未人所当得的分，无人供给他们，甚至供职的利未人与歌唱的，俱各奔回自己的田地去了。
And I saw that the Levites had not been given what was needed for their support; so that the Levites and the music-makers, who did the work, had gone away, everyone to his field.

我就斥责官长说，为何离弃神的殿呢？我便招聚利未人，使他们照旧供职。
Then I made protests to the chiefs, and said, Why has the house of God been given up? And I got them together and put them in their places.

犹大众人就把五谷，新酒，和油的十分之一送入库房。
Then all Judah came with the tenth part of the grain and wine and oil and put it into the store-houses.

我派祭司示利米雅，文士撒督，和利未人毗大雅作库官管理库房。副官是哈难。哈难是撒刻的儿子。撒刻是玛他尼的儿子。这些人都是忠信的，他们的职分是将所供给的分给他们的弟兄。
And I made controllers over the store-houses, Shelemiah the priest and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and with them was Hanan, the son of Zaccur the son of Mattaniah: they were taken to be true men and their business was the distribution of these things to their brothers.

我的神阿，求你因这事记念我，不要涂抹我为神的殿，与其中的礼节所行的善。
Keep me in mind, O my God, in connection with this, and do not let the good which I have done for the house of my God and its worship go from your memory completely.

那些日子，我在犹大见有人在安息日榨酒（原文作踹酒榨），搬运禾捆驮在驴上。又把酒，葡萄，无花果，和各样的担子在安息日担入耶路撒冷，我就在他们卖食物的那日警戒他们。
In those days, I saw in Judah some who were crushing grapes on the Sabbath, and getting in grain and putting it on asses; as well as wine and grapes and figs and all sorts of goods which they took into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: and I gave witness against them on the day when they were marketing food.

又有推罗人住在耶路撒冷。他们把鱼和各样货物运进来，在安息日卖给犹大人。
And there were men of Tyre there, who came with fish and all sorts of goods, trading with the children of Judah and in Jerusalem on the Sabbath.

我就斥责犹大的贵胄说，你们怎么行这恶事犯了安息日呢？
Then I made protests to the chiefs of Judah, and said to them, What is this evil which you are doing, not keeping the Sabbath day holy?

从前你们列祖岂不是这样行，以致我们神使一切灾祸临到我们，和这城吗？现在你们还犯安息日，使忿怒越发临到以色列。
Did not your fathers do the same, and did not our God send all this evil on us and on this town? but you are causing more wrath to come on Israel by not keeping the Sabbath holy.

在安息日的前一日，耶路撒冷城门有黑影的时候，我就吩咐人将门关锁，不过安息日不准开放。我又派我几个仆人管理城门，免得有人在安息日担什么担子进城。
And so, when the streets of Jerusalem were getting dark before the Sabbath, I gave orders for the doors to be shut and not to be open again till after the Sabbath: and I put some of my servants by the door so that nothing might be taken in on the Sabbath day.

于是商人和贩卖各样货物的，一两次住宿在耶路撒冷城外。
So the traders in all sorts of goods took their night's rest outside Jerusalem once or twice.

我就警戒他们说，你们为何在城外住宿呢？若再这样，我必下手拿办你们。从此以后，他们在安息日不再来了。
Then I gave witness against them and said, Why are you waiting all night by the wall? if you do so again I will have you taken prisoners. From that time they did not come again on the Sabbath.

我吩咐利未人洁净自己，来守城门，使安息日为圣。我的神阿，求你因这事记念我，照你的大慈爱怜恤我。
And I gave the Levites orders to make themselves clean and come and keep the doors and make the Sabbath holy. Keep this in mind to my credit, O my God, and have mercy on me, for great is your mercy.

那些日子，我也见犹大人娶了亚实突，亚扪，摩押的女子为妻。
And in those days I saw the Jews who were married to women of Ashdod and Ammon and Moab:

他们的儿女说话，一半是亚实突的话，不会说犹大的话，所说的是照着各族的方言。
And their children were talking half in the language of Ashdod; they had no knowledge of the Jews' language, but made use of the language of the two peoples.

我就斥责他们，咒诅他们，打了他们几个人，拔下他们的头发，叫他们指着神起誓，必不将自己的女儿嫁给外邦人的儿子，也不为自己和儿子娶他们的女儿。
And I took up the cause against them, cursing them and giving blows to some of them and pulling out their hair; and I made them take an oath by God, saying, You are not to give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons or for yourselves.

我又说，以色列王所罗门不是在这样的事上犯罪吗？在多国中并没有一王像他，且蒙他神所爱，神立他作以色列全国的王。然而连他也被外邦女子引诱犯罪。
Was it not in these things that Solomon, king of Israel, did wrong? among a number of nations there was no king like him, and he was dear to his God, and God made him king over all Israel: but even he was made to do evil by strange women.

如此，我岂听你们行这大恶，娶外邦女子干犯我们的神呢？
Are we then without protest to let you do all this great evil, sinning against our God by taking strange women for your wives?

大祭司以利亚实的孙子，耶何耶大的一个儿子是，和伦人参巴拉的女婿，我就从我这里把他赶出去。
And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib, the chief priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite: so I sent him away from me.

我的神阿，求你记念他们的罪。因为他们玷污了祭司的职任，违背你与祭司利未人所立的约。
Keep them in mind, O my God, because they have put shame on the priests' name and on the agreement of the priests and the Levites.

这样，我洁净他们，使他们离绝一切外邦人，派定祭司和利未人的班次，使他们各尽其职。
So I made them clean from all strange people, and had regular watches fixed for the priests and for the Levites, everyone in his work;

我又派百姓按定期献柴，和初熟的土产。我的神阿，求你记念我，施恩与我。
And for the wood offering, at fixed times, and for the first fruits. Keep me in mind, O my God, for good.

