便雅悯地亚拿突城的祭司中，希勒家的儿子耶利米的话记在下面。
The words of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

犹大王亚们的儿子约西亚在位十三年，耶和华的话临到耶利米。
To whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his rule.

从犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬在位的时候，直到犹大王约西亚的儿子西底家在位的末年，就是十一年五月间耶路撒冷人被掳的时候，耶和华的话也常临到耶利米。
And it came again in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, up to the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah; till Jerusalem was taken away in the fifth month.

耶利米说，耶和华的话临到我说，
Now the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

我未将你造在腹中，我已晓得你。你未出母胎，我已分别你为圣。我已派你作列国的先知。
Before you were formed in the body of your mother I had knowledge of you, and before your birth I made you holy; I have given you the work of being a prophet to the nations.

我就说，主耶和华阿，我不知怎样说，因为我是年幼的。
Then said I, O Lord God! see, I have no power of words, for I am a child.

耶和华对我说，你不要说我是年幼的，因为我差遣你到谁那里去，你都要去。我吩咐你说什么话，你都要说。
But the Lord said to me, Do not say, I am a child: for wherever I send you, you are to go, and whatever I give you orders to say, you are to say.

你不要惧怕他们，因为我与你同在，要拯救你。这是耶和华说的。
Have no fear because of them: for I am with you, to keep you safe, says the Lord.

于是耶和华伸手按我的口，对我说，我已将当说的话传给你。
Then the Lord put out his hand, touching my mouth; and the Lord said to me, See, I have put my words in your mouth:

看哪，我今日立你在列邦列国之上，为要施行拔出，拆毁，毁坏，倾覆，又要建立，栽植。
See, this day I have put you over the nations and over the kingdoms, for uprooting and smashing down, for destruction and overturning, for building up and planting.

耶和华的话又临到我说，耶利米，你看见什么。我说，我看见一根杏树枝。
Again the word of the Lord came to me, saying, Jeremiah, what do you see? And I said, I see a branch of an almond-tree.

耶和华对我说，你看得不错。因为我留意保守我的话，使得成就。
Then the Lord said to me, You have seen well: for I keep watch over my word to give effect to it.

耶和华的话第二次临到我说，你看见什么。我说，我看见一个烧开的锅，从北而倾。
And the word of the Lord came to me a second time, saying, What do you see? And I said, I see a boiling pot, and its face is from the north.

耶和华对我说，必有灾祸从北方发出，临到这地的一切居民。
Then the Lord said to me, Out of the north evil will come, bursting out on all the people of the land.

耶和华说，看哪，我要召北方列国的众族。他们要来，各安座位在耶路撒冷的城门口，周围攻击城墙，又要攻击犹大的一切城邑。
For see, I will send for all the families of the kingdoms of the north, says the Lord; and they will come, everyone placing his high seat at the way into Jerusalem, and against its walls on every side, and against all the towns of Judah.

至于这民的一切恶，就是离弃我，向别神烧香，跪拜自己手所造的，我要发出我的判语，攻击他们。
And I will give my decision against them on account of all their evil-doing; because they have given me up, burning perfumes to other gods and worshipping the works of their hands.

所以你当束腰，起来将我所吩咐你的一切话告诉他们。不要因他们惊惶，免得我使你在他们面前惊惶。
So make yourself ready, and go and say to them everything I give you orders to say: do not be overcome by fear of them, or I will send fear on you before them.

看哪，我今日使你成为坚城，铁柱，铜墙，与全地和犹大的君王，首领，祭司，并地上的众民反对。
For see, this day have I made you a walled town, and an iron pillar, and walls of brass, against all the land, against the kings of Judah, against its captains, against its priests, and against the people of the land.

他们要攻击你，却不能胜你。因为我与你同在，要拯救你。这是耶和华说的。
They will be fighting against you, but they will not overcome you: for I am with you, says the Lord, to give you salvation.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你去向耶路撒冷人的耳中喊叫说，耶和华如此说，你幼年的恩爱，婚姻的爱情，你怎样在旷野，在未曾耕种之地跟随我，我都记得。
Go and say in the ears of Jerusalem, The Lord says, I still keep the memory of your kind heart when you were young, and your love when you became my bride; how you went after me in the waste of sand, in an unplanted land.

那时以色列归耶和华为圣，作为土产初熟的果子。凡吞吃它的必算为有罪，灾祸必临到他们。这是耶和华说的。
Israel was holy to the Lord, the first-fruits of his increase: all who made attacks on him were judged as wrongdoers, evil came on them, says the Lord.

雅各家，以色列家的各族阿，你们当听耶和华的话。
Give ear to the words of the Lord, O sons of Jacob and all the families of Israel:

耶和华如此说，你们的列祖见我有什么不义，竟远离我，随从虚无的神，自己成为虚妄的呢？
These are the words of the Lord: What evil have your fathers seen in me that they have gone far from me, and, walking after what is false, have become false?

他们也不说，那领我们从埃及地上来，引导我们经过旷野，沙漠有深坑之地，和干旱死荫，无人经过，无人居住之地的耶和华在哪里呢？
And they never said, Where is the Lord, who took us up out of the land of Egypt; who was our guide through the waste of sand, through an unplanted land full of deep holes, through a dry land of deep shade, which no one went through and where no man was living?

我领你们进入肥美之地，使你们得吃其中的果子和美物。但你们进入的时候就玷污我的地，使我的产业成为可憎的。
And I took you into a fertile land, where you were living on its fruit and its wealth; but when you came in, you made my land unclean, and made my heritage a disgusting thing.

祭司都不说，耶和华在哪里呢？传讲律法的都不认识我。官长违背我。先知借巴力说预言，随从无益的神。
The priests did not say, Where is the Lord? and those who were expert in the law had no knowledge of me: and the rulers did evil against me, and the prophets became prophets of the Baal, going after things without value.

耶和华说，我因此必与你们争辩，也必与你们的子孙争辩。
For this reason, I will again put forward my cause against you, says the Lord, even against you and against your children's children.

你们且过到基提海岛去察看，打发人往基达去留心查考，看曾有这样的事没有。
For go over to the sea-lands of Kittim and see; send to Kedar and give deep thought to it; and see if there has ever been such a thing.

岂有一国换了他的神吗？其实这不是神。但我的百姓将他们的荣耀换了那无益的神。
Has any nation ever made a change in their gods, though they are no gods? but my people have given up their glory in exchange for what is of no profit.

诸天哪，要因此惊奇，极其恐慌，甚为凄凉。这是耶和华说的。
Be full of wonder, O heavens, at this; be overcome with fear, be completely waste, says the Lord.

因为我的百姓作了两件恶事，就是离弃我这活水的泉源，为自己凿出池子，是破裂不能存水的池子。
For my people have done two evils; they have given up me, the fountain of living waters, and have made for themselves water-holes, cut out from the rock, broken water-holes, of no use for storing water.

以色列是仆人吗？是家中生的奴仆吗？为何成为掠物呢？
Is Israel a servant? has he been a house-servant from birth? why has he been made waste?

少壮狮子向他咆哮，大声吼叫，使他的地荒凉。城邑也都焚烧，无人居住。
The young lions have made an outcry against him with a loud voice: they have made his land waste; his towns are burned up, with no one living in them.

挪弗人和答比匿人也打破你的头顶。
Even the children of Noph and Tahpanhes have put shame on you.

这事临到你身上，不是你自招的吗？不是因耶和华你神引你行路的时候，你离弃他吗？
Has not this come on you because you have given up the Lord your God, who was your guide by the way?

现今你为何在埃及路上要喝西曷的水呢？你为何在亚述路上要喝大河的水呢？
And now, what have you to do on the way to Egypt, to get your drink from the waters of the Nile? or what have you to do on the way to Assyria, to get your drink from the waters of the River?

你自己的恶必惩治你。你背道的事必责备你。由此可知可见，你离弃耶和华你的神，不存敬畏我的心，乃为恶事，为苦事。这是主万军之耶和华说的。
The evil you yourselves have done will be your punishment, your errors will be your judge: be certain then, and see that it is an evil and a bitter thing to give up the Lord your God, and no longer to be moved by fear of me, says the Lord, the Lord of armies.

我在古时折断你的轭，解开你的绳索。你说，我必不事奉耶和华。因为你在各高冈上，各青翠树下屈身行淫。（或作我在古时折断你的轭，解开你的绳索，你就说，我必不事奉别神。谁知你在各高冈上，各青翠树下，仍屈身行淫。）
For in the past, your yoke was broken by your hands and your cords parted; and you said, I will not be your servant; for on every high hill and under every branching tree, your behaviour was like that of a loose woman

然而，我栽你是上等的葡萄树，全然是真种子。你怎么向我变为外邦葡萄树的坏枝子呢？
But when you were planted by me, you were a noble vine, in every way a true seed: how then have you been changed into the branching plant of a strange vine?

你虽用碱，多用肥皂洗濯，你罪孽的痕迹仍然在我面前显出。这是主耶和华说的。
For even if you are washed with soda and take much soap, still your evil-doing is marked before me, says the Lord God.

你怎能说，我没有玷污，没有随从众巴力。你看你谷中的路，就知道你所行的如何。你是快行的独峰驼，狂奔乱走。
How are you able to say, I am not unclean, I have not gone after the Baals? see your way in the valley, be clear about what you have done: you are a quick-footed camel twisting her way in and out;

你是野驴，惯在旷野，欲心发动就吸风。起性的时候谁能使它转去呢？凡寻找它的必不至疲乏。在它的月分必能寻见。
An untrained ass, used to the waste land, breathing up the wind in her desire; at her time, who is able to send her away? all those who are looking for her will have no need to make themselves tired; in her month they will get her.

我说，你不要使脚上无鞋，喉咙干渴。你倒说，这是枉然。我喜爱别神，我必随从他们。
Do not let your foot be without shoes, or your throat dry from need of water: but you said, There is no hope: no, for I have been a lover of strange gods, and after them I will go.

贼被捉拿，怎样羞愧，以色列家和他们的君王，首领，祭司，先知也都照样羞愧。
As the thief is shamed when he is taken, so is Israel shamed; they, their kings and their rulers, their priests and their prophets;

他们向木头说，你是我的父。向石头说，你是生我的。他们以背向我，不以面向我。及至遭遇患难的时候却说，起来拯救我们。
Who say to a tree, You are my father; and to a stone, You have given me life: for their backs have been turned to me, not their faces: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Up! and be our saviour.

你为自己作的神在哪里呢？你遭遇患难的时候，叫他们起来拯救你吧。犹大阿，你神的数目与你城的数目相等。
But where are the gods you have made for yourselves? let them come, if they are able to give you salvation in the time of your trouble: for the number of your gods is as the number of your towns, O Judah.

耶和华说，你们为何与我争辩呢？你们都违背了我。
Why will you put forward your cause against me? You have all done evil against me, says the Lord.

我责打你们的儿女是徒然的，他们不受惩治。你们自己的刀吞灭你们的先知，好像残害的狮子。
I gave your children blows to no purpose; they got no good from training: your sword has been the destruction of your prophets, like a death-giving lion.

这世代的人哪，你们要看明耶和华的话。我岂向以色列作旷野呢？或作幽暗之地呢？我的百姓为何说，我们脱离约束，再不归向你了。
O generation, see the word of the Lord. Have I been a waste land to Israel? or a land of dark night? why do my people say, We have got loose, we will not come to you again?

处女岂能忘记她的妆饰呢？新妇岂能忘记她的美衣呢？我的百姓却忘记了我无数的日子。
Is it possible for a virgin to put out of her memory her ornaments, or a bride her robes? but my people have put me out of their memories for unnumbered days.

你怎么修饰你的道路要求爱情呢？就是恶劣的妇人你也叫她们行你的路。
With what care are your ways ordered when you are looking for love! so ... your ways.

并且你的衣襟上有无辜穷人的血。你杀他们并不是遇见他们挖窟窿，乃是因这一切的事。
And in the skirts of your robe may be seen the life-blood of those who have done no wrong: ...

你还说，我无辜。耶和华的怒气必定向我消了。看哪，我必审问你。因你自说，我没有犯罪。
And still you said, I have done no wrong; truly, his wrath is turned away from me. See, I will take up the cause against you, because you say, I have done no wrong.

你为何东跑西奔要更换你的路呢？你必因埃及蒙羞，像从前因亚述蒙羞一样。
Why do you go about so much for the purpose of changing your way? you will be shamed on account of Egypt, as you were shamed on account of Assyria.

你也必两手抱头从埃及出来。因为耶和华已经弃绝你所倚靠的，你必不因他们得顺利。
Truly, you will go out from him with your hands on your head: for the Lord has given up those in whom you have put your faith, and they will be of no help to you.

有话说，人若休妻，妻离他而去，作了别人的妻，前夫岂能再收回她来？若收回她来，那地岂不是大大玷污了吗？但你和许多亲爱的行邪淫，还可以归向我。这是耶和华说的。
They say, If a man puts away his wife and she goes from him and becomes another man's, will he go back to her again? will not that land have been made unclean? but though you have been acting like a loose woman with a number of lovers, will you now come back to me? says the Lord.

你向净光的高处举目观看，你在何处没有淫行呢？你坐在道旁等候，好像亚拉伯人在旷野埋伏一样，并且你的淫行邪恶玷污了全地。
Let your eyes be lifted up to the open hilltops, and see; where have you not been taken by your lovers? You have been seated waiting for them by the wayside like an Arabian in the waste land; you have made the land unclean with your loose ways and your evil-doing.

因此甘霖停止，春（原文作晚）雨不降。你还是有娼妓之脸，不顾羞耻。
So the showers have been kept back, and there has been no spring rain; still your brow is the brow of a loose woman, you will not let yourself be shamed.

从今以后，你岂不向我呼叫说，我父阿，你是我幼年的恩主。
Will you not, from this time, make your prayer to me, crying, My father, you are the friend of my early years?

耶和华岂永远怀怒，存留到底吗？看哪，你又发恶言又行坏事，随自己的私意而行（或作你虽这样说还是行恶放纵欲心）。
Will he be angry for ever? will he keep his wrath to the end? These things you have said, and have done evil and have had your way.

约西亚王在位的时候，耶和华又对我说，背道的以色列所行的，你看见没有。她上各高山，在各青翠树下行淫。
And the Lord said to me in the days of Josiah the king, Have you seen what Israel, turning away from me, has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and under every branching tree, acting like a loose woman there.

她行这些事以后，我说她必归向我，她却不归向我。她奸诈的妹妹犹大也看见了。
And I said, After she has done all these things she will come back to me; but she did not. And her false sister Judah saw it.

背道的以色列行淫，我为这缘故给她休书休她。我看见她奸诈的妹妹犹大，还不惧怕，也去行淫。
And though she saw that, because Israel, turning away from me, had been untrue to me, I had put her away and given her a statement in writing ending the relation between us, still Judah, her false sister, had no fear, but went and did the same.

因以色列轻忽了她的淫乱，和石头木头行淫，地就被玷污了。
So that through all her loose behaviour the land became unclean, and she was untrue, giving herself to stones and trees.

虽有这一切的事，她奸诈的妹妹犹大还不一心归向我，不过是假意归我。这是耶和华说的。
But for all this, her false sister Judah has not come back to me with all her heart, but with deceit, says the Lord.

耶和华对我说，背道的以色列比奸诈的犹大还显为义。
And the Lord said to me, Israel in her turning away is seen to be more upright than false Judah.

你去向北方宣告说，耶和华说，背道的以色列阿，回来吧。我必不怒目看你们。因为我是慈爱的，我必不永远存怒。这是耶和华说的。
Go, and give out these words to the north, and say, Come back, O Israel, though you have been turned away from me, says the Lord; my face will not be against you in wrath: for I am full of mercy, says the Lord, I will not be angry for ever.

只要承认你的罪孽，就是你违背耶和华你的神，在各青翠树下向别神东奔西跑，没有听从我的话。这是耶和华说的。
Only be conscious of your sin, the evil you have done against the Lord your God; you have gone with strange men under every branching tree, giving no attention to my voice, says the Lord.

耶和华说，背道的儿女阿，回来吧。因为我作你们的丈夫，并且我必将你们从一城取一人，从一族取两人，带到锡安。
Come back, O children who are turned away, says the Lord; for I am a husband to you, and I will take you, one from a town and two from a family, and will make you come to Zion;

我也必将合我心的牧者赐给你们。他们必以知识和智慧牧养你们。
And I will give you keepers, pleasing to my heart, who will give you your food with knowledge and wisdom.

耶和华说，你们在国中生养众多。当那些日子，人必不再提说耶和华的约柜，不追想，不记念，不觉缺少，也不再制造。
And it will come about, when your numbers are increased in the land, in those days, says the Lord, that they will no longer say, The ark of the agreement of the Lord: it will not come into their minds, they will not have any memory of it, or be conscious of the loss of it, and it will not be made again.

那时，人必称耶路撒冷为耶和华的宝座。万国必到耶路撒冷，在耶和华立名的地方聚集。他们必不再随从自己顽梗的恶心行事。
At that time Jerusalem will be named the seat of the Lord's kingdom; and all the nations will come together to it, to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: and no longer will their steps be guided by the purposes of their evil hearts.

当那些日子，犹大家要和以色列家同行，从北方之地一同来到我赐给你们列祖为业之地。
In those days the family of Judah will go with the family of Israel, and they will come together out of the land of the north into the land which I gave for a heritage to your fathers.

我说，我怎样将你安置在儿女之中，赐给你美地，就是万国中肥美的产业。我又说，你们必称我为父，也不再转去不跟从我。
But I said, How am I to put you among the children, and give you a desired land, a heritage of glory among the armies of the nations? and I said, You are to say to me, My father; and not be turned away from me.

以色列家，你们向我行诡诈，真像妻子行诡诈离开他丈夫一样。这是耶和华说的。
Truly, as a wife is false to her husband, so have you been false to me, O Israel, says the Lord.

在净光的高处听见人声，就是以色列人哭泣恳求之声，乃因他们走弯曲之道，忘记耶和华他们的神。
A voice is sounding on the open hilltops, the weeping and the prayers of the children of Israel; because their way is twisted, they have not kept the Lord their God in mind.

你们这背道的儿女阿，回来吧。我要医治你们背道的病。看哪，我们来到你这里，因你是耶和华我们的神。
Come back, you children who have been turned away, and I will take away your desire for wandering. See, we have come to you, for you are the Lord our God.

仰望从小山或从大山的喧嚷中得帮助，真是枉然的。以色列得救，诚然在乎耶和华我们的神。
Truly, the hills, and the noise of an army on the mountains, are a false hope: truly, in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

从我们幼年以来，那可耻的偶像将我们列祖所劳碌得来的羊群，牛群，和他们的儿女都吞吃了。
But the Baal has taken all the work of our fathers from our earliest days; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

我们在羞耻中躺卧吧。愿惭愧将我们遮盖。因为从立国（原文作幼年）以来，我们和我们的列祖常常得罪耶和华我们的神，没有听从耶和华我们神的话。
Let us be stretched on the earth in our downfall, covering ourselves with our shame: for we have been sinners against the Lord our God, we and our fathers, from our earliest years even till this day: and we have not given ear to the voice of the Lord our God.

耶和华说，以色列阿，你若回来归向我，若从我眼前除掉你可憎的偶像，你就不被迁移。
If you will come back, O Israel, says the Lord, you will come back to me: and if you will put away your disgusting ways, you will not be sent away from before me.

你必凭诚实，公平，公义，指着永生的耶和华起誓。列国必因耶和华称自己为有福，也必因他夸耀。
And you will take your oath, By the living Lord, in good faith and wisdom and righteousness; and the nations will make use of you as a blessing, and in you will they take a pride.

耶和华对犹大和耶路撒冷人如此说，要开垦你们的荒地，不要撒种在荆棘中。
For this is what the Lord says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem: Get your unworked land ploughed up, do not put in your seeds among thorns.

犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民哪，你们当自行割礼，归耶和华，将心里的污秽除掉。恐怕我的忿怒因你们的恶行发作，如火着起，甚至无人能以熄灭。
Undergo a circumcision of the heart, you men of Judah and people of Jerusalem: or my wrath may come out like fire, burning so that no one is able to put it out, because of the evil of your doings.

你们当传扬在犹大，宣告在耶路撒冷说，你们当在国中吹角，高声呼叫说，你们当聚集。我们好进入坚固城。
Say openly in Judah, give it out in Jerusalem, and say, Let the horn be sounded in the land: crying out in a loud voice, Come together, and let us go into the walled towns.

应当向锡安竖立大旗。要逃避，不要迟延，因我必使灾祸与大毁灭从北方来到。
Put up a flag for a sign to Zion: go in flight so that you may be safe, waiting no longer: for I will send evil from the north, and a great destruction.

有狮子从密林中上来，是毁坏列国的。它已经动身出离本处，要使你的地荒凉，使你的城邑变为荒场无人居住。
A lion has gone up from his secret place in the woods, and one who makes waste the nations is on his way; he has gone out from his place, to make your land unpeopled, so that your towns will be made waste, with no man living in them.

因此，你们当腰束麻布，大声哀号，因为耶和华的烈怒没有向我们转消。
For this put on haircloth, with weeping and loud crying: for the burning wrath of the Lord is not turned back from us.

耶和华说，到那时，君王和首领的心都要消灭。祭司都要惊奇，先知都要诧异。
And it will come about in that day, says the Lord, that the heart of the king will be dead in him, and the hearts of the rulers; and the priests will be overcome with fear, and the prophets with wonder.

我说，哀哉。主耶和华阿，你真是大大地欺哄这百姓和耶路撒冷，说，你们必得平安。其实刀剑害及性命了。
Then said I, Ah, Lord God! your words were not true when you said to this people and to Jerusalem, You will have peace; when the sword has come even to the soul.

那时，必有话对这百姓和耶路撒冷说，有一阵热风从旷野净光的高处向我的众民（原文作民女）刮来，不是为簸扬，也不是为扬净。
At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A burning wind from the open hilltops in the waste land is blowing on the daughter of my people, not for separating or cleaning the grain;

必有一阵更大的风从这些地方为我刮来。现在我又必发出判语，攻击他们。
A full wind will come for me: and now I will give my decision against them.

看哪，仇敌必如云上来。他的战车如旋风，他的马匹比鹰更快。我们有祸了。我们败落了。
See, he will come up like the clouds, and his war-carriages like the storm-wind: his horses are quicker than eagles. Sorrow is ours, for destruction has come on us.

耶路撒冷阿，你当洗去心中的恶，使你可以得救。恶念存在你心里要到几时呢？
O Jerusalem, make your heart clean from evil, so that you may have salvation. How long are evil purposes to have a resting-place in you?

有声音从但传扬，从以法莲山报祸患。
For a voice is sounding from Dan, giving out evil from the hills of Ephraim:

你们当传给列国，报告攻击耶路撒冷的事说，有探望的人从远方来到，向犹大的城邑大声呐喊。
Make this come to the minds of the nations, make a statement openly against Jerusalem, that attackers are coming from a far country and their voices will be loud against the towns of Judah.

他们周围攻击耶路撒冷，好像看守田园的，因为她背叛了我。这是耶和华说的。
Like keepers of a field they are against her on every side; because she has been fighting against me, says the Lord.

你的行动，你的作为，招惹这事。这是你罪恶的结果，实在是苦，是害及你心了。
Your ways and your doings have made these things come on you; this is your sin; truly it is bitter, going deep into your heart.

我的肺腑阿，我的肺腑阿，我心疼痛。我心在我里面烦躁不安。我不能静默不言，因为我已经听见角声和打仗的喊声。
My soul, my soul! I am pained to my inmost heart; my heart is troubled in me; I am not able to be quiet, because the sound of the horn, the note of war, has come to my ears.

毁坏的信息连络不绝，因为全地荒废。我的帐棚忽然毁坏。我的幔子顷刻破裂。
News is given of destruction on destruction; all the land is made waste: suddenly my tents, straight away my curtains, are made waste.

我看见大旗，听见角声，要到几时呢？
How long will I go on seeing the flag and hearing the sound of the war-horn?

耶和华说，我的百姓愚顽，不认识我。他们是愚昧无知的儿女，有智慧行恶，没有知识行善。
For my people are foolish, they have no knowledge of me; they are evil-minded children, without sense, all of them: they are wise in evil-doing, but have no knowledge of doing good.

先知说，我观看地，不料，地是空虚混沌。我观看天，天也无光。
Looking at the earth, I saw that it was waste and without form; and to the heavens, that they had no light.

我观看大山，不料，尽都震动，小山也都摇来摇去。
Looking at the mountains, I saw them shaking, and all the hills were moved about.

我观看，不料，无人。空中的飞鸟也都躲避。
Looking, I saw that there was no man, and all the birds of heaven had gone in flight.

我观看，不料，肥田变为荒地。一切城邑在耶和华面前，因他的烈怒都被拆毁。
Looking, I saw that the fertile field was a waste, and all its towns were broken down before the Lord and before his burning wrath.

耶和华如此说，全地必然荒凉，我却不毁灭净尽。
For this is what the Lord has said: All the land will become a waste; I will make destruction complete.

因此，地要悲哀，在上的天也必黑暗。因为我言已出，我意已定，必不后悔，也不转意不作。
The earth will be weeping for this, and the heavens on high will be black: because I have said it, and I will not go back from it; it is my purpose, and it will not be changed.

各城的人因马兵和弓箭手的响声就都逃跑，进入密林，爬上磐石。各城被撇下，无人住在其中。
All the land is in flight because of the noise of the horsemen and the bowmen; they have taken cover in the woodland and up on the rocks: every town has been given up, not a man is living in them.

你凄凉的时候要怎样行呢？你虽穿上朱红衣服，佩戴黄金装饰，用颜料修饰眼目，这样标致是枉然的。恋爱你的藐视你，并且寻索你的性命。
And you, when you are made waste, what will you do? Though you are clothed in red, though you make yourself beautiful with ornaments of gold, though you make your eyes wide with paint, it is for nothing that you make yourself fair; your lovers have no more desire for you, they have designs on your life.

我听见有声音，仿佛妇人产难的声音，好像生头胎疼痛的声音，是锡安女子的声音（女子就是指民的意思）。她喘着气，？？挲手，说，我有祸了。在杀人的跟前，我的心发昏了。
A voice has come to my ears like the voice of a woman in birth-pains, the pain of one giving birth to her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, fighting for breath, stretching out her hands, saying, Now sorrow is mine! for my strength is gone from me before the takers of life.

你们当在耶路撒冷的街上跑来跑去，在宽阔处寻找，看看有一人行公义求诚实没有。若有，我就赦免这城。
Go quickly through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and get knowledge, and make a search in her wide places if there is a man, if there is one in her who is upright, who keeps faith; and she will have my forgiveness.

其中的人虽然指着永生的耶和华起誓，所起的誓实在是假的。
And though they say, By the living Lord; truly their oaths are false.

耶和华阿，你的眼目不是看顾诚实吗？你击打他们，他们却不伤恸。你毁灭他们，他们仍不受惩治。他们使脸刚硬过于磐石，不肯回头。
O Lord, do not your eyes see good faith? you have given them punishment, but they were not troubled; you have sent destruction on them, but they did not take your teaching to heart: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they would not come back.

我说，这些人实在是贫穷的，是愚昧的，因为不晓得耶和华的作为和他们神的法则。
Then I said, But these are the poor: they are foolish, for they have no knowledge of the way of the Lord or of the behaviour desired by their God.

我要去见尊大的人，对他们说话，因为他们晓得耶和华的作为和他们神的法则。哪知，这些人齐心将轭折断，挣开绳索。
I will go to the great men and have talk with them; for they have knowledge of the way of the Lord and of the behaviour desired by their God. But as for these, their one purpose is a broken yoke and burst bands.

因此，林中的狮子必害死他们。晚上（或作野地）的豺狼必灭绝他们。豹子要在城外窥伺他们。凡出城的必被撕碎。因为他们的罪过极多，背道的事也加增了。
And so a lion from the woods will put them to death, a wolf of the waste land will make them waste, a leopard will keep watch on their towns, and everyone who goes out from them will be food for the beasts; because of the great number of their sins and the increase of their wrongdoing.

我怎能赦免你呢？你的儿女离弃我，又指着那不是神的起誓。我使他们饱足，他们就行奸淫，成群地聚集在娼妓家里。
How is it possible for you to have my forgiveness for this? your children have given me up, taking their oaths by those who are no gods: when I had given them food in full measure, they were false to their wives, taking their pleasure in the houses of loose women.

他们像喂饱的马到处乱跑，各向他邻舍的妻发嘶声。
They were full of desire, like horses after a meal of grain: everyone went after his neighbour's wife.

耶和华说，我岂不因这些事讨罪呢？岂不报复这样的国民呢？
Am I not to give punishment for these things? says the Lord: will not my soul take payment from such a nation as this?

你们要上她葡萄园的墙施行毁坏，但不可毁坏净尽，只可除掉她的枝子，因为不属耶和华。
Go up against her vines and make waste; let the destruction be complete: take away her branches, for they are not the Lord's.

原来以色列家和犹大家大行诡诈攻击我。这是耶和华说的。
For the people of Israel and the people of Judah have been very false to me, says the Lord.

他们不认耶和华，说，这并不是他，灾祸必不临到我们。刀剑和饥荒，我们也看不见。
They would have nothing to do with the Lord, saying, He will do nothing, and no evil will come to us; we will not see the sword or be short of food:

先知的话必成为风。道也不在他们里面。这灾必临到他们身上。
And the prophets will become wind, and the word is not in them; so it will be done to them.

所以耶和华万军之神如此说，因为百姓说这话，我必使我的话在你口中为火，使他们为柴。这火便将他们烧灭。
For this reason the Lord, the God of armies, has said: Because you have said this, I will make my words in your mouth a fire, and this people wood, and they will be burned up by it.

耶和华说，以色列家阿，我必使一国的民从远方来攻击你，是强盛的国，是从古而有的国。他们的言语你不晓得，他们的话你不明白。
See, I will send you a nation from far away, O people of Israel, says the Lord; a strong nation and an old nation, a nation whose language is strange to you, so that you may not get the sense of their words.

他们的箭袋是敞开的坟墓。他们都是勇士。
Their arrows give certain death, they are all men of war.

他们必吃尽你的庄稼和你的粮食，是你儿女该吃的。必吃尽你的牛羊，吃尽你的葡萄和无花果。又必用刀毁坏你所倚靠的坚固城。
They will take all the produce of your fields, which would have been food for your sons and your daughters: they will take your flocks and your herds: they will take all your vines and your fig-trees: and with the sword they will make waste your walled towns in which you put your faith.

耶和华说，就是到那时，我也不将你们毁灭净尽。
But even in those days, says the Lord, I will not let your destruction be complete.

百姓若说，耶和华我们的神为什么向我们行这一切事呢？你就对他们说，你们怎样离弃耶和华（原文作我），在你们的地上事奉外邦神，也必照样在不属你们的地上事奉外邦人。
And it will come about, when you say, Why has the Lord our God done all these things to us? that you will say to them, As you gave me up, making yourselves servants to strange gods in your land, so will you be servants to strange men in a land which is not yours.

当传扬在雅各家，报告在犹大说，
Say this openly in Jacob and give it out in Judah, saying,

愚昧无知的百姓阿，你们有眼不看，有耳不听，现在当听这话。
Give ear now to this, O foolish people without sense; who have eyes but see nothing, and ears without the power of hearing:

耶和华说，你们怎么不惧怕我呢？我以永远的定例，用沙为海的界限，水不得越过。因此，你们在我面前还不战兢吗？波浪虽然翻腾，却不能逾越。虽然？？訇，却不能过去。
Have you no fear of me? says the Lord; will you not be shaking with fear before me, who have put the sand as a limit for the sea, by an eternal order, so that it may not go past it? and though it is ever in motion, it is not able to have its way; though the sound of its waves is loud, they are not able to go past it.

但这百姓有背叛忤逆的心。他们叛我而去，
But the heart of this people is uncontrolled and turned away from me; they are broken loose and gone.

心内也不说，我们应当敬畏耶和华我们的神。他按时赐雨，就是秋雨春雨，又为我们定收割的节令，永存不废。
And they do not say in their hearts, Now let us give worship to our God, who gives the rain, the winter and the spring rain, at the right time; who keeps for us the ordered weeks of the grain-cutting.

你们的罪孽使这些事转离你们。你们的罪恶使你们不能得福。
Through your evil-doing these things have been turned away, and your sins have kept back good from you.

因为在我民中有恶人。他们埋伏窥探，好像捕鸟的人。他们设立圈套陷害人。
For there are sinners among my people: they keep watch, like men watching for birds; they put a net and take men in it.

笼内怎样满了雀鸟，他们的房中也照样充满诡诈。所以他们得成为大，而且富足。
As the fowl-house is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit: for this reason they have become great and have got wealth.

他们肥胖光润，作恶过甚，不为人伸冤。就是不为孤儿伸冤，不使他亨通，也不为穷人辨屈。
They have become fat and strong: they have gone far in works of evil: they give no support to the cause of the child without a father, so that they may do well; they do not see that the poor man gets his rights.

耶和华说，我岂不因这些事讨罪呢？岂不报复这样的国民呢？
Am I not to give punishment for these things? says the Lord: will not my soul take payment from such a nation as this?

国中有可惊骇，可憎恶的事，
A thing of wonder and fear has come about in the land;

就是先知说假预言，祭司借他们把持权柄。我的百姓也喜爱这些事，到了结局你们怎样行呢？
The prophets give false words and the priests give decisions by their direction; and my people are glad to have it so: and what will you do in the end?

便雅悯人哪，你们要逃出耶路撒冷，在提哥亚吹角，在伯哈基琳立号旗。因为有灾祸与大毁灭从北方张望。
Go in flight out of Jerusalem, so that you may be safe, you children of Benjamin, and let the horn be sounded in Tekoa, and the flag be lifted up on Beth-haccherem: for evil is looking out from the north, and a great destruction.

那秀美娇嫩的锡安女子，我必剪除（女子就是指民的意思）。
The fair and delicate one, the daughter of Zion, will be cut off by my hand.

牧人必引他们的羊群到她那里，在她周围支搭帐棚，各在自己所占之地使羊吃草。
Keepers of sheep with their flocks will come to her; they will put up their tents round her; everyone will get food in his place.

你们要准备攻击她。起来吧，我们可以趁午时上去。哀哉。日已渐斜，晚影拖长了。
Make war ready against her; up! let us go up when the sun is high. Sorrow is ours! for the day is turned and the shades of evening are stretched out.

起来吧，我们夜间上去，毁坏她的宫殿。
Up! let us go up by night, and send destruction on her great houses.

因为万军之耶和华如此说，你们要砍伐树木，筑垒攻打耶路撒冷。这就是那该罚的城，其中尽是欺压。
For this is what the Lord of armies has said: Let trees be cut down and an earthwork be placed against Jerusalem: sorrow on the false town! inside her there is nothing but cruel ways.

井怎样涌出水来，这城也照样涌出恶来。在其间常听见有强暴毁灭的事，病患损伤也常在我面前。
As the spring keeps its waters cold, so she keeps her evil in her: the sound of cruel and violent behaviour is in her; before me at all times are disease and wounds.

耶路撒冷阿，你当受教，免得我心与你生疏，免得我使你荒凉，成为无人居住之地。
Undergo teaching, O Jerusalem, or my soul will be turned away from you, and I will make you a waste, an unpeopled land.

万军之耶和华曾如此说，敌人必掳尽以色列剩下的民，如同摘净葡萄一样。你要像摘葡萄的人摘了又摘，回手放在筐子里。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Everything will be taken from the rest of Israel as the last grapes are taken from the vine; let your hand be turned to the small branches, like one pulling off grapes.

现在我可以向谁说话作见证，使他们听呢？他们的耳朵未受割礼，不能听见。看哪，耶和华的话他们以为羞辱，不以为喜悦。
To whom am I to give word, witnessing so that they may take note? see, their ears are stopped, and they are not able to give attention: see, the word of the Lord has been a cause of shame to them, they have no delight in it.

因此我被耶和华的忿怒充满，难以含忍。我要倾在街中的孩童和聚会的少年人身上，连夫带妻，并年老的与日子满足的都必被擒拿。
For this reason I am full of the wrath of the Lord, I am tired of keeping it in: may it be let loose on the children in the street, and on the band of the young men together: for even the husband with his wife will be taken, the old man with him who is full of days.

他们的房屋，田地，和妻子都必转归别人。我要伸手攻击这地的居民。这是耶和华说的。
And their houses will be handed over to others, their fields and their wives together: for my hand will be stretched out against the people of the land, says the Lord.

因为他们从最小的到至大的都一味地贪婪，从先知到祭司都行事虚谎。
For from the least of them even to the greatest, everyone is given up to getting money; from the prophet even to the priest, everyone is working deceit.

他们轻轻忽忽地医治我百姓的损伤，说，平安了。平安了。其实没有平安。
And they have made little of the wounds of my people, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

他们行可憎的事知道惭愧吗？不然，他们毫不惭愧，也不知羞耻。因此，他们必在仆倒的人中仆倒。我向他们讨罪的时候，他们必致跌倒。这是耶和华说的。
Let them be put to shame because they have done disgusting things. They had no shame, they were not able to become red with shame: so they will come down with those who are falling: when my punishment comes on them, they will be made low, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，你们当站在路上察看，访问古道，哪是善道，便行在其间。这样，你们心里必得安息。他们却说，我们不行在其间。
This is what the Lord has said: Take your place looking out on the ways; make search for the old roads, saying, Where is the good way? and go in it that you may have rest for your souls. But they said, We will not go in it.

我设立守望的人照管你们，说，要听角声。他们却说，我们不听。
And I put watchmen over you, saying, Give attention to the sound of the horn; but they said, We will not give attention.

列国阿，因此你们当听。会众阿，要知道他们必遭遇的事。
So then, give ear, you nations, and ...

地阿，当听。我必使灾祸临到这百姓，就是他们意念所结的果子。因为他们不听从我的言语，至于我的训诲（或作律法），他们也厌弃了。
Give ear, O earth: see, I will make evil come on this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not given attention to my words, and they would have nothing to do with my law.

从示巴出的乳香，从远方出的菖蒲（或作甘蔗）奉来给我有何益呢？你们的燔祭不蒙悦纳。你们的平安祭，我也不喜悦。
To what purpose does sweet perfume come to me from Sheba, and spices from a far country? your burned offerings give me no pleasure, your offerings of beasts are not pleasing to me.

所以耶和华如此说，我要将绊脚石放在这百姓前面。父亲和儿子要一同跌在其上。邻舍与朋友也都灭亡。
For this reason the Lord has said, See, I will put stones in the way of this people: and the fathers and the sons together will go falling over them; the neighbour and his friend will come to destruction.

耶和华如此说，看哪，有一种民从北方而来，并有一大国被激动，从地极来到。
The Lord has said, See, a people is coming from the north country, a great nation will be put in motion from the inmost parts of the earth.

他们拿弓和枪，性情残忍，不施怜悯。他们的声音像海浪？？訇。锡安城阿（城原文作女子），他们骑马都摆队伍，如上战场的人要攻击你。
Bows and spears are in their hands; they are cruel and have no mercy; their voice is like the thunder of the sea, and they go on horses; everyone in his place like men going to the fight, against you, O daughter of Zion.

我们听见他们的风声，手就发软。痛苦将我们抓住，疼痛仿佛产难的妇人。
The news of it has come to our ears; our hands have become feeble: trouble has come on us and pain, like the pain of a woman in childbirth.

你们不要往田野去，也不要行在路上，因四围有仇敌的刀剑和惊吓。
Go not out into the field or by the way; for there is the sword of the attacker, and fear on every side.

我民哪（民原文作民女），应当腰束麻布，滚在灰中。你要悲伤，如丧独生子痛痛哭号，因为灭命的要忽然临到我们。
O daughter of my people, put on haircloth, rolling yourself in the dust: give yourself to sorrow, as for an only son, with most bitter cries of grief; for he who makes waste will come on us suddenly.

我使你在我民中为高台，为保障（高台或作试验人的），使你知道试验他们的行动。
I have made you a tester among my people, so that you may have knowledge of their way and put it to the test.

他们都是极悖逆的，往来谗谤人。他们是铜是铁，都行坏事。
All of them are turned away, going about with false stories; they are brass and iron: they are all workers of deceit.

风箱吹火，铅被烧毁。他们炼而又炼，终是徒然。因为恶劣的还未除掉。
The blower is blowing strongly, the lead is burned away in the fire: they go on heating the metal to no purpose, for the evil-doers are not taken away.

人必称他们为被弃的银渣，因为耶和华已经弃掉他们。
They will be named waste silver, because the Lord has given them up.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

你当站在耶和华殿的门口，在那里宣传这话说，你们进这些门敬拜耶和华的一切犹大人，当听耶和华的话。
Take your place in the doorway of the Lord's house, and give out this word there, and say, Give ear to the word of the Lord, all you of Judah who come inside these doors to give worship to the Lord.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们改正行动作为，我就使你们在这地方仍然居住。
The Lord of armies, the God of Israel, says, Let your ways and your doings be changed for the better and I will let you go on living in this place.

你们不要倚靠虚谎的话，说，这些是耶和华的殿，是耶和华的殿，是耶和华的殿。
Put no faith in false words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these.

你们若实在改正行动作为，在人和邻舍中间诚然施行公平，
For if your ways and your doings are truly changed for the better; if you truly give right decisions between a man and his neighbour;

不欺压寄居的和孤儿寡妇。在这地方不流无辜人的血，也不随从别神陷害自己。
If you are not cruel to the man from a strange country, and to the child without a father, and to the widow, and do not put the upright to death in this place, or go after other gods, causing damage to yourselves:

我就使你们在这地方仍然居住，就是我古时所赐给你们列祖的地，直到永远。
Then I will let you go on living in this place, in the land which I gave to your fathers in the past and for ever.

看哪，你们倚靠虚谎无益的话。
See, you put your faith in false words which are of no profit.

你们偷盗，杀害，奸淫，起假誓，向巴力烧香，并随从素不认识的别神，
Will you take the goods of others, put men to death, and be untrue to your wives, and take false oaths, and have perfumes burned to the Baal, and go after other gods which are strange to you;

且来到这称为我名下的殿，在我面前敬拜。又说，我们可以自由了。你们这样的举动是要行那些可憎的事吗？
And come and take your place before me in this house, which is named by my name, and say, We have been made safe; so that you may do all these disgusting things?

这称为我名下的殿在你们眼中岂可看为贼窝吗？我都看见了。这是耶和华说的。
Has this house, which is named by my name, become a hole of thieves to you? Truly I, even I, have seen it, says the Lord.

你们且往示罗去，就是我先前立为我名的居所，察看我因这百姓以色列的罪恶向那地所行的如何。
But go now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I put my name at first, and see what I did to it because of the evil-doing of my people Israel.

耶和华说，现在因你们行了这一切的事，我也从早起来警戒你们，你们却不听从。呼唤你们，你们却不答应。
And now, because you have done all these works, says the Lord, and I sent my word to you, getting up early and sending, but you did not give ear; and my voice came to you, but you gave no answer:

所以我要向这称我为名下，你们所倚靠的殿，与我所赐给你们和你们列祖的地施行，照我从前向示罗所行的一样。
For this reason I will do to the house which is named by my name, and in which you have put your faith, and to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.

我必将你们从我眼前赶出，正如赶出你们的众弟兄，就是以法莲的一切后裔。
And I will send you away from before my face, as I have sent away all your brothers, even all the seed of Ephraim.

所以，你不要为这百姓祈祷。不要为他们呼求祷告，也不要向我为他们祈求，因我不听允你。
And as for you (Jeremiah), make no prayers for this people, send up no cry or prayer for them, make no request for them to me: for I will not give ear.

他们在犹大城邑中和耶路撒冷街上所行的，你没有看见吗？
Do you not see what they are doing in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

孩子捡柴，父亲烧火，妇女抟面作饼，献给天后，又向别神浇奠祭，惹我发怒。
The children go for wood, the fathers get the fire burning, the women are working the paste to make cakes for the queen of heaven, and drink offerings are drained out to other gods, moving me to wrath.

耶和华说，他们岂是惹我发怒呢？不是自己惹祸，以致脸上惭愧吗？
Are they moving me to wrath? says the Lord; are they not moving themselves to their shame?

所以主耶和华如此说，看哪，我必将我的怒气和忿怒倾在这地方的人和牲畜身上，并田野的树木和地里的出产上，必如火着起，不能熄灭。
So this is what the Lord God has said: See, my wrath and my passion will be let loose on this place, on man and beast, and on the trees of the field, and on the produce of the earth; it will be burning and will not be put out.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们将燔祭加在平安祭上，吃肉吧。
These are the words of the Lord of armies, the God of Israel: Put your burned offerings with your offerings of beasts, and take flesh for your food.

因为我将你们列祖从埃及地领出来的那日，燔祭平安祭的事我并没有提说，也没有吩咐他们。
For I said nothing to your fathers, and gave them no orders, on the day when I took them out of Egypt, about burned offerings or offerings of beasts:

我只吩咐他们这一件说，你们当听从我的话，我就作你们的神，你们也作我的子民。你们行我所吩咐的一切道，就可以得福。
But this was the order I gave them, saying, Give ear to my voice, and I will be your God, and you will be my people: go in all the way ordered by me, so that all may be well for you.

他们却不听从，不侧耳而听，竟随从自己的计谋和顽梗的恶心，向后不向前。
But they took no note and did not give ear, but were guided by the thoughts and the pride of their evil hearts, going back and not forward.

自从你们列祖出埃及地的那日，直到今日，我差遣我的仆人众先知到你们那里去，每日从早起来差遣他们。
From the day when your fathers came out of Egypt till this day, I have sent my servants the prophets to you, getting up early every day and sending them:

你们却不听从，不侧耳而听，竟硬着颈项行恶，比你们列祖更甚。
But still they took no note and would not give ear, but they made their necks stiff, doing worse than their fathers.

你要将这一切的话告诉他们，他们却不听从。呼唤他们，他们却不答应。
And you are to say all these words to them, but they will not give ear to you: you will send out your voice to them, but they will give no answer.

你要对他们说，这就是不听从耶和华他们神的话，不受教训的国民。从他们的口中，诚实灭绝了。
And you are to say to them, This is the nation which has not given ear to the voice of their God, or taken his teaching to heart: good faith is dead and is cut off from their mouths.

耶路撒冷阿，要剪发抛弃，在净光的高处举哀。因为耶和华丢掉离弃了惹他忿怒的世代。
Let your hair be cut off, O Jerusalem, and let it go, and let a song of grief go up on the open hilltops; for the Lord is turned away from the generation of his wrath and has given them up.

耶和华说，犹大人行我眼中看为恶的事，将可憎之物设立在称为我名下的殿中，污秽这殿。
For the children of Judah have done what is evil in my eyes, says the Lord: they have put their disgusting images in the house which is named by my name, making it unclean.

他们在欣嫩子谷建筑陀斐特的丘坛，好在火中焚烧自己的儿女。这并不是我所吩咐的，也不是我心所起的意。
And they have put up the high place of Topheth in the valley of the son of Hinnom, burning their sons and their daughters there in the fire; a thing which was not ordered by me and never came into my mind.

耶和华说，因此，日子将到，这地方不再称为陀斐特和欣嫩子谷，反倒称为杀戮谷。因为要在陀斐特葬埋尸首，甚至无处可葬。
For this cause, the days are coming, says the Lord, when it will no longer be named Topheth, or, The valley of the son of Hinnom, but, The valley of Death: for they will put the dead into the earth in Topheth till there is no more room.

并且这百姓的尸首必给空中的飞鸟和地上的野兽作食物，并无人哄赶。
And the bodies of this people will be food for the birds of heaven and for the beasts of the earth; and there will be no one to send them away.

那时，我必使犹大城邑中和耶路撒冷街上，欢喜和快乐的声音，新郎和新妇的声音，都止息了，因为地必成为荒场。
And in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, I will put an end to the laughing voices, the voice of joy and the voice of the newly-married man and the voice of the bride: for the land will become a waste.

耶和华说，到那时，人必将犹大王的骸骨和他首领的骸骨，祭司的骸骨，先知的骸骨，并耶路撒冷居民的骸骨，都从坟墓中取出来，
At that time, says the Lord, they will take the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his rulers, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the people of Jerusalem out of their resting-places:

抛散在日头，月亮，和天上众星之下，就是他们从前所喜爱，所事奉，所随从，所求问，所敬拜的。这些骸骨不再收殓，不再葬埋，必在地面上成为粪土。
And they will put them out before the sun and the moon and all the stars of heaven, whose lovers and servants they have been, after whom they have gone, to whom they have made prayers, and to whom they have given worship: they will not be put together or placed in the earth; they will be waste on the face of the earth.

并且这恶族所剩下的民在我所赶他们到的各处，宁可拣死不拣生。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And death will be desired more than life by the rest of this evil family who are still living in all the places where I have sent them away, says the Lord of armies.

你要对他们说，耶和华如此说，人跌倒，不再起来吗？人转去，不再转来吗？
Further, you are to say to them, This is what the Lord has said: Will those who are falling not be lifted up again? will he who has gone away not come back?

这耶路撒冷的民，为何恒久背道呢？他们守定诡诈，不肯回头。
Why do these people of Jerusalem go back, for ever turning away? they will not give up their deceit, they will not come back.

我留心听，听见他们说不正直的话。无人悔改恶行，说，我作的是什么呢？他们各人转奔己路，如马直闯战场。
I took note and gave ear, but no one said what is right: no man had regret for his evil-doing, saying, What have I done? everyone goes off on his way like a horse rushing to the fight.

空中的鹳鸟知道来去的定期。斑鸠燕子与白鹤也守候当来的时令。我的百姓却不知道耶和华的法则。
Truly, the stork in the heavens is conscious of her fixed times; the dove and the swallow and the crane keep to the times of their coming; but my people have no knowledge of the law of the Lord.

你们怎么说，我们有智慧，耶和华的律法在我们这里。看哪，文士的假笔舞弄虚假。
How is it that you say, We are wise and the law of the Lord is with us? But see, the false pen of the scribes has made it false.

智慧人惭愧，惊惶，被擒拿。他们弃掉耶和华的话，心里还有什么智慧呢？
The wise men are shamed, they are overcome with fear and taken: see, they have given up the word of the Lord; and what use is their wisdom to them?

所以我必将他们的妻子给别人，将他们的田地给别人为业。因为他们从最小的到至大的都一味地贪婪，从先知到祭司都行事虚谎。
So I will give their wives to others, and their fields to those who will take them for themselves: for everyone, from the least to the greatest, is given up to getting money; from the priest even to the prophet, everyone is false.

他们轻轻忽忽地医治我百姓的损伤，说，平安了。平安了。其实没有平安。
And they have made little of the wounds of the daughter of Zion, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

他们行可憎的事知道惭愧吗？不然，他们毫不惭愧，也不知羞耻。因此他们必在仆倒的人中仆倒。我向他们讨罪的时候，他们必致跌倒。这是耶和华说的。
Let them be put to shame because they have done disgusting things. They had no shame, they were not able to become red with shame: so they will come down with those who are falling: in the time of their punishment they will be made low, says the Lord.

耶和华说，我必使他们全然灭绝。葡萄树上必没有葡萄，无花果树上必没有果子，叶子也必枯干。我所赐给他们的，必离开他们过去。
I will put an end to them completely, says the Lord: there are no grapes on the vine and no figs on the fig-tree, and the leaf is dry.

我们为何静坐不动呢？我们当聚集，进入坚固城，在那里静默不言。因为耶和华我们的神使我们静默不言，又将苦胆水给我们喝，都因我们得罪了耶和华。
Why are we seated doing nothing? come together, and let us go to the walled towns, and let destruction overtake us there, for the Lord our God has sent destruction on us, and given us bitter water for our drink, because we have done evil against the Lord.

我们指望平安，却得不着好处。指望痊愈的时候，不料，受了惊惶。
We were looking for peace, but no good came; and for a time of well-being, but there is only a great fear.

听见从但那里敌人的马喷鼻气，他的壮马发嘶声，全地就都震动。因为他们来吞灭这地和其上所有的，吞灭这城与其中的居民。
The loud breathing of the horses comes to our ears from Dan: at the sound of the outcry of his war-horses, all the land is shaking with fear; for they have come, and have made a meal of the land and everything in it; the town and the people living in it.

看哪，我必使毒蛇到你们中间，是不服法术的，必咬你们。这是耶和华说的。
See, I will send snakes and poison-snakes among you, against which the wonder-worker has no power; and they will give you wounds which may not be made well, says the Lord.

我有忧愁，愿能自慰。我心在我里面发昏。
Sorrow has come on me! my heart in me is feeble.

听阿，是我百姓的哀声从极远之地而来，说，耶和华不在锡安吗？锡安的王不在其中吗？耶和华说，他们为什么以雕刻的偶像和外邦虚无的神惹我发怒呢？
The voice of the cry of the daughter of my people comes from a far land: Is the Lord not in Zion? is not her King in her? Why have they made me angry with their images and their strange gods which are no gods?

麦秋已过，夏令已完，我们还未得救。
The grain-cutting is past, the summer is ended, and no salvation has come to us.

先知说，因我百姓的损伤，我也受了损伤。我哀痛，惊惶将我抓住。
For the destruction of the daughter of my people I am broken: I am dressed in the clothing of grief; fear has taken me in its grip.

在基列岂没有乳香呢？在那里岂没有医生呢？我百姓为何不得痊愈呢？
Is there no life-giving oil in Gilead? is there no expert in medical arts? why then have my people not been made well?

但愿我的头为水，我的眼为泪的泉源，我好为我百姓（原文作民女。七节同）中被杀的人昼夜哭泣。
If only my head was a stream of waters and my eyes fountains of weeping, so that I might go on weeping day and night for the dead of the daughter of my people!

惟愿我在旷野有行路人住宿之处，使我可以离开我的民出去。因他们都是行奸淫的，是行诡诈的一党。
If only I had in the waste land a night's resting-place for travellers, so that I might go away, far from my people! for they are all untrue, a band of false men.

他们弯起舌头像弓一样，为要说谎话。他们在国中增长势力，不是为行诚实，乃是恶上加恶，并不认识我。这是耶和华说的。
Their tongues are bent like a bow to send out false words: they have become strong in the land, but not for good faith: they go on from evil to evil, and they have no knowledge of me, says the Lord.

你们各人当谨防邻舍，不可信靠弟兄。因为弟兄尽行欺骗，邻舍都往来谗谤人。
Let everyone keep watch on his neighbour, and put no faith in any brother: for every brother will certainly be tricking his brother, and every neighbour will go about saying evil.

他们各人欺哄邻舍，不说真话。他们教舌头学习说谎，劳劳碌碌地作孽。
Everyone will make sport of his neighbour with deceit, not saying what is true: their tongues have been trained to say false words; they are twisted, hating to come back.

你的住处在诡诈的人中。他们因行诡诈，不肯认识我。这是耶和华说的。
There is wrong on wrong, deceit on deceit; they have given up the knowledge of me, says the Lord.

所以万军之耶和华如此说，看哪，我要将他们融化熬炼。不然，我因我百姓的罪该怎样行呢？
So the Lord of armies has said, See, I will make them soft in the fire and put them to the test; this I will do because of their evil-doing.

他们的舌头是毒箭，说话诡诈。人与邻舍口说和平话，心却谋害他。
His tongue is an arrow causing death; the words of his mouth are deceit: he says words of peace to his neighbour, but in his heart he is waiting secretly for him.

耶和华说，我岂不因这些事讨他们的罪呢？岂不报复这样的国民呢？
Am I not to send punishment for these things? says the Lord: will not my soul take payment from such a nation as this?

我要为山岭哭泣悲哀，为旷野的草场扬声哀号。因为都已干焦，甚至无人经过。人也听不见牲畜鸣叫，空中的飞鸟和地上的野兽都已逃去。
Give yourselves to weeping, crying out in sorrow for the mountains; and for the fields of the waste land send up a song of grief, because they are burned up, so that no one goes through; there is no sound of cattle; the bird of the heavens and the beast are in flight and are gone.

我必使耶路撒冷变为乱堆，为野狗的住处，也必使犹大的城邑变为荒场，无人居住。
And I will make Jerusalem a mass of broken stones, the living-place of jackals; and I will make the towns of Judah a waste, with no man living there.

谁是智慧人，可以明白这事？耶和华的口向谁说过，使他可以传说？遍地为何灭亡，干焦好像旷野，甚至无人经过呢？
Who is the wise man able to see this? who is he to whom the word of the Lord has come, so that he may make it clear? why is the land given to destruction and burned up like a waste place, so that no one goes through?

耶和华说，因为这百姓离弃我，在他们面前所设立的律法没有遵行，也没有听从我的话。
And the Lord said, Because they have given up my law which I put before them, giving no attention to my voice and not being guided by it;

只随从自己顽梗的心行事，照他们列祖所教训的随从众巴力。
But they have been walking in the pride of their hearts, going after the Baals, as their fathers gave them teaching.

所以万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，看哪，我必将茵陈给这百姓吃，又将苦胆水给他们喝。
So the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, I will give them, even this people, bitter plants for food and bitter water for drink.

我要把他们散在列邦中，就是他们和他们列祖素不认识的列邦。我也要使刀剑追杀他们，直到将他们灭尽。
And I will send them wandering among the nations, among people strange to them and to their fathers: and I will send the sword after them till I have put an end to them.

万军之耶和华如此说，你们应当思想，将善唱哀歌的妇女召来，又打发人召善哭的妇女来，
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Take thought and send for the weeping women, so that they may come; and send for the wise women, so that they may come:

叫她们速速为我们举哀，使我们眼泪汪汪，使我们的眼皮涌出水来。
Let them quickly make cries of sorrow for us, so that drops may be flowing from our eyes till they are streaming with water.

因为听见哀声出于锡安，说，我们怎样败落了。我们大大地惭愧。我们撇下地土。人也拆毁了我们的房屋。
For a sound of weeping goes up from Zion, a cry, How has destruction come on us? we are overcome with shame because we have gone away from our land; he has sent us out from our house.

妇女们哪，你们当听耶和华的话，领受他口中的言语。又当教导你们的儿女举哀，各人教导邻舍唱哀歌。
But even now, give ear to the word of the Lord, O you women; let your ears be open to the word of his mouth, training your daughters to give cries of sorrow, everyone teaching her neighbour a song of grief.

因为死亡上来，进了我们的窗户，入了我们的宫殿。要从外边剪除孩童，从街上剪除少年人。
For death has come up into our windows, forcing its way into our great houses; cutting off the children in the streets and the young men in the wide places.

你当说，耶和华如此说，人的尸首必倒在田野像粪土，又像收割的人遗落的一把禾稼，无人收取。
The bodies of men will be falling like waste on the open fields, and like grain dropped by the grain-cutter, and no one will take them up.

耶和华如此说，智慧人不要因他的智慧夸口，勇士不要因他的勇力夸口，财主不要因他的财物夸口。
This is the word of the Lord: Let not the wise man take pride in his wisdom, or the strong man in his strength, or the man of wealth in his wealth:

夸口的却因他有聪明，认识我是耶和华，又知道我喜悦在世上施行慈爱，公平，和公义，以此夸口。这是耶和华说的。
But if any man has pride, let it be in this, that he has the wisdom to have knowledge of me, that I am the Lord, working mercy, giving true decisions, and doing righteousness in the earth: for in these things I have delight, says the Lord.

耶和华说，看哪，日子将到，我要刑罚一切受过割礼，心却未受割礼的，
See, the day is coming, says the Lord, when I will send punishment on all those who have circumcision in the flesh;

就是埃及，犹大，以东，亚扪人，摩押人，和一切住在旷野剃周围头发的。因为列国人都没有受割礼，以色列人心中也没有受割礼。
On Egypt and on Judah and on Edom and on the children of Ammon and on Moab and on all who have the ends of their hair cut, who are living in the waste land: for all these nations and all the people of Israel are without circumcision in their hearts.

以色列家阿，要听耶和华对你们所说的话。
Give ear to the word which the Lord says to you, O people of Israel:

耶和华如此说，你们不要效法列国的行为，也不要为天象惊惶，因列国为此事惊惶。
This is what the Lord has said: Do not go in the way of the nations; have no fear of the signs of heaven, for the nations go in fear of them.

众民的风俗是虚空的。他们在树林中用斧子砍伐一棵树，匠人用手工造成偶像。
For that which is feared by the people is foolish: it is the work of the hands of the workman; for a tree is cut down by him out of the woods with his axe.

他们用金银妆饰它，用钉子和锤子钉稳，使它不动摇。
They make it beautiful with silver and gold; they make it strong with nails and hammers, so that it may not be moved.

它好像棕树，是镟成的，不能说话，不能行走，必须有人抬着。你们不要怕它。它不能降祸，也无力降福。
It is like a pillar in a garden of plants, and has no voice: it has to be lifted, for it has no power of walking. Have no fear of it; for it has no power of doing evil and it is not able to do any good.

耶和华阿，没有能比你的。你本为大，有大能大力的名。
There is no one like you, O Lord; you are great and your name is great in power.

万国的王阿，谁不敬畏你。敬畏你本是合宜的。因为在列国的智慧人中，虽有政权的尊荣，也不能比你。
Who would not have fear of you, O King of the nations? for it is your right: for among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is no one like you.

他们尽都是畜类，是愚昧的。偶像的训诲算什么呢？偶像不过是木头。
But they are together like beasts and foolish: the teaching of false gods is wood.

有银子打成片，是从他施带来的，并有从乌法来的金子，都是匠人和银匠的手工，又有蓝色紫色料的衣服，都是巧匠的工作。
Silver hammered into plates is sent from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the expert workman and of the hands of the gold-worker; blue and purple is their clothing, all the work of expert men.

惟耶和华是真神，是活神，是永远的王。他一发怒，大地震动。他一恼恨，列国都担当不起。
But the Lord is the true God; he is the living God and an eternal king: when he is angry, the earth is shaking with fear, and the nations give way before his wrath.

你们要对他们如此说，不是那创造天地的神，必从地上从天下被除灭。
This is what you are to say to them: The gods who have not made the heavens and the earth will be cut off from the earth and from under the heavens.

耶和华用能力创造大地，用智慧建立世界，用聪明铺张穹苍。
He has made the earth by his power, he has made the world strong in its place by his wisdom, and by his wise design the heavens have been stretched out.

他一发声，空中便有多水激动。他使云雾从地极上腾。他造电随雨而闪，从他府库中带出风来。
At the sound of his voice there is a massing of waters in the heavens, and he makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes the thunder-flames for the rain, and sends out the wind from his store-houses.

各人都成了畜类，毫无知识。各银匠都因他雕刻的偶像羞愧。他所铸的偶像本是虚假的，其中并无气息，
Then every man becomes like a beast without knowledge; every gold-worker is put to shame by the image he has made: for his metal image is deceit, and there is no breath in them.

都是虚无的，是迷惑人的工作。到追讨的时候必被除灭。
They are nothing, a work of error: in the time of their punishment, destruction will overtake them.

雅各的分不像这些，因他是造作万有的主。以色列也是他产业的支派，万军之耶和华是他的名。
The heritage of Jacob is not like these; for the maker of all things is his heritage: the Lord of armies is his name.

受围困的人哪，当收拾你的财物，从国中带出去。
Get your goods together and go out of the land, O you who are shut up in the walled town.

因为耶和华如此说，这时候，我必将此地的居民，好像用机弦甩出去，又必加害在他们身上，使他们觉悟。
For the Lord has said, I will send the people in flight like a stone from the land at this time, troubling them so that they will be conscious of it.

民说，祸哉。我受损伤。我的伤痕极其重大。我却说，这真是我的痛苦，必须忍受。
Sorrow is mine for I am wounded! my wound may not be made well; and I said, Cruel is my disease, I may not be free from it.

我的帐棚毁坏。我的绳索折断。我的儿女离我出去，没有了。无人再支搭我的帐棚，挂起我的幔子。
My tent is pulled down and all my cords are broken: my children have gone from me, and they are not: no longer is there anyone to give help in stretching out my tent and hanging up my curtains.

因为牧人都成为畜类，没有求问耶和华，所以不得顺利。他们的羊群也都分散。
For the keepers of the sheep have become like beasts, not looking to the Lord for directions: so they have not done wisely and all their flocks have been put to flight.

有风声。看哪，敌人来了。有大扰乱从北方出来，要使犹大城邑变为荒凉，成为野狗的住处。
News is going about, see, it is coming, a great shaking is coming from the north country, so that the towns of Judah may be made waste and become the living-place of jackals.

耶和华阿，我晓得人的道路不由自己，行路的人也不能定自己的脚步。
O Lord, I am conscious that a man's way is not in himself: man has no power of guiding his steps.

耶和华阿，求你从宽惩治我，不要在你的怒中惩治我，恐怕使我归于无有。
O Lord, put me right, but with wise purpose; not in your wrath, or you will make me small.

愿你将忿怒倾在不认识你的列国中，和不求告你名的各族上。因为他们吞了雅各，不但吞了，而且灭绝，把他的住处变为荒场。
Let your wrath be let loose on the nations which have no knowledge of you, and on the families who give no worship to your name: for they have made a meal of Jacob, truly they have made a meal of him and put an end to him and made his fields a waste.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

当听这约的话，告诉犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民，
Give ear to the words of this agreement, and say to the men of Judah and to the people of Jerusalem,

对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，不听从这约之话的人必受咒诅。
The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, Let that man be cursed who does not give ear to the words of this agreement,

这约是我将你们列祖从埃及地领出来，脱离铁炉的那日所吩咐他们的，说，你们要听从我的话，照我一切所吩咐的去行。这样，你们就作我的子民，我也作你们的神。
To the order which I gave your fathers on the day when I took them out of the land of Egypt, out of the oven of iron, saying, Give ear to my voice, and do all the orders I have given you: so you will be my people, and I will be your God:

我好坚定向你们列祖所起的誓，给他们流奶与蜜之地，正如今日一样。我就回答说，耶和华阿，阿们。
So that I may give effect to the oath which I made to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey as at this day. And I said in answer, So be it, O Lord.

耶和华对我说，你要在犹大城邑中和耶路撒冷街市上，宣告这一切话说，你们当听从遵行这约的话。
And the Lord said to me, Give out these words in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Give ear to the words of this agreement and do them.

因为我将你们列祖从埃及地领出来的那日，直到今日，都是从早起来，切切告诫他们说，你们当听从我的话。
For I gave certain witness to your fathers on the day when I took them up out of the land of Egypt, and even to this day, getting up early and witnessing and saying, Give ear to my voice.

他们却不听从，不侧耳而听，竟随从自己顽梗的恶心去行。所以我使这约中一切咒诅的话临到他们身上。这约是我吩咐他们行的，他们却不去行。
But they gave no attention and did not give ear, but they went on, every man in the pride of his evil heart: so I sent on them all the curses in this agreement, which I gave them orders to keep, but they did not.

耶和华对我说，在犹大人和耶路撒冷居民中有同谋背叛的事。
And the Lord said to me, There is an evil design at work among the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem.

他们转去效法他们的先祖，不肯听我的话，犯罪作孽，又随从别神，事奉它。以色列家和犹大家背了我与他们列祖所立的约。
They are turned back to the sins of their fathers, who would not give ear to my words; they have gone after other gods and become their servants: the people of Israel and the people of Judah have not kept the agreement which I made with their fathers.

所以耶和华如此说，我必使灾祸临到他们，是他们不能逃脱的。他们必向我哀求，我却不听。
So the Lord has said, I will send evil on them, which they will not be able to get away from; and they will send up a cry for help to me, but I will not give ear to them.

那时，犹大城邑的人和耶路撒冷的居民要去哀求他们烧香所供奉的神。只是遭难的时候，这些神毫不拯救他们。
Then the towns of Judah and the people of Jerusalem will go crying for help to the gods to whom they have been burning perfumes: but they will give them no salvation in the time of their trouble.

犹大阿，你神的数目与你城的数目相等。你为那可耻的巴力所筑烧香的坛也与耶路撒冷街道的数目相等。
For the number of your gods is as the number of your towns, O Judah; and for every street in Jerusalem you have put up altars to the Baal for burning perfumes to the Baal.

所以你不要为这百姓祈祷，不要为他们呼求祷告。因为他们遭难向我哀求的时候，我必不应允。
And as for you, make no prayers for this people, send up no cry or prayer for them: for I will not give ear to their cry in the time of their trouble.

我所亲爱的，既行许多淫乱，圣肉也离了你，你在我殿中作什么呢？你作恶就喜乐。
About Judah. What have you to do in my house? is it your thought that oaths and holy flesh will get you out of your trouble? will you make yourself safe in this way?

从前耶和华给你起名叫青橄榄树，又华美又结好果子。如今他用哄嚷之声，点火在其上，枝子也被折断。
You had been named by the Lord, A branching olive-tree, fair with beautiful fruit: with the noise of a great rushing he has put it on fire and its branches are broken.

原来栽培你的万军之耶和华已经说，要降祸攻击你，是因以色列家和犹大家行恶，向巴力烧香，惹我发怒，是自作自受。
For the Lord of armies, by whom you were planted, has given his decision for evil against you, because of the evil which the people of Israel and the people of Judah have done, In moving me to wrath by offering perfumes to the Baal.

耶和华指示我，我就知道。你将他们所行的给我指明。
And the Lord gave me knowledge of it and I saw it: then you made clear to me their doings.

我却像柔顺的羊羔被牵到宰杀之地。我并不知道他们设计谋害我，说，我们把树连果子都灭了吧。将他从活人之地剪除，使他的名不再被记念。
But I was like a gentle lamb taken to be put to death; I had no thought that they were designing evil against me, saying, Come and let us make trouble his food, cutting him off from the land of the living, so that there may be no more memory of his name.

按公义判断，察验人肺腑心肠的万军之耶和华阿，我却要见你在他们身上报仇，因我将我的案件向你禀明了。
But, O Lord of armies, judging in righteousness, testing the thoughts and the heart, let me see your punishment come on them: for I have put my cause before you.

所以，耶和华论到寻索你命的亚拿突人如此说，他们说，你不要奉耶和华的名说预言，免得你死在我们手中。
So this is what the Lord of armies has said about the men of Anathoth who have made designs against your life, saying, You are not to be a prophet in the name of the Lord, or death will overtake you by our hands:

所以万军之耶和华如此说，看哪，我必刑罚他们。他们的少年人必被刀剑杀死，他们的儿女必因饥荒灭亡，
So the Lord of armies has said, See, I will send punishment on them: the young men will be put to the sword; their sons and their daughters will come to death through need of food:

并且没有余剩的人留给他们。因为在追讨之年，我必使灾祸临到亚拿突人。
Not one of them will keep his life, for I will send evil on the men of Anathoth in the year of their punishment.

耶和华阿，我与你争辩的时候，你显为义。但有一件，我还要与你理论，恶人的道路为何亨通呢？大行诡诈的为何得安逸呢？
You are in the right, O Lord, when I put my cause before you: still let me take up with you the question of your decisions: why does the evil-doer do well? why are the workers of deceit living in comfort?

你栽培了他们，他们也扎了根，长大，而且结果。他们的口是与你相近，心却与你远离。
They have been planted by you, they have taken root; they go on and give fruit: you are near in their mouths but far from their thoughts.

耶和华阿，你晓得我，看见我，察验我向你是怎样的心。求你将他们拉出来，好像将宰的羊，叫他们等候杀戮的日子。
But you, O Lord, have knowledge of me; you see me, searching and testing how my heart is with you: let them be pulled out like sheep to be put to death, make them ready for the day of death.

这地悲哀，通国的青草枯干，要到几时呢？因其上居民的恶行，牲畜和飞鸟都灭绝了。他们曾说，他看不见我们的结局。
How long will the land have grief, and the plants of all the land be dry? because of the sins of the people living in it, destruction has overtaken the beasts and the birds; because they said, God does not see our ways.

耶和华说，你若与步行的人同跑，尚且觉累，怎能与马赛跑呢？你在平安之地，虽然安稳，在约旦河边的丛林要怎样行呢？
If running with the fighting-men has made you tired, how will you be able to keep up with horses? and if in a land of peace you go in flight, what will become of you in the thick growth of Jordan?

因为连你弟兄和你父家都用奸诈待你。他们也在你后边大声喊叫，虽向你说好话，你也不要信他们。
For even your brothers, your father's family, even they have been untrue to you, crying loudly after you: have no faith in them, though they say fair words to you.

我离了我的殿宇，撇弃我的产业，将我心里所亲爱的交在她仇敌的手中。
I have given up my house, I have let my heritage go; I have given the loved one of my soul into the hands of her haters.

我的产业向我如林中的狮子，她发声攻击我，因此我恨恶她。
My heritage has become like a lion in the woodland to me; her voice has been loud against me; so I have hate for her.

我的产业向我岂如斑点的鸷鸟呢？鸷鸟岂在她四围攻击她呢？你们要去聚集田野的百兽，带来吞吃吧。
My heritage is like a brightly coloured bird to me; the cruel birds are attacking her on every side: go, get together all the beasts of the field, make them come for destruction.

许多牧人毁坏我的葡萄园，践踏我的分，使我美好的分变为荒凉的旷野。
The keepers of sheep have been the destruction of my vine-garden, crushing my heritage under their feet; they have made my fair heritage an unplanted waste;

他们使地荒凉。地既荒凉，便向我悲哀。全地荒凉，因无人介意。
They have made it waste; it is weeping to me, being wasted; all the land is made waste, because no man takes it to heart.

灭命的都来到旷野中一切净光的高处。耶和华的刀从地这边直到地那边尽行杀灭。凡有血气的都不得平安。
Those who make waste have come on all the open hilltops in the waste land; for the sword of the Lord sends destruction from one end of the land to the other end of the land: no flesh has peace.

他们种的是麦子，收的是荆棘。劳劳苦苦却毫无益处。因耶和华的烈怒，你们必为自己的土产羞愧。
Though good grain was planted, they have got in thorns: they have given themselves pain without profit: they will be shamed on account of their produce, because of the burning wrath of the Lord.

耶和华如此说，一切恶邻，就是占据我使百姓以色列所承受产业的，我要将他们拔出本地，又要将犹大家从他们中间拔出来。
This is what the Lord has said against all my evil neighbours, who put their hands on the heritage which I gave my people Israel: See, I will have them uprooted from their land, uprooting the people of Judah from among them.

我拔出他们以后，我必转过来怜悯他们，把他们再带回来，各归本业，各归故土。
And it will come about that, after they have been uprooted, I will again have pity on them; and I will take them back, every man to his heritage and every man to his land.

他们若殷勤学习我百姓的道，指着我的名起誓，说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，正如他们从前教我百姓指着巴力起誓，他们就必建立在我百姓中间。
And it will be that, if they give their minds to learning the ways of my people, using my name in their oaths, By the living Lord; as they have been teaching my people to take oaths by the Baal; then their place will be made certain among my people.

他们若是不听，我必拔出那国，拔出而且毁灭。这是耶和华说的。
But if they will not give ear, then I will have that nation uprooted, and given to destruction, says the Lord.

耶和华对我如此说，你去买一根麻布带子束腰，不可放在水中。
This is what the Lord said to me: Go and get yourself a linen band and put it round you and do not put it in water.

我就照着耶和华的话，买了一根带子束腰。
So, as the Lord said, I got a band for a price and put it round my body.

耶和华的话第二次临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me a second time, saying,

要拿着你所买的腰带，就是你腰上的带子，起来往伯拉河去，将腰带藏在那里的磐石穴中。
Take the band which you got for a price, which is round your body, and go to Parah and put it in a secret place there in a hole of the rock.

我就去，照着耶和华所吩咐我的，将腰带藏在伯拉河边。
So I went and put it in a secret place by Parah, as the Lord had said to me.

过了多日，耶和华对我说，你起来往伯拉河去，将我吩咐你藏在那里的腰带取出来。
Then after a long time, the Lord said to me, Up! go to Parah and get the band which I gave you orders to put there.

我就往伯拉河去，将腰带从我所藏的地方刨出来，见腰带已经变坏，毫无用了。
So I went to Parah and, uncovering the hole, took the band from the place where I had put it away: and the band was damaged and of no use for anything.

耶和华的话临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

耶和华如此说，我必照样败坏犹大的骄傲和耶路撒冷的大骄傲。
The Lord has said, In this way I will do damage to the pride of Judah and to the great pride of Jerusalem.

这恶民不肯听我的话，按自己顽梗的心而行，随从别神，事奉敬拜，他们也必像这腰带变为无用。
These evil people who say they will not give ear to my words, who go on in the pride of their hearts and have become servants and worshippers of other gods, will become like this band which is of no use for anything.

耶和华说，腰带怎样紧贴人腰，照样，我也使以色列全家和犹大全家紧贴我，，好叫他们属我为子民，使我得名声，得颂赞，得荣耀。他们却不肯听。
For as a band goes tightly round a man's body, so I made all the people of Israel and all the people of Judah tightly united to me; so that they might be a people for me and a name and a praise and a glory: but they would not give ear.

所以你要对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，各坛都要盛满了酒。他们必对你说，我们岂不确知各坛都要盛满了酒呢？
So you are to say this word to them: This is the word of the Lord, the God of Israel: Every skin bottle will be full of wine; and they will say to you, Is it not quite clear to us that every skin bottle will be full of wine?

你就要对他们说，耶和华如此说，我必使这地的一切居民，就是坐大卫宝座的君王和祭司，与先知，并耶路撒冷的一切居民，都酩酊大醉。
Then you are to say to them, The Lord has said, I will make all the people of this land, even the kings seated on David's seat, and the priests and the prophets and all the people of Jerusalem, overcome with strong drink.

耶和华说，我要使他们彼此相碰，就是父与子彼此相碰。我必不可怜，不顾惜，不怜悯，以致灭绝他们。
I will have them smashed against one another, fathers and sons together, says the Lord: I will have no pity or mercy, I will have no feeling for them to keep me from giving them to destruction.

你们当听，当侧耳而听。不要骄傲，因为耶和华已经说了。
Give ear and let your ears be open; be not lifted up: for these are the words of the Lord.

耶和华你们的神未使黑暗来到，你们的脚未在昏暗山上绊跌之先，当将荣耀归给他。免得你们盼望光明，他使光明变为死荫，成为幽暗。
Give glory to the Lord your God, before he makes it dark, and before your feet are slipping on the dark mountains, and, while you are looking for a light, he makes it into deep dark, into black night.

你们若不听这话，我必因你们的骄傲在暗地哭泣。我眼必痛哭流泪，因为耶和华的群众被掳去了。
But if you do not give ear to it, my soul will be weeping in secret for your pride; my eye will be weeping bitterly, streaming with water, because the Lord's flock has been taken away as prisoners.

你要对君王和太后说，你们当自卑，坐在下边。因你们的头巾，就是你们的华冠，已经脱落了。
Say to the king and to the queen-mother, Make yourselves low, be seated on the earth: for the crown of your glory has come down from your heads.

南方的城尽都关闭，无人开放。犹大全被掳掠，且掳掠净尽。
The towns of the south are shut up, and there is no one to make them open: Judah is taken away as prisoners; all Judah is taken away as prisoners.

你们要举目观看从北方来的人。先前赐给你的群众，就是你佳美的群众，如今在哪里呢？
Let your eyes be lifted up (O Jerusalem), and see those who are coming from the north. Where is the flock which was given to you, your beautiful flock?

耶和华立你自己所交的朋友为首，辖制你，那时你还有什么话说呢？痛苦岂不将你抓住像产难的妇人吗？
What will you say when he puts over you those whom you yourself have made your friends? will not pains take you like a woman in childbirth?

你若心里说，这一切事为何临到我呢？你的衣襟揭起，你的脚跟受伤，是因你的罪孽甚多。
And if you say in your heart, Why have these things come on me? because of the number of your sins, your skirts have been uncovered and violent punishment overtakes you.

古实人岂能改变皮肤呢？豹岂能改变斑点呢？若能，你们这习惯行恶的便能行善了。
Is it possible for the skin of the Ethiopian to be changed, or the markings on the leopard? Then it might be possible for you to do good, who have been trained to do evil.

所以我必用旷野的风吹散他们，像吹过的碎秸一样。
So I will send them in all directions, as dry grass is taken away by the wind of the waste land.

耶和华说，这是你所当得的，是我量给你的分。因为你忘记我，倚靠虚假（或作偶像）。
This is your fate, the part measured out to you by me, says the Lord, because you have put me out of your memory and put your faith in what is false.

所以我要揭起你的衣襟，蒙在你脸上，显出你的丑陋。
So I will have your skirts uncovered before your face, in order that your shame may be seen.

你那些可憎恶之事就是在田野的山上行奸淫，发嘶声，作淫乱的事我都看见了。耶路撒冷阿，你有祸了。你不肯洁净，还要到几时呢？
I have seen your disgusting acts, even your false behaviour and your cries of desire and your loose ways on the hills in the field. Unhappy are you, O Jerusalem, you have no desire to be made clean; how long will you be in turning back to me?

耶和华论到干旱之灾的话临到耶利米，
The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah when there was no water.

犹大悲哀，城门衰败。众人披上黑衣坐在地上。耶路撒冷的哀声上达。
Judah is weeping and its doors are dark with sorrow, and people are seated on the earth clothed in black; and the cry of Jerusalem has gone up.

他们的贵胄打发家僮打水。他们来到水池，见没有水，就拿着空器皿，蒙羞惭愧，抱头而回。
Their great men have sent their servants for water: they come to the holes and there is no water to be seen; they come back with nothing in their vessels; they are overcome with shame and fear, covering their heads.

耕地的也蒙羞抱头。因为无雨降在地上，地都干裂。
Those who do work on the land are in fear, for there has been no rain on the land, and the farmers are shamed, covering their heads.

田野的母鹿生下小鹿，就撇弃，因为无草。
And the roe, giving birth in the field, lets her young one be uncared for, because there is no grass.

野驴站在净光的高处，喘气好像野狗。因为无草，眼目失明。
And the asses of the field on the open hilltops are opening their mouths wide like jackals to get air; their eyes are hollow because there is no grass.

耶和华阿，我们的罪孽虽然作见证告我们，还求你为你名的缘故行事。我们本是多次背道，得罪了你。
Though our sins give witness against us, do something, O Lord, for the honour of your name: for again and again we have been turned away from you, we have done evil against you.

以色列所盼望，在患难时作他救主的阿，你为何在这地像寄居的，又像行路的只住一宵呢？
O you hope of Israel, its saviour in time of trouble, why are you like one who is strange in the land, and like a traveller putting up his tent for a night?

你为何像受惊的人，像不能救人的勇士呢？耶和华阿，你仍在我们中间。我们也称为你名下的人，求你不要离开我们。
Why are you like a man surprised, like a man of war who is not able to give help? but you, O Lord, are with us, and we are named by your name; do not go away from us.

耶和华对这百姓如此说，这百姓喜爱妄行（原文作飘流），不禁止脚步，所以耶和华不悦纳他们。现今要记念他们的罪孽，追讨他们的罪恶。
This is what the Lord has said about this people: Even so they have been glad to go from the right way; they have not kept their feet from wandering, so the Lord has no pleasure in them; now he will keep their wrongdoing in mind and send punishment for their sins.

耶和华又对我说，不要为这百姓祈祷求好处。
And the Lord said to me, Make no prayer for this people for their good.

他们禁食的时候，我不听他们的呼求。他们献燔祭和素祭，我也不悦纳。我却要用刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫灭绝他们。
When they go without food, I will not give ear to their cry; when they give burned offerings and meal offerings, I will not take pleasure in them: but I will put an end to them by the sword and by need of food and by disease.

我就说，唉。主耶和华阿，那些先知常对他们说，你们必不看见刀剑，也不遭遇饥荒。耶和华要在这地方赐你们长久的平安。
Then I said, Ah, Lord God! see, the prophets say to them, You will not see the sword or be short of food; but I will give you certain peace in this place.

耶和华对我说，那些先知托我的名说假预言，我并没有打发他们，没有吩咐他们，也没有对他们说话。他们向你们预言的，乃是虚假的异象和占卜，并虚无的事，以及本心的诡诈。
Then the Lord said to me, The prophets say false words in my name, and I gave them no orders, and I said nothing to them: what they say to you is a false vision and wonder-working words without substance, the deceit of their hearts.

所以耶和华如此说，论到托我名说预言的那些先知，我并没有打发他们。他们还说这地不能有刀剑饥荒，其实那些先知必被刀剑饥荒灭绝。
So this is what the Lord has said about the prophets who make use of my name, though I sent them not, and say, The sword and need of food will not be in this land: the sword and need of food will put an end to those prophets.

听他们说预言的百姓必因饥荒刀剑抛在耶路撒冷的街道上，无人葬埋。他们连妻子带儿女，都是如此。我必将他们的恶倒在他们身上（或作我必使他们罪恶的报应临到他们身上）。
And the people to whom they are prophets will be pushed out dead into the streets of Jerusalem, because there is no food, and because of the sword; and they will have no one to put their bodies into the earth, them or their wives or their sons or their daughters: for I will let loose their evil-doing on them.

你要将这话对他们说，愿我眼泪汪汪，昼夜不息，因为我百姓（原文作民的处女）受了裂口破坏的大伤。
And you are to say this word to them, Let my eyes be streaming with water night and day, and let it not be stopped; for the virgin daughter of my people is wounded with a great wound, with a very bitter blow.

我若出往田间，就见有被刀杀的。我若进入城内，就见有因饥荒患病的。连先知带祭司在国中往来，也是毫无知识（或作不知怎样才好）。
If I go out into the open country, there are those put to death by the sword! and if I go into the town, there are those who are diseased from need of food! for the prophet and the priest go about in the land and have no knowledge.

你全然弃掉犹大吗？你心厌恶锡安吗？为何击打我们，以致无法医治呢？我们指望平安，却得不着好处。指望痊愈，不料，受了惊惶。
Have you completely given up Judah? is your soul turned in disgust from Zion? why have you given us blows from which there is no one to make us well? we were looking for peace, but no good came; and for a time of well-being, but there was only a great fear.

耶和华阿，我们承认自己的罪恶，和我们列祖的罪孽，因我们得罪了你。
We are conscious, O Lord, of our sin and of the wrongdoing of our fathers: we have done evil against you.

求你为你名的缘故，不厌恶我们，不辱没你荣耀的宝座。求你追念，不要背了与我们所立的约。
Do not be turned from us in disgust, because of your name; do not put shame on the seat of your glory: keep us in mind, let not your agreement with us be broken.

外邦人虚无的神中有能降雨的吗？天能自降甘霖吗？耶和华我们的神阿，能如此的不是你吗？所以，我们仍要等候你，因为这一切都是你所造的。
Are any of the false gods of the nations able to make rain come? are the heavens able to give showers? are you not he, O Lord our God? so we will go on waiting for you, for you have done all these things.

耶和华对我说，虽有摩西和撒母耳站在我面前代求，我的心也不顾惜这百姓。你将他们从我眼前赶出，叫他们去吧。
Then the Lord said to me, Even if Moses and Samuel came before me, I would have no desire for this people: send them away from before me, and let them go.

他们问你说，我们往哪里去呢？你便告诉他们，耶和华如此说，定为死亡的，必至死亡。定为刀杀的，必交刀杀。定为饥荒的，必遭饥荒。定为掳掠的，必被掳掠。
And it will be, when they say to you, Where are we to go? then you are to say to them, The Lord has said, Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are to be in need of food, to need of food; and such as are to be taken away prisoners, to be taken away.

耶和华说，我命定四样害他们，就是刀剑杀戮，狗类撕裂，空中的飞鸟，和地上的野兽吞吃毁灭。
And I will put over them four divisions, says the Lord: the sword causing death, dogs pulling the dead bodies about, and the birds of heaven, and the beasts of the earth to take their bodies for food and put an end to them.

又必使他们在天下万国中抛来抛去，都因犹大王希西家的儿子玛拿西在耶路撒冷所行的事。
And I will make them a cause of fear to all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, and what he did in Jerusalem.

耶路撒冷阿，谁可怜你呢？谁为你悲伤呢？谁转身问你的安呢？
For who will have pity on you, O Jerusalem? and who will have sorrow for you? or who will go out of his way to see how you are?

耶和华说，你弃绝了我，转身退后。因此我伸手攻击你，毁坏你。我后悔甚不耐烦。
You have given me up, says the Lord, you have gone back: so my hand is stretched out against you for your destruction; I am tired of changing my purpose.

我在境内各城门口（或作我在这地边界的关口），用簸箕簸了我的百姓，使他们丧掉儿女。我毁灭他们，他们仍不转离所行的道。
And I have sent a cleaning wind on them in the public places of the land; I have taken their children from them; I have given my people to destruction; they have not been turned from their ways.

他们的寡妇在我面前比海沙更多。我使灭命的午间来，攻击少年人的母亲，使痛苦惊吓忽然临到她身上。
I have let their widows be increased in number more than the sand of the seas: I have sent against them, against the mother and the young men, one who makes waste in the heat of the day, causing pain and fears to come on her suddenly.

生过七子的妇人力衰气绝。尚在白昼，日头忽落。她抱愧蒙羞。其余的人，我必在他们敌人跟前，交与刀剑。这是耶和华说的。
The mother of seven is without strength; her spirit is gone from her, her sun has gone down while it is still day: she has been shamed and overcome: and the rest of them I will give up to the sword before their haters, says the Lord.

我的母亲哪，我有祸了。因你生我作为遍地相争相竞的人。我素来没有借贷与人，人也没有借贷与我，人人却都咒骂我。
Sorrow is mine, my mother, because you have given birth to me, a cause of fighting and argument in all the earth! I have not made men my creditors and I am not in debt to any, but every one of them is cursing me.

耶和华说，我必要坚固你，使你得好处。灾祸苦难临到的时候，我必要使仇敌央求你。
...

人岂能将铜与铁，就是北方的铁折断呢？
Is it possible for iron to be broken; even iron from the north, and brass?

我必因你在四境之内所犯的一切罪，把你的货物财宝当掠物，白白地交给仇敌。
I will give your wealth and your stores to your attackers, without a price, because of all your sins, even in every part of your land.

我也必使仇敌带这掠物到你所不认识的地去，因我怒中起的火要将你们焚烧。
They will go away with your haters into a land which is strange to you: for my wrath is on fire with a flame which will be burning on you.

耶和华阿，你是知道的。求你记念我，眷顾我，向逼迫我的人为我报仇。不要向他们忍怒取我的命，要知道我为你的缘故受了凌辱。
O Lord, you have knowledge: keep me in mind and come to my help, and give their right reward to those who are attacking me; take me not away, for you are slow to be angry: see how I have undergone shame because of you from all those who make little of your word;

耶和华万军之神阿，我得着你的言语就当食物吃了。你的言语是我心中的欢喜快乐，因我是称为你名下的人。
But to me your word is a joy, making my heart glad; for I am named by your name, O Lord God of armies.

我没有坐在宴乐人的会中，也没有欢乐。我因你的感动（感动原文作手）独自静坐，因你使我满心愤恨。
I did not take my seat among the band of those who are glad, and I had no joy; I kept by myself because of your hand; for you have made me full of wrath.

我的痛苦为何长久不止呢？我的伤痕为何无法医治，不能痊愈呢？难道你待我有诡诈，像流干的河道吗？
Why is my pain unending and my wound without hope of being made well? Sorrow is mine, for you are to me as a stream offering false hope and as waters which are not certain.

耶和华如此说，你若归回，我就将你再带来，使你站在我面前。你若将宝贵的和下贱的分别出来，你就可以当作我的口。他们必归向你，你却不可归向他们。
For this cause the Lord has said, If you will come back, then I will again let you take your place before me; and if you give out what is of value and not that which has no value, you will be as my mouth: let them come back to you, but do not go back to them.

我必使你向这百姓成为坚固的铜墙。他们必攻击你，却不能胜你。因我与你同在，要拯救你，搭救你。这是耶和华说的。
And I will make you a strong wall of brass to this people; they will be fighting against you, but they will not overcome you: for I am with you to keep you safe, says the Lord.

我必搭救你脱离恶人的手，救赎你脱离强暴人的手。
I will keep you safe from the hands of the evil-doers, and I will give you salvation from the hands of the cruel ones.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Then again the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你在这地方不可娶妻，生儿养女。
You are not to take a wife for yourself or have sons or daughters in this place.

因为论到在这地方所生的儿女，又论到在这国中生养他们的父母，耶和华如此说，
For this is what the Lord has said about the sons and daughters who come to birth in this place, and about their mothers who have given them birth, and about their fathers who have given life to them in this land:

他们必死得甚苦，无人哀哭，必不得葬埋，必在地上像粪土，必被刀剑和饥荒灭绝。他们的尸首必给空中的飞鸟和地上的野兽作食物。
Death from evil diseases will overtake them; there will be no weeping for them and their bodies will not be put to rest; they will be like waste on the face of the earth: the sword and need of food will put an end to them; their dead bodies will be meat for the birds of heaven and for the beasts of the earth.

耶和华如此说，不要进入丧家，不要去哀哭，也不要为他们悲伤，因我已将我的平安，慈爱，怜悯从这百姓夺去了。这是耶和华说的。
For this is what the Lord has said: Do not go into the house of sorrow, do not go to make weeping or songs of grief for them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord, even mercy and pity.

连大带小，都必在这地死亡，不得葬埋。人必不为他们哀哭，不用刀划身，也不使头光秃。
Death will overtake great as well as small in the land: their bodies will not be put in a resting-place, and no one will be weeping for them or wounding themselves or cutting off their hair for them:

他们有丧事，人必不为他们掰饼，因死人安慰他们。他们丧父丧母，人也不给他们一杯酒安慰他们。
No one will make a feast for them in sorrow, to give them comfort for the dead, or put to their lips the cup of comfort on account of their father or their mother.

你不可进入宴乐的家，与他们同坐吃喝。
And you are not to go into the house of feasting, or be seated with them to take food or drink.

因为万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们还活着的日子在你们眼前，我必使欢喜和快乐的声音，新郎和新妇的声音，从这地方止息了。
For the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, See, before your eyes and in your days I will put an end in this place to the laughing voices and the voice of joy; to the voice of the newly-married man and the voice of the bride.

你将这一切的话指示这百姓。他们问你说，耶和华为什么说，要降这大灾祸攻击我们呢？我们有什么罪孽呢？我们向耶和华我们的神犯了什么罪呢？
And it will be, that when you say all these words to the people, then they will say to you, Why has the Lord done all this evil against us? what is our wrongdoing and what is our sin which we have done against the Lord our God?

你就对他们说，耶和华说，因为你们列祖离弃我，随从别神，事奉敬拜，不遵守我的律法，
Then you will say to them, Because your fathers have given me up, says the Lord, and have gone after other gods and become their servants and their worshippers, and have given me up and have not kept my law;

而且你们行恶比你们列祖更甚。因为各人随从自己顽梗的恶心行事，甚至不听从我，
And you have done worse evil than your fathers; for see, every one of you is guided by the pride of his evil heart, so as not to give ear to me:

所以我必将你们从这地赶出，直赶到你们和你们列祖素不认识的地。你们在那里必昼夜事奉别神，因为我必不向你们施恩。
For this reason I will send you away out of this land into a land which is strange to you, to you and to your fathers; there you will be the servants of other gods day and night, and you will have no mercy from me.

耶和华说，日子将到，人必不再指着那领以色列人从埃及地上来之永生的耶和华起誓，
For this cause, see, the days are coming, says the Lord, when it will no longer be said, By the living Lord, who took the children of Israel up out of the land of Egypt.

却要指着那领以色列人从北方之地，并赶他们到的各国上来之永生的耶和华起誓，并且我要领他们再入我从前赐给他们列祖之地。
But, By the living Lord, who took the children of Israel up out of the land of the north, and from all the countries where he had sent them: and I will take them back again to their land which I gave to their fathers.

耶和华说，我要召许多打鱼的把以色列人打上来，然后我要召许多打猎的，从各山上，各冈上，各石穴中猎取他们。
See, I will send for great numbers of fishermen, says the Lord, and they will take them like fish in a net; and after that, I will send for numbers of bowmen, and they will go after them, driving them from every mountain and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.

因我的眼目察看他们的一切行为。他们不能在我面前遮掩，他们的罪孽也不能在我眼前隐藏。
For my eyes are on all their ways: there is no cover for them from my face, and their evil-doing is not kept secret from my eyes.

我先要加倍报应他们的罪孽和罪恶。因为他们用可憎之尸玷污我的地土，又用可厌之物充满我的产业。
And I will give them the reward of their evil-doing and their sin twice over; because they have made my land unclean, and have made my heritage full of the bodies of their unholy and disgusting things.

耶和华阿，你是我的力量，是我的保障。在苦难之日是我的避难所。列国人必从地极来到你这里，说，我们列祖所承受的，不过是虚假，是虚空无益之物。
O Lord, my strength and my strong tower, my safe place in the day of trouble, the nations will come to you from the ends of the earth, and say, The heritage of our fathers is nothing but deceit, even false things in which there is no profit.

人岂可为自己制造神呢？其实这不是神。
Will a man make for himself gods which are no gods?

耶和华说，我要使他们知道，就是这一次使他们知道我的手和我的能力。他们就知道我的名是耶和华了。
For this reason, truly, I will make them see, this once I will give them knowledge of my hand and my power; and they will be certain that my name is the Lord.

犹大的罪是用铁笔，用金钢钻记录的，铭刻在他们的心版上和坛角上。
The sin of Judah is recorded with a pen of iron, and with the sharp point of a jewel it is cut on their hearts of stone, and on the horns of their altars for a sign to them:

他们的儿女记念他们高冈上，青翠树旁的坛和木偶。
Their altars and their wood pillars under every branching tree, on the high hills and the mountains in the field.

我田野的山哪，我必因你在四境之内所犯的罪，把你的货物，财宝，并丘坛当掠物交给仇敌。
I will give your wealth and all your stores to be taken away in war without a price, because of your sins in every part of your land.

并且你因自己的罪必失去我所赐给你的产业。我也必使你在你所不认识的地上服事你的仇敌。因为你使我怒中起火，直烧到永远。
And your hand will have to let go your heritage which I gave you; and I will make you a servant to your haters in a land which is strange to you: for you have put my wrath on fire with a flame which will go on burning for ever.

耶和华如此说，倚靠人血肉的膀臂，心中离弃耶和华的，那人有祸了。
This is what the Lord has said: Cursed is the man who puts his faith in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart is turned away from the Lord.

因他必像沙漠的杜松，不见福乐来到，却要住旷野干旱之处，无人居住的碱地。
For he will be like the brushwood in the upland, and will not see when good comes; but his living-place will be in the dry places in the waste land, in a salt and unpeopled land.

倚靠耶和华，以耶和华为可靠的，那人有福了。
A blessing is on the man who puts his faith in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

他必像树栽于水旁，在河边扎根，炎热来到，并不惧怕，叶子仍必青翠，在干旱之年毫无挂虑，而且结果不止。
For he will be like a tree planted by the waters, pushing out its roots by the stream; he will have no fear when the heat comes, but his leaf will be green; in a dry year he will have no care, and will go on giving fruit.

人心比万物都诡诈，坏到极处，谁能识透呢？
The heart is a twisted thing, not to be searched out by man: who is able to have knowledge of it?

我耶和华是鉴察人心，试验人肺腑的，要照各人所行的和他作事的结果报应他。
I the Lord am the searcher of the heart, the tester of the thoughts, so that I may give to every man the reward of his ways, in keeping with the fruit of his doings.

那不按正道得财的，好像鹧鸪抱不是自己下的蛋。到了中年，那财都必离开他，他终久成为愚顽人。
Like the partridge, getting eggs together but not producing young, is a man who gets wealth but not by right; before half his days are ended, it will go from him, and at his end he will be foolish.

我们的圣所是荣耀的宝座，从太初安置在高处。
A seat of glory, placed on high from the first, is our holy place.

耶和华以色列的盼望阿，凡离弃你的必至蒙羞。耶和华说，离开我的，他们的名字必写在土里，因为他们离弃我这活水的泉源。
O Lord, the hope of Israel, all who give you up will be put to shame; those who go away from you will be cut off from the earth, because they have given up the Lord, the fountain of living waters.

耶和华阿，求你医治我，我便痊愈，拯救我，我便得救。因你是我所赞美的。
Make me well, O Lord, and I will be well; be my saviour, and I will be safe: for you are my hope.

他们对我说，耶和华的话在哪里呢？叫这话应验吧。
See, they say to me, Where is the word of the Lord? let it come now.

至于我，那跟从你作牧人的职分，我并没有急忙离弃，也没有想那灾殃的日子。这是你知道的。我口中所出的言语都在你面前。
As for me, I have not said; Let the day of trouble come to them quickly; and I have not been hoping for the death-giving day; you have knowledge of what came from my lips; it was open before you.

不要使我因你惊恐。当灾祸的日子，你是我的避难所。
Be not a cause of fear to me: you are my safe place in the day of evil.

愿那些逼迫我的蒙羞，却不要使我蒙羞。使他们惊惶，却不要使我惊惶。使灾祸的日子临到他们，以加倍的毁坏毁坏他们。
Let them be put to shame who are attacking me, but let me not be shamed; let them be overcome with fear, but let me not be overcome: send on them the day of evil, and put them to destruction twice over.

耶和华对我如此说，你去站在平民的门口，就是犹大君王出入的门，又站在耶路撒冷的各门口，
This is what the Lord has said to me: Go and take your place in the doorway of Benjamin, where the kings of Judah come in and by which they go out, and in all the doorways of Jerusalem;

对他们说，你们这犹大君王和犹大众人，并耶路撒冷的一切居民，凡从这些门进入的都当听耶和华的话。
And say to them, Give ear to the word of the Lord, you kings of Judah, and all the people of Jerusalem who come in by these doors:

耶和华如此说，你们要谨慎，不要在安息日担什么担子进入耶路撒冷的各门。
This is what the Lord has said: See to yourselves, that you take up no weight on the Sabbath day, or take it in through the doors of Jerusalem;

也不要在安息日从家中担出担子去。无论何工都不可作，只要以安息日为圣日，正如我所吩咐你们列祖的。
And take no weight out of your houses on the Sabbath day, or do any work, but keep the Sabbath day holy, as I gave orders to your fathers;

他们却不听从，不侧耳而听，竟硬着颈项不听，不受教训。
But they gave no attention and would not give ear, but they made their necks stiff so that they might not give ear and might not get teaching.

耶和华说，你们若留意听从我，在安息日不担什么担子进入这城的各门，只以安息日为圣日，在那日无论何工都不作。
And it will be, that if with all care you give ear to me, says the Lord, and take no weight through the doorways of this town on the Sabbath day, but keep the Sabbath day holy and do no work in it;

那时就有坐大卫宝座的君王和首领，他们与犹大人，并耶路撒冷的居民，或坐车，或骑马，进入这城的各门，而且这城必存到永远。
Then through the doors of this town there will come kings and princes, seated on the seat of David, going in carriages and on horseback, they and their princes, and the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem: and this town will keep its place for ever.

也必有人从犹大城邑和耶路撒冷四围的各处，从便雅悯地，高原，山地，并南地而来，都带燔祭，平安祭，素祭，和乳香，并感谢祭，到耶和华的殿去。
And they will come from the towns of Judah, and from the places round about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the lowlands, and from the mountains, and from the South, with burned offerings and offerings of beasts and meal offerings and perfume and offerings of praise, to the house of the Lord.

你们若不听从我，不以安息日为圣日，仍在安息日担担子，进入耶路撒冷的各门，我必在各门中点火。这火也必烧毁耶路撒冷的宫殿，不能熄灭。
But if you do not give ear to me, to keep the Sabbath day holy, and to let no weight be lifted and taken through the doors of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: then I will put a fire in its doorways, burning up the great houses of Jerusalem, and it will never be put out.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

你起来，下到窑匠的家里去，我在那里要使你听我的话。
Up! go down to the potter's house, and there I will let my words come to your ears.

我就下到窑匠的家里去，正遇他转轮作器皿。
Then I went down to the potter's house, and he was doing his work on the stones.

窑匠用泥作的器皿，在他手中作坏了，他又用这泥另作别的器皿。窑匠看怎样好，就怎样作。
And when the vessel, which he was forming out of earth, got damaged in the hand of the potter, he made it again into another vessel, as it seemed good to the potter to make it.

耶和华的话就临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

耶和华说，以色列家阿，我待你们，岂不能照这窑匠弄泥吗？以色列家阿，泥在窑匠的手中怎样，你们在我的手中也怎样。
O Israel, am I not able to do with you as this potter does? says the Lord. See, like earth in the potter's hand are you in my hands, O Israel.

我何时论到一邦或一国说，要拔出，拆毁，毁坏。
Whenever I say anything about uprooting a nation or a kingdom, and smashing it and sending destruction on it;

我所说的那一邦，若是转意离开他们的恶，我就必后悔，不将我想要施行的灾祸降与他们。
If, in that very minute, that nation of which I was talking is turned away from its evil, my purpose of doing evil to them will be changed.

我何时论到一邦或一国说，要建立，栽植。
And whenever I say anything about building up a nation or a kingdom, and planting it;

他们若行我眼中看为恶的事，不听从我的话，我就必后悔，不将我所说的福气赐给他们。
If, in that very minute, it does evil in my eyes, going against my orders, then my good purpose, which I said I would do for them, will be changed.

现在你要对犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民说，耶和华如此说，我造出灾祸攻击你们，定意刑罚你们。你们各人当回头离开所行的恶道，改正你们的行动作为。
Now, then, say to the men of Judah and to the people of Jerusalem, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am forming an evil thing against you, and designing a design against you: let every man come back now from his evil way, and let your ways and your doings be changed for the better.

他们却说，这是枉然。我们要照自己的计谋去行。各人随自己顽梗的恶心作事。
But they will say, There is no hope: we will go on in our designs, and every one of us will do what he is moved by the pride of his evil heart to do.

所以，耶和华如此说，你们且往各国访问，有谁听见这样的事。以色列民（原文作处女）行了一件极可憎恶的事。
So this is what the Lord has said: Make search among the nations and see who has had word of such things; the virgin of Israel has done a very shocking thing.

利巴嫩的雪从田野的磐石上岂能断绝呢？从远处流下的凉水岂能干涸呢？
Will the white snow go away from the top of Sirion? will the cold waters flowing from the mountains become dry?

我的百姓竟忘记我，向假神烧香，使他们在所行的路上，在古道上绊跌，使他们行没有修筑的斜路，
For my people have put me out of their memory, burning perfumes to that which is nothing; and because of this, I will put a cause of falling in their ways, even in the old roads, and will make them go on side-roads, in a way not lifted up;

以致他们的地令人惊骇，常常嗤笑。凡经过这地的必惊骇摇头。
Making their land a thing of wonder, causing sounds of surprise for ever; everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder, shaking his head.

我必在仇敌面前分散他们，好像用东风吹散一样。遭难的日子，我必以背向他们，不以面向他们。
I will send them in flight, as from an east wind, before the attacker; I will let them see my back and not my face on the day of their downfall.

他们就说，来吧。我们可以设计谋害耶利米。因为我们有祭司讲律法，智慧人设谋略，先知说预言，都不能断绝。来吧。我们可以用舌头击打他，不要理会他的一切话。
Then they said, Come, let us make a design against Jeremiah; for teaching will never be cut off from the priest, or wisdom from the wise, or the word from the prophet. Come, let us make use of his words for an attack on him, and let us give attention with care to what he says.

耶和华阿，求你理会我，且听那些与我争竞之人的话。
Give thought to me, O Lord, and give ear to the voice of those who put forward a cause against me.

岂可以恶报善呢？他们竟挖坑要害我的性命。求你记念我怎样站在你面前为他们代求，要使你的忿怒向他们转消。
Is evil to be the reward of good? for they have made a deep hole for my soul. Keep in mind how I took my place before you, to say a good word for them so that your wrath might be turned away from them.

故此，愿你将他们的儿女交与饥荒和刀剑。愿他们的妻无子，且作寡妇。又愿他们的男人被死亡所灭，他们的少年人在阵上被刀击杀。
For this cause, let their children be without food, and give them over to the power of the sword; and let their wives be without children and become widows; let their men be overtaken by death, and their young men be put to the sword in the fight.

你使敌军忽然临到他们的时候，愿人听见哀声从他们的屋内发出。因他们挖坑要捉拿我，暗设网罗要绊我的脚。
Let a cry for help go up from their houses, when you send an armed band on them suddenly: for they have made a hole in which to take me, and have put nets for my feet secretly.

耶和华阿，他们要杀我的那一切计谋，你都知道。不要赦免他们的罪孽，也不要从你面前涂抹他们的罪恶，要叫他们在你面前跌倒。愿你发怒的时候罚办他们。
But you, Lord, have knowledge of all the designs which they have made against my life; let not their evil-doing be covered or their sin be washed away from before your eyes: but let it be a cause of falling before you: so do to them in the time of your wrath.

耶和华如此说，你去买窑匠的瓦瓶，又带百姓中的长老和祭司中的长老，
This is what the Lord has said: Go and get for money a potter's bottle made of earth, and take with you some of the responsible men of the people and of the priests;

出去到欣嫩子谷，哈珥西（哈珥西就是瓦片的意思）的门口那里，宣告我所吩咐你的话，
And go out to the valley of the son of Hinnom, by the way into the door of broken pots, and there say in a loud voice the words which I will give you;

说，犹大君王和耶路撒冷的居民哪，当听耶和华的话。万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必使灾祸临到这地方，凡听见的人都必耳鸣。
Say, Give ear to the word of the Lord, O kings of Judah and people of Jerusalem; the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, See, I will send evil on this place which will be bitter to the ears of anyone hearing of it.

因为他们和他们列祖，并犹大君王离弃我，将这地方看为平常，在这里向素不认识的别神烧香，又使这地方满了无辜人的血，
Because they have given me up, and made this place a strange place, burning perfumes in it to other gods, of whom they and their fathers and the kings of Judah had no knowledge; and they have made this place full of the blood of those who have done no wrong;

又建筑巴力的丘坛，好在火中焚烧自己的儿子，作为燔祭献给巴力。这不是我所吩咐的，不是我所提说的，也不是我心所起的意。
And they have put up the high places of the Baal, burning their sons in the fire; a thing which was not ordered by me, and it was never in my mind:

耶和华说，因此，日子将到，这地方不再称为陀斐特和欣嫩子谷，反倒称为杀戮谷。
For this cause, see, a time is coming, says the Lord, when this place will no longer be named Topheth, or, The valley of the son of Hinnom, but, The valley of Death.

我必在这地方使犹大和耶路撒冷的计谋落空，也必使他们在仇敌面前倒于刀下，并寻索其命的人手下。他们的尸首，我必给空中的飞鸟和地上的野兽作食物。
I will make the purpose of Judah and Jerusalem come to nothing in this place; I will have them put to the sword by their haters, and by the hands of those who have designs on their life; and their dead bodies I will give to be food for the birds of heaven and the beasts of the earth.

我必使这城令人惊骇嗤笑。凡经过的人，必因这城所遭的灾惊骇嗤笑。
And I will make this town a thing of wonder and a cause of surprise; everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder and make sounds of surprise, because of all its troubles.

我必使他们在围困窘迫之中，就是仇敌和寻索其命的人窘迫他们的时候，各人吃自己儿女的肉和朋友的肉。
I will make them take the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters for food, they will be making a meal of one another, because of their bitter need and the cruel grip of their haters and those who have made designs against their life.

你要在同去的人眼前打碎那瓶，
Then let the potter's bottle be broken before the eyes of the men who have gone with you,

对他们说，万军之耶和华如此说，我要照样打碎这民和这城，正如人打碎窑匠的瓦器，以致不能再囫囵。并且人要在陀斐特葬埋尸首，甚至无处可葬。
And say to them, This is what the Lord of armies has said: Even so will this people and this town be broken by me, as a potter's bottle is broken and may not be put together again: and the bodies of the dead will be put in the earth in Topheth, till there is no more room.

耶和华说，我必向这地方和其中的居民如此行，使这城与陀斐特一样。
This is what I will do to this place, says the Lord, and to its people, making this town like Topheth:

耶路撒冷的房屋和犹大君王的宫殿是已经被玷污的，就是他们在其上向天上的万象烧香，向别神浇奠祭的宫殿房屋，都必与陀斐特一样。
And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, which they have made unclean, will be like the place of Topheth, even all the houses on whose roofs perfumes have been burned to all the army of heaven, and drink offerings drained out to other gods.

耶利米从陀斐特就是耶和华差他去说预言的地方回来，站在耶和华殿的院中，对众人说，
Then Jeremiah came from Topheth, where the Lord had sent him to give the prophet's word; and he took his place in the open square of the Lord's house, and said to all the people,

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必使我所说的一切灾祸临到这城和属城的一切城邑，因为他们硬着颈项不听我的话。
The Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, I will send on this town and on all her towns all the evil which I have said; because they made their necks stiff, so that they might not give ear to my words.

祭司音麦的儿子巴施户珥作耶和华殿的总管，听见耶利米预言这些事，
Now it came to the ears of Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, who was chief in authority in the house of the Lord, that Jeremiah was saying these things;

他就打先知耶利米，用耶和华殿里便雅悯高门内的枷，将他枷在那里。
And Pashhur gave blows to Jeremiah and had his feet chained in a framework of wood in the higher doorway of Benjamin, which was in the house of the Lord.

次日，巴施户珥将耶利米开枷释放。于是耶利米对他说，耶和华不是叫你的名为巴施户珥，乃是叫你玛歌珥米撒毕（就是四面惊吓的意思）。
Then on the day after, Pashhur let Jeremiah loose. Then Jeremiah said to him, The Lord has given you the name of Magor-missabib (Cause-of-fear-on-every-side), not Pashhur.

因耶和华如此说，我必使你自觉惊吓，你也必使众朋友惊吓。他们必倒在仇敌的刀下，你也必亲眼看见。我必将犹大人全交在巴比伦王的手中，他要将他们掳到巴比伦去，也要用刀将他们杀戮。
For the Lord has said, See, I will make you a cause of fear to yourself and to all your friends: they will come to their death by the sword of their haters, and your eyes will see it: and I will give all Judah into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he will take them away prisoners into Babylon and put them to the sword.

并且我要将这城中的一切货财和劳碌得来的，并一切珍宝，以及犹大君王所有的宝物，都交在他们仇敌的手中。仇敌要当作掠物带到巴比伦去。
And more than this, I will give all the wealth of this town and all its profits and all its things of value, even all the stores of the kings of Judah will I give into the hands of their haters, who will put violent hands on them and take them away to Babylon.

你这巴施户珥和一切住在你家中的人都必被掳去。你和你的众朋友，就是你向他们说假预言的，都必到巴比伦去，要死在那里，葬在那里。
And you, Pashhur, and all who are in your house, will go away prisoners: you will come to Babylon, and there your body will be put to rest, you and all your friends, to whom you said false words.

耶和华阿，你曾劝导我，我也听了你的劝导。你比我有力量，且胜了我。我终日成为笑话，人人都戏弄我。
O Lord, you have been false to me, and I was tricked; you are stronger than I, and have overcome me: I have become a thing to be laughed at all the day, everyone makes sport of me.

我每逢讲论的时候，就发出哀声，我喊叫说，有强暴和毁灭。因为耶和华的话终日成了我的凌辱，讥刺。
For every word I say is a cry for help; I say with a loud voice, Violent behaviour and wasting: because the word of the Lord is made a shame to me and a cause of laughing all the day.

我若说，我不再提耶和华，也不再奉他的名讲论，我便心里觉得似乎有烧着的火闭塞在我骨中，我就含忍不住，不能自禁。
And if I say, I will not keep him in mind, I will not say another word in his name; then it is in my heart like a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I am tired of keeping myself in, I am not able to do it.

我听见了许多人的谗谤，四围都是惊吓。就是我知己的朋友也都窥探我，愿我跌倒，说，告他吧，我们也要告他。或者他被引诱，我们就能胜他，在他身上报仇。
For numbers of them say evil secretly in my hearing (there is fear on every side): they say, Come, let us give witness against him; all my nearest friends, who are watching for my fall, say, It may be that he will be taken by deceit, and we will get the better of him and give him punishment.

然而，耶和华与我同在，好像甚可怕的勇士。因此，逼迫我的必都绊跌，不能得胜。他们必大大蒙羞，就是受永不忘记的羞辱，因为他们行事没有智慧。
But the Lord is with me as a great one, greatly to be feared: so my attackers will have a fall, and they will not overcome me: they will be greatly shamed, because they have not done wisely, even with an unending shame, kept in memory for ever.

试验义人，察看人肺腑心肠的万军之耶和华阿，求你容我见你在他们身上报仇，因我将我的案件向你禀明了。
But, O Lord of armies, testing the upright and seeing the thoughts and the heart, let me see your punishment come on them; for I have put my cause before you.

你们要向耶和华唱歌。赞美耶和华。因他救了穷人的性命脱离恶人的手。
Make melody to the Lord, give praise to the Lord: for he has made the soul of the poor man free from the hands of the evil-doers.

愿我生的那日受咒诅。愿我母亲产我的那日不蒙福。
A curse on the day of my birth: let there be no blessing on the day when my mother had me.

给我父亲报信说你得了儿子，使我父亲甚欢喜的，愿那人受咒诅。
A curse on the man who gave the news to my father, saying, You have a male child; making him very glad.

愿那人像耶和华所倾覆而不后悔的城邑。愿他早晨听见哀声，晌午听见呐喊。
May that man be like the towns overturned by the Lord without mercy: let a cry for help come to his ears in the morning, and the sound of war in the middle of the day;

因他在我未出胎的时候不杀我，使我母亲成了我的坟墓，胎就时常重大。
Because he did not put me to death before my birth took place: so my mother's body would have been my last resting-place, and she would have been with child for ever.

我为何出胎见劳碌愁苦，使我的年日因羞愧消灭呢？
Why did I come from my mother's body to see pain and sorrow, so that my days might be wasted with shame?

耶和华的话临到耶利米。那时，西底家王打发玛基雅的儿子巴施户珥，和玛西雅的儿子祭司西番雅，去见耶利米，说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, when King Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur, the son of Malchiah, and Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

请你为我们求问耶和华。因为巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒来攻击我们，或者耶和华照他一切奇妙的作为待我们，使巴比伦王离开我们上去。
Will you get directions from the Lord for us; for Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, is making war against us; it may be that the Lord will do something for us like all the wonders he has done, and make him go away from us.

耶利米对他们说，你们当对西底家这样说，
Then Jeremiah said to them, This is what you are to say to Zedekiah:

耶和华以色列的神如此说，我要使你们手中的兵器，就是你们在城外与巴比伦王和围困你们的迦勒底人打仗的兵器翻转过来，又要使这些都聚集在这城中。
The Lord God of Israel has said, See, I am turning back the instruments of war in your hands, with which you are fighting against the king of Babylon and the Chaldaeans, who are outside the walls and shutting you in; and I will get them together inside this town.

并且我要在怒气，忿怒，和大恼恨中，用伸出来的手，并大能的膀臂，亲自攻击你们。
And I myself will be fighting against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even with angry feeling and passion and in great wrath.

又要击打这城的居民，连人带牲畜都必遭遇大瘟疫死亡。
And I will send a great disease on the people living in this town, on man and on beast, causing their death.

以后我要将犹大王西底家和他的臣仆百姓，就是在城内，从瘟疫，刀剑，饥荒中剩下的人，都交在巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手中和他们仇敌，并寻索其命的人手中。巴比伦王必用刀击杀他们，不顾惜，不可怜，不怜悯。这是耶和华说的。
And after that, says the Lord, I will give up Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his servants and his people, even those in the town who have not come to their end from the disease and the sword and from need of food, into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and into the hands of their haters, and into the hands of those desiring their death: he will put them to the sword; he will not let anyone get away, he will have no pity or mercy.

你要对这百姓说，耶和华如此说，看哪，我将生命的路和死亡的路摆在你们面前。
And to this people you are to say, The Lord has said, See, I put before you the way of life and the way of death.

住在这城里的必遭刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫而死。但出去归降围困你们迦勒底人的必得存活，要以自己的命为掠物。
He who keeps in this town will come to his death by the sword and through need of food and through disease; but he who goes out and gives himself up to the Chaldaeans who are shutting you in, will go on living, and will keep his life safe.

耶和华说，我向这城变脸，降祸不降福。这城必交在巴比伦王的手中，他必用火焚烧。
For my face is turned to this town for evil and not for good, says the Lord: it will be given into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he will have it burned with fire.

至于犹大王的家，你们当听耶和华的话。
About the family of the king of Judah. Give ear to the word of the Lord;

大卫家阿，耶和华如此说，你们每早晨要施行公平，拯救被抢夺的脱离欺压人的手，恐怕我的忿怒因你们的恶行发作，如火着起，甚至无人能以熄灭。
O family of David, this is what the Lord has said: Do what is right in the morning, and make free from the hands of the cruel one him whose goods have been violently taken away, or my wrath will go out like fire, burning so that no one may put it out, because of the evil of your doings.

耶和华说，住山谷和平原磐石上的居民，你们说，谁能下来攻击我们。谁能进入我们的住处呢？看哪，我与你们为敌。
See, I am against you, you who are living on the rock of the valley, says the Lord; you who say, Who will come down against us? or who will get into our houses?

耶和华又说，我必按你们作事的结果刑罚你们。我也必使火在耶路撒冷的林中着起，将她四围所有的尽行烧灭。
I will send punishment on you in keeping with the fruit of your doings, says the Lord: and I will put a fire in her woodlands, burning up everything round about her.

耶和华如此说，你下到犹大王的宫中，在那里说这话，
This is what the Lord has said: Go down to the house of the king of Judah and there give him this word,

说，坐大卫宝座的犹大王阿，你和你的臣仆，并进入城门的百姓，都当听耶和华的话。
And say, Give ear to the word of the Lord, O king of Judah, seated on the seat of David, you and your servants and your people who come in by these doors.

耶和华如此说，你们要施行公平和公义，拯救被抢夺的脱离欺压人的手，不可亏负寄居的和孤儿寡妇，不可以强暴待他们，在这地方也不可流无辜人的血。
This is what the Lord has said: Do what is right, judging uprightly, and make free from the hands of the cruel one him whose goods have been violently taken away: do no wrong and be not violent to the man from a strange country and the child without a father and the widow, and let not those who have done no wrong be put to death in this place.

你们若认真行这事，就必有坐大卫宝座的君王和他的臣仆百姓，或坐车或骑马，从这城的各门进入。
For if you truly do this, then there will come in through the doors of this house kings seated on the seat of David, going in carriages and on horseback, he and his servants and his people

你们若不听这些话，耶和华说，我指着自己起誓，这城必变为荒场。
But if you do not give ear to these words, I give you my oath by myself, says the Lord, that this house will become a waste.

耶和华论到犹大王的家如此说，我看你如基列，如利巴嫩顶。然而，我必使你变为旷野，为无人居住的城邑。
For this is what the Lord has said about the family of the king of Judah: You are Gilead to me, and the top of Lebanon: but, truly, I will make you waste, with towns unpeopled.

我要预备行毁灭的人，各拿器械攻击你。他们要砍下你佳美的香柏树，扔在火中。
And I will make ready those who will send destruction on you, everyone armed for war: by them your best cedar-trees will be cut down and put in the fire.

许多国的民要经过这城，各人对邻舍说，耶和华为何向这大城如此行呢？
And nations from all sides will go past this town, and every man will say to his neighbour, Why has the Lord done such things to this great town?

他们必回答说，是因离弃了耶和华他们神的约，事奉敬拜别神。
And they will say, Because they gave up the agreement of the Lord their God, and became worshippers and servants of other gods.

不要为死人哭号。不要为他悲伤，却要为离家出外的人大大哭号。因为他不得再回来，也不得再见他的本国。
Let there be no weeping for the dead, and make no songs of grief for him: but make bitter weeping for him who has gone away, for he will never come back or see again the country of his birth.

因为耶和华论到从这地方出去的犹大王约西亚的儿子沙龙（列王下二十三章三十节名约哈斯），就是接续他父亲约西亚作王的，这样说，他必不得再回到这里来，
For this is what the Lord has said about Shallum, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who became king in place of Josiah his father, who went out from this place: He will never come back there again:

却要死在被掳去的地方，必不得再见这地。
But death will come to him in the place where they have taken him away prisoner, and he will never see this land again.

那行不义盖房，行不公造楼，白白使用人的手工不给工价的有祸了。
A curse is on him who is building his house by wrongdoing, and his rooms by doing what is not right; who makes use of his neighbour without payment, and gives him nothing for his work;

他说，我要为自己盖广大的房，宽敞的楼，为自己开窗户。这楼房的护墙板是香柏木的，楼房是丹色油漆的。
Who says, I will make a wide house for myself, and rooms of great size, and has windows cut out, and has it roofed with cedar and painted with bright red.

难道你作王是在乎造香柏木楼房争胜吗？你的父亲岂不是也吃也喝，也施行公平和公义吗？那时他得了福乐。
Are you to be a king because you make more use of cedar than your father? did not your father take food and drink and do right, judging in righteousness, and then it was well for him?

他为困苦和穷乏人伸冤，那时就得了福乐。认识我不在乎此吗？这是耶和华说的。
He was judge in the cause of the poor and those in need; then it was well. Was not this to have knowledge of me? says the Lord.

惟有你的眼和你的心专顾贪婪，流无辜人的血，行欺压和强暴。
But your eyes and your heart are fixed only on profit for yourself, on causing the death of him who has done no wrong, and on violent and cruel acts.

所以，耶和华论到犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬如此说，人必不为他举哀，说，哀哉。我的哥哥。或说，哀哉。我的姐姐。也不为他举哀，说，哀哉。我的主。或说，哀哉。我主的荣华。
So this is what the Lord has said about Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah: They will make no weeping for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they will make no weeping for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!

他被埋葬，好像埋驴一样，要拉出去扔在耶路撒冷的城门之外。
They will do to him what they do to the dead body of an ass; his body will be pulled out and placed on the earth outside the doors of Jerusalem.

你要上利巴嫩哀号，在巴珊扬声，从亚巴琳哀号，因为你所亲爱的都毁灭了。
Go up to Lebanon and give a cry; let your voice be loud in Bashan, crying out from Abarim; for all your lovers have come to destruction

你兴盛的时候，我对你说话。你却说，我不听。你自幼年以来总是这样，不听从我的话。
My word came to you in the time of your well-being; but you said, I will not give ear. This has been your way from your earliest years, you did not give attention to my voice.

你的牧人要被风吞吃，你所亲爱的必被掳去。那时你必因你一切的恶抱愧蒙羞。
All the keepers of your sheep will be food for the wind, and your lovers will be taken away prisoners: truly, then you will be shamed and unhonoured because of all your evil-doing.

你这住利巴嫩，在香柏树上搭窝的，有痛苦临到你，好像疼痛临到产难的妇人，那时你何等可怜。
O you who are living in Lebanon, making your living-place in the cedars, how greatly to be pitied will you be when pains come on you, as on a woman in childbirth!

耶和华说，犹大王约雅敬的儿子哥尼雅（又名耶哥尼雅下同），虽是我右手上带印的戒指，我凭我的永生起誓，也必将你从其上摘下来，
By my life, says the Lord, even if Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, was the ring on my right hand, even from there I would have you pulled off;

并且我必将你交给寻索你命的人和你所惧怕的人手中，就是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒和迦勒底人的手中。
And I will give you into the hands of those desiring your death, and into the hands of those whom you are fearing, even into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and into the hands of the Chaldaeans.

我也必将你和生你的母亲赶到别国，并不是你们生的地方。你们必死在那里，
I will send you out, and your mother who gave you birth, into another country not the land of your birth; and there death will come to you.

但心中甚想归回之地，必不得归回。
But to the land on which their soul's desire is fixed, they will never come back.

哥尼雅这人是被轻看，破坏的器皿吗？是无人喜爱的器皿吗？他和他的后裔为何被赶到不认识之地呢？
Is this man Coniah a broken vessel of no value? is he a vessel in which there is no pleasure? why are they violently sent out, he and his seed, into a land which is strange to them?

地阿，地阿，地阿，当听耶和华的话。
O earth, earth, earth, give ear to the word of the Lord!

耶和华如此说，要写明这人算为无子，是平生不得亨通的。因为他后裔中再无一人得亨通，能坐在大卫的宝座上治理犹大。
The Lord has said, Let this man be recorded as having no children, a man who will not do well in all his life: for no man of his seed will do well, seated on the seat of the kingdom of David and ruling again in Judah.

耶和华说，那些残害，赶散我草场之羊的牧人有祸了。
A curse is on the keepers who are causing the destruction and loss of the sheep of my field, says the Lord.

耶和华以色列的神斥责那些牧养他百姓的牧人，如此说，你们赶散我的羊群，并没有看顾他们。我必讨你们这行恶的罪。这是耶和华说的。
So this is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said against the keepers who have the care of my people: You have let my flock be broken up, driving them away and not caring for them; see, I will send on you the punishment for the evil of your doings, says the Lord.

我要将我羊群中所余剩的，从我赶他们到的各国内招聚出来，领他们归回本圈。他们也必生养众多。
And I will get the rest of my flock together from all the countries where I have sent them, and will make them come back again to their resting-place; and they will have offspring and be increased.

我必设立照管他们的牧人，牧养他们。他们不再惧怕，不再惊惶，也不缺少一个。这是耶和华说的。
And I will put over them keepers who will take care of them: never again will they be overcome with fear or be troubled, and there will not be the loss of one of them, says the Lord.

耶和华说，日子将到，我要给大卫兴起一个公义的苗裔。他必掌王权，行事有智慧，在地上施行公平和公义。
See, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will give to David a true Branch, and he will be ruling as king, acting wisely, doing what is right, and judging uprightly in the land.

在他的日子，犹大必得救，以色列也安然居住。他的名必称为耶和华我们的义。
In his days Judah will have salvation and Israel will be living without fear: and this is the name by which he will be named, The Lord is our righteousness.

耶和华说，日子将到，人必不再指着那领以色列人从埃及地上来永生的耶和华起誓，
And so, truly, the days are coming when they will say no longer, By the living Lord, who took the children of Israel up out of the land of Egypt;

却要指着那领以色列家的后裔从北方和赶他们到的各国中上来，永生的耶和华起誓。他们必住在本地。
But, By the living Lord, who took up the seed of Israel, and made them come out of the north country, and from all the countries where I had sent them; and they will be living in the land which is theirs.

论到那些先知，我心在我里面忧伤，我骨头都发颤。因耶和华和他的圣言，我像醉酒的人，像被酒所胜的人。
About the prophets. My heart is broken in me, all my bones are shaking; I am like a man full of strong drink, like a man overcome by wine; because of the Lord, and because of his holy words.

地满了行淫的人。因妄自赌咒，地就悲哀。旷野的草场都枯干了。他们所行的道乃是恶的。他们的勇力使得不正。
For the land is full of men who are untrue to their wives; because of the curse the land is full of grief; the green fields of the waste land have become dry; and they are quick to do evil, their strength is for what is not right.

连先知带祭司都是亵渎的，就是在我殿中我也看见他们的恶。这是耶和华说的。
For the prophet as well as the priest is unclean; even in my house I have seen their evil-doing, says the Lord.

因此，他们的道路必像黑暗中的滑地，他们必被追赶，在这路中仆倒。因为当追讨之年，我必使灾祸临到他们。这是耶和华说的。
For this cause their steps will be slipping on their way: they will be forced on into the dark and have a fall there: for I will send evil on them in the year of their punishment, says the Lord.

我在撒玛利亚的先知中曾见愚妄。他们借巴力说预言，使我的百姓以色列走错了路。
And I have seen ways without sense in the prophets of Samaria; they became prophets of the Baal, causing my people Israel to go wrong.

我在耶路撒冷的先知中曾见可憎恶的事。他们行奸淫，作事虚妄，又坚固恶人的手，甚至无人回头离开他的恶。他们在我面前都像所多玛。耶路撒冷的居民都像蛾摩拉。
And in the prophets of Jerusalem I have seen a shocking thing; they are untrue to their wives, walking in deceit, and they make strong the hands of evil-doers, so that a man may not be turned back from his evil-doing: they have all become like Sodom to me, and its people like Gomorrah.

所以万军之耶和华论到先知如此说，我必将茵陈给他们吃，又将苦胆水给他们喝。因为亵渎的事出于耶路撒冷的先知，流行遍地。
So this is what the Lord of armies has said about the prophets: See, I will give them a bitter plant for their food, and bitter water for their drink: for from the prophets of Jerusalem unclean behaviour has gone out into all the land.

万军之耶和华如此说，这些先知向你们说预言，你们不要听他们的话。他们以虚空教训你们，所说的异象是出于自己的心，不是出于耶和华的口。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Do not give ear to the words which the prophets say to you: they give you teaching of no value: it is from themselves that their vision comes, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.

他们常对藐视我的人说，耶和华说，你们必享平安。又对一切按自己顽梗之心而行的人说，必没有灾祸临到你们。
They keep on saying to those who have no respect for the word of the Lord, You will have peace; and to everyone who goes on his way in the pride of his heart, they say, No evil will come to you.

有谁站在耶和华的会中得以听见并会悟他的话呢？有谁留心听他的话呢？
For which of them has knowledge of the secret of the Lord, and has seen him, and given ear to his word? which of them has taken note of his word and given attention to it?

看哪。耶和华的忿怒好像暴风，已经发出。是暴烈的旋风，必转到恶人的头上。
See, the storm-wind of the Lord, even the heat of his wrath, has gone out, a rolling storm, bursting on the heads of the evil-doers.

耶和华的怒气必不转消，直到他心中所拟定的成就了。末后的日子你们要全然明白。
The wrath of the Lord will not be turned back till he has done, till he has put into effect, the purposes of his heart: in days to come you will have full knowledge of this.

我没有打发那些先知，他们竟自奔跑。我没有对他们说话，他们竟自预言。
I did not send these prophets, but they went running: I said nothing to them, but they gave out the prophet's word.

他们若是站在我的会中，就必使我的百姓听我的话，又使他们回头离开恶道和他们所行的恶。
But if they had been in my secret, then they would have made my people give ear to my words, turning them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

耶和华说，我岂为近处的神呢？不也为远处的神吗？
Am I only a God who is near, says the Lord, and not a God at a distance?

耶和华说，人岂能在隐密处藏身，使我看不见他呢？耶和华说，我岂不充满天地吗？
In what secret place may a man take cover without my seeing him? says the Lord. Is there any place in heaven or earth where I am not? says the Lord.

我已听见那些先知所说的，就是托我名说的假预言，他们说，我作了梦。我作了梦。
My ears have been open to what the prophets have said, who say false words in my name, saying, I have had a dream, I have had a dream, I have had a dream,

说假预言的先知，就是预言本心诡诈的先知，他们这样存心要到几时呢？
Is (my word) in the hearts of the prophets who give out false words, even the prophets of the deceit of their hearts?

他们各人将所作的梦对邻舍述说，想要使我的百姓忘记我的名，正如他们列祖因巴力忘记我的名一样。
Whose purpose is to take away the memory of my name from my people by their dreams, of which every man is talking to his neighbour, as their fathers gave up the memory of my name for the Baal.

得梦的先知可以述说那梦。得我话的人可以诚实讲说我的话。糠秕怎能与麦子比较呢？这是耶和华说的。
If a prophet has a dream, let him give out his dream; and he who has my word, let him give out my word in good faith. What has the dry stem to do with the grain? says the Lord.

耶和华说，我的话岂不像火，又像能打碎磐石的大锤吗？
Is not my word like fire? says the Lord; and like a hammer, smashing the rock to bits?

耶和华说，那些先知各从邻舍偷窃我的言语，因此我必与他们反对。
For this cause I am against the prophets, says the Lord, who take my words, every one from his neighbour.

耶和华说，那些先知用舌头，说是耶和华说的。我必与他们反对。
See, I am against the prophets, says the Lord, who let their tongues say, He has said.

耶和华说，那些以幻梦为预言，又述说这梦，以谎言和矜夸使我百姓走错了路的，我必与他们反对。我没有打发他们，也没有吩咐他们。他们与这百姓毫无益处。这是耶和华说的。
See, I am against the prophets of false dreams, says the Lord, who give them out and make my people go out of the way by their deceit and their uncontrolled words: but I did not send them or give them orders; and they will be of no profit to this people, says the Lord.

无论是百姓，是先知，是祭司，问你说，耶和华有什么默示呢？你就对他们说，什么默示阿。耶和华说，我要撇弃你们。
And if this people, or the prophet, or a priest, questioning you, says, What word of weight is there from the Lord? then you are to say to them, You are the word, for I will not be troubled with you any more, says the Lord.

无论是先知，是祭司，是百姓，说耶和华的默示，我必刑罚那人和他的家。
And as for the prophet and the priest and the people who say, A word of weight from the Lord! I will send punishment on that man and on his house.

你们各人要对邻舍，各人要对弟兄如此说，耶和华回答什么？耶和华说了什么呢？
But this is what you are to say, every man to his neighbour and every man to his brother, What answer has the Lord given? and, What has the Lord said?

耶和华的默示你们不可再提，各人所说的话必作自己的重担（重担和默示原文同），因为你们谬用永生神，万军之耶和华我们神的言语。
And you will no longer put people in mind of the word of weight of the Lord: for every man's word will be a weight on himself; for the words of the living God, of the Lord of armies, our God, have been twisted by you.

你们要对先知如此说，耶和华回答你什么。耶和华说了什么呢？
This is what you are to say to the prophet, What answer has the Lord given to you? and, What has the Lord said?

你们若说耶和华的默示，耶和华就如此说，因你们说耶和华的默示这句话，我也打发人到你们那里去，告诉你们不可说耶和华的默示。
But if you say, The word of weight of the Lord; this is what the Lord has said: Because you say, The weight of the Lord, and I have sent to you, saying, You are not to say, The weight of the Lord;

所以我必全然忘记你们，将你们和我所赐给你们并你们列祖的城撇弃了。
For this reason, truly, I will put you completely out of my memory, and I will put you, and the town which I gave to you and to your fathers, away from before my face:

又必使永远的凌辱和长久的羞耻临到你们，是不能忘记的。
And I will give you a name without honour for ever, and unending shame which will never go from the memory of men.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒将犹大王约雅敬的儿子耶哥尼雅和犹大的首领，并工匠，铁匠从耶路撒冷掳去，带到巴比伦。这事以后，耶和华指给我看，有两筐无花果放在耶和华的殿前。
The Lord gave me a vision, and I saw two baskets full of figs put in front of the Temple of the Lord, after Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, had taken prisoner Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the chiefs of Judah, and the expert workmen and metal-workers from Jerusalem, and had taken them to Babylon.

一筐是极好的无花果，好像是初熟的。一筐是极坏的无花果，坏得不可吃。
One basket had very good figs, like the figs which first come to growth: and the other basket had very bad figs, so bad that they were of no use for food.

于是耶和华问我说，耶利米你看见什么。我说，我看见无花果，好的极好，坏的极坏，坏得不可吃。
Then the Lord said to me, What do you see, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs; the good figs are very good, and the bad very bad, and of no use for food, they are so bad.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

耶和华以色列的神如此说，被掳去的犹大人，就是我打发离开这地到迦勒底人之地去的，我必看顾他们如这好无花果，使他们得好处。
This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said: Like these good figs, so in my eyes will be the prisoners of Judah, whom I have sent from this place into the land of the Chaldaeans for their good.

我要眷顾他们，使他们得好处，领他们归回这地。我也要建立他们，必不拆毁，栽植他们，并不拔出。
For I will keep my eyes on them for good, and I will take them back again to this land, building them up and not pulling them down, planting them and not uprooting them.

我要赐他们认识我的心，知道我是耶和华。他们要作我的子民，我要作他们的神，因为他们要一心归向我。
And I will give them a heart to have knowledge of me, that I am the Lord: and they will be my people, and I will be their God: for they will come back to me with all their heart.

耶和华如此说，我必将犹大王西底家和他的首领，以及剩在这地耶路撒冷的余民，并住在埃及地的犹大人都交出来，好像那极坏，坏得不可吃的无花果。
And like the bad figs which are so bad that they are of no use for food, so I will give up Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his chiefs and the rest of Jerusalem who are still in this land, and those who are in the land of Egypt:

我必使他们交出来，在天下万国中抛来抛去，遭遇灾祸。在我赶逐他们到的各处成为凌辱，笑谈，讥刺，咒诅。
I will give them up to be a cause of fear and of trouble among all the kingdoms of the earth; to be a name of shame and common talk and a cutting word and a curse in all the places wherever I will send them wandering.

我必使刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫临到他们，直到他们从我所赐给他们和他们列祖之地灭绝。
And I will send the sword, and need of food, and disease, among them till they are all cut off from the land which I gave to them and to their fathers.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬第四年，就是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的元年，耶和华论犹大众民的话临到耶利米。
The word which came to Jeremiah about all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah king of Judah; this was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon.

先知耶利米就将这话对犹大众人和耶路撒冷的一切居民说，
This word Jeremiah gave out to all the people of Judah and to those living in Jerusalem, saying,

从犹大王亚们的儿子约西亚十三年直到今日，这二十三年之内，常有耶和华的话临到我。我也对你们传说，就是从早起来传说，只是你们没有听从。
From the thirteenth year of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah, even till this day, for twenty-three years, the word of the Lord has been coming to me, and I have given it to you, getting up early and talking to you; but you have not given ear.

耶和华也从早起来，差遣他的仆人众先知到你们这里来（只是你们没有听从，也没有侧耳而听），
And the Lord has sent to you all his servants the prophets, getting up early and sending them; but you have not given attention and your ear has not been open to give hearing;

说，你们各人当回头，离开恶道和所作的恶，便可居住耶和华古时所赐给你们和你们列祖之地，直到永远。
Saying, Come back now, everyone from his evil way and from the evil of your doings, and keep your place in the land which the Lord has given to you and to your fathers, from times long past even for ever:

不可随从别神事奉敬拜，以你们手所作的惹我发怒。这样，我就不加害与你们。
Do not go after other gods to be their servants and to give them worship, and do not make me angry with the work of your hands, causing evil to yourselves.

然而你们没有听从我，竟以手所作的惹我发怒，陷害自己。这是耶和华说的。
But you have not given ear to me, says the Lord; so that you have made me angry with the work of your hands, causing evil to yourselves.

所以万军之耶和华如此说，因为你们没有听从我的话，
So this is what the Lord of armies has said: Because you have not given ear to my words,

我必召北方的众族和我仆人巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒来攻击这地和这地的居民，并四围一切的国民。我要将他们尽行灭绝，以致他们令人惊骇，嗤笑，并且永久荒凉。这是耶和华说的。
See, I will send and take all the families of the north, says the Lord, and Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, my servant, and make them come against this land, and against its people, and against all these nations on every side; and I will give them up to complete destruction, and make them a cause of fear and surprise and a waste place for ever.

我又要使欢喜和快乐的声音，新郎和新妇的声音，推磨的声音和灯的亮光，从他们中间止息。
And more than this, I will take from them the sound of laughing voices, the voice of joy, the voice of the newly-married man, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the stones crushing the grain, and the shining of lights.

这全地必然荒凉，令人惊骇。这些国民要服事巴比伦王七十年。
All this land will be a waste and a cause of wonder; and these nations will be the servants of the king of Babylon for seventy years.

七十年满了以后，我必刑罚巴比伦王和那国民，并迦勒底人之地，因他们的罪孽使那地永远荒凉。这是耶和华说的。
And it will come about, after seventy years are ended, that I will send punishment on the king of Babylon, and on that nation, says the Lord, for their evil-doing, and on the land of the Chaldaeans; and I will make it a waste for ever.

我也必使我向那地所说的话，就是记在这书上的话，是耶利米向这些国民说的预言，都临到那地。
And I will make that land undergo everything I have said against it, even everything recorded in this book, which Jeremiah the prophet has said against all the nations.

因为有多国和大君王必使迦勒底人作奴仆。我也必照他们的行为，按他们手所作的报应他们。
For a number of nations and great kings will make servants of them, even of them: and I will give them the reward of their acts, even the reward of the work of their hands.

耶和华以色列的神对我如此说，你从我手中接这杯忿怒的酒，使我所差遣你去的各国的民喝。
For this is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said to me: Take the cup of the wine of this wrath from my hand, and make all the nations to whom I send you take of it.

他们喝了就要东倒西歪，并要发狂，因我使刀剑临到他们中间。
And after drinking it, they will go rolling from side to side, and be off their heads, because of the sword which I will send among them.

我就从耶和华的手中接了这杯，给耶和华所差遣我去的各国的民喝，
Then I took the cup from the Lord's hand, and gave a drink from it to all the nations to whom the Lord sent me;

就是耶路撒冷和犹大的城邑，并耶路撒冷的君王与首领，使这城邑荒凉，令人惊骇，嗤笑，咒诅，正如今日一样。
Jerusalem and the towns of Judah and their kings and their princes, to make them a waste place, a cause of fear and surprise and a curse, as it is this day;

又有埃及王法老和他的臣仆，首领，以及他的众民，
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and his servants and his princes and all his people;

并杂族的人民和乌斯地的诸王，与非利士地的诸王，亚实基伦，迦萨，以革伦，以及亚实突剩下的人。
And all the mixed people and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon and Gaza and Ekron and the rest of Ashdod;

以东，摩押，亚扪人，
Edom and Moab and the children of Ammon,

推罗的诸王，西顿的诸王，海岛的诸王，
And all the kings of Tyre, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the lands across the sea;

底但，提玛，布斯，和一切剃周围头发的。
Dedan and Tema and Buz, and all who have the ends of their hair cut;

亚拉伯的诸王，住旷野杂族人民的诸王，
And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mixed people living in the waste land;

心利的诸王，以拦的诸王，玛代的诸王，
And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes;

北方远近的诸王，以及天下地上的万国喝了，以后示沙克（就是巴比伦）王也要喝。
And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the world on the face of the earth.

你要对他们说，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们要喝，且要喝醉，要呕吐，且要跌倒，不得再起来，都因我使刀剑临到你们中间。
And you are to say to them, This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Take of this cup and be overcome, and let it come out again from your lips, and from your fall you will never be lifted up again, because of the sword which I will send among you.

他们若不肯从你手接这杯喝，你就要对他们说，万军之耶和华如此说，你们一定要喝。
And it will be, if they will not take of the cup in your hand, then you are to say to them, This is what the Lord of armies has said: You will certainly take of it.

我既从称为我名下的城起首施行灾祸，你们能尽免刑罚吗？你们必不能免，因为我要命刀剑临到地上一切的居民。这是万军之耶和华说的。
For see, I am starting to send evil on the town which is named by my name, and are you to be without any punishment? You will not be without punishment: for I will send a sword on all people living on the earth, says the Lord of armies.

所以你要向他们预言这一切的话，攻击他们，说，耶和华必从高天吼叫，从圣所发声，向自己的羊群大声吼叫。他要向地上一切的居民呐喊，像踹葡萄的一样。
So, as a prophet, give out these words among them, and say to them, The voice of the Lord will be sounding like a lion from on high; he will send out his voice from his holy place, like the loud voice of a lion, against his flock; he will give a cry, like those who are crushing the grapes, against all the people of the earth.

必有响声达到地极，因为耶和华与列国相争。凡有血气的，他必审问。至于恶人，他必交给刀剑。这是耶和华说的。
A noise will come, even to the end of the earth; for the Lord has a cause against the nations, he will give his decision against all flesh; as for the evil-doers, he will give them to the sword, says the Lord.

万军之耶和华如此说，看哪，必有灾祸从这国发到那国，并有大暴风从地极刮起。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: See, evil is going out from nation to nation, and a great storm will come up from the inmost parts of the earth.

到那日，从地这边直到地那边都有耶和华所杀戮的。必无人哀哭，不得收殓，不得葬埋，必在地上成为粪土。
And at that day, the bodies of those whom the Lord has put to death will be seen from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth: there will be no weeping for them, their bodies will not be taken up or put to rest in the earth; they will be like waste on the face of the land.

牧人哪，你们当哀号，呼喊。群众的头目阿，你们要滚在灰中，因为你们被杀戮分散的日子足足来到。你们要跌碎，好像美器打碎一样。
Give cries of grief, you keepers of sheep; give cries for help, rolling yourselves in the dust, you chiefs of the flock: for the days of your destruction have fully come, and I will send you in all directions, and your fall will be like that of the males of the flock.

牧人无路逃跑。群众的头目也无法逃脱。
There will be no way of flight for the keepers of sheep, no road for the chiefs of the flock to get away safely.

听阿，有牧人呼喊，有群众头目哀号的声音，因为耶和华使他们的草场变为荒场。
A sound of the cry of the keepers of sheep, and the bitter crying of the chiefs of the flock! for the Lord has made waste their green fields.

耶和华发出猛烈的怒气，平安的羊圈就都寂静无声。
And there is no sound in the fields of peace, because of the burning wrath of the Lord.

他离了隐密处像狮子一样，他们的地，因刀剑凶猛的欺压，又因他猛烈的怒气都成为可惊骇的。
The lion has come out of his secret place, for the land has become a waste because of the cruel sword, and because of the heat of his wrath.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬登基的时候，有这话从耶和华临到耶利米说，
When Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, first became king, this word came from the Lord, saying,

耶和华如此说，你站在耶和华殿的院内，对犹大众城邑的人，就是到耶和华殿来礼拜的，说我所吩咐你的一切话，一字不可删减。
This is what the Lord has said: Take your place in the open square of the Lord's house and say to all the towns of Judah, who come into the Lord's house for worship, everything I give you orders to say to them: keep back not a word;

或者他们肯听从，各人回头离开恶道，使我后悔不将我因他们所行的恶，想要施行的灾祸降与他们。
It may be that they will give ear, and that every man will be turned from his evil way, so that my purpose of sending evil on them because of the evil of their doings may be changed.

你要对他们说，耶和华如此说，你们若不听从我，不遵行我设立在你们面前的律法，
And you are to say to them, This is what the Lord has said: If you do not give ear to me and go in the way of my law which I have put before you,

不听我从早起来差遣到你们那里去我仆人众先知的话（你们还是没有听从），
And give ear to the words of my servants the prophets whom I send to you, getting up early and sending them, though you gave no attention;

我就必使这殿如示罗，使这城为地上万国所咒诅的。
Then I will make this house like Shiloh, and will make this town a curse to all the nations of the earth.

耶利米在耶和华殿中说的这些话，祭司，先知与众民都听见了。
And in the hearing of the priests and the prophets and all the people, Jeremiah said these words in the house of the Lord.

耶利米说完了耶和华所吩咐他对众人说的一切话，祭司，先知与众民都来抓住他，说，你必要死。
Now, when Jeremiah had come to the end of saying everything the Lord had given him orders to say to all the people, the priests and the prophets and all the people took him by force, saying, Death will certainly be your fate.

你为何托耶和华的名预言，说这殿必如示罗，这城必变为荒场无人居住呢？于是众民都在耶和华的殿中聚集到耶利米那里。
Why have you said in the name of the Lord, This house will be like Shiloh, and this land a waste with no one living in it? And all the people had come together to Jeremiah in the house of the Lord.

犹大的首领听见这事，就从王宫上到耶和华的殿，坐在耶和华殿的新门口。
And the rulers of Judah, hearing of these things, came up from the king's house to the house of the Lord, and took their seats by the new door of the Lord's house.

祭司，先知对首领和众民说，这人是该死的。因为他说预言攻击这城，正如你们亲耳所听见的。
Then the priests and the prophets said to the rulers and to all the people, The right fate for this man is death; for he has said words against this town in your hearing.

耶利米就对众首领和众民说，耶和华差遣我预言，攻击这殿和这城，说你们所听见的这一切话。
Then Jeremiah said to all the rulers and to all the people, The Lord has sent me as his prophet to say against this house and against this town all the words which have come to your ears.

现在要改正你们的行动作为，听从耶和华你们神的话，他就必后悔，不将所说的灾祸降与你们。
So now, make a change for the better in your ways and your doings, and give ear to the voice of the Lord your God; then the Lord will let himself be turned from the decision he has made against you for evil.

至于我，我在你们手中，你们眼看何为善，何为正，就那样待我吧。
As for me, here I am in your hands: do with me whatever seems good and right in your opinion.

但你们要确实地知道，若把我治死，就使无辜人的血归到你们和这城，并其中的居民了。因为耶和华实在差遣我到你们这里来，将这一切话传与你们耳中。
Only be certain that, if you put me to death, you will make yourselves and your town and its people responsible for the blood of one who has done no wrong: for truly, the Lord has sent me to you to say all these words in your ears.

首领和众民就对祭司，先知说，这人是不该死的，因为他是奉耶和华我们神的名，向我们说话
Then the rulers and all the people said to the priests and the prophets, It is not right for this man to be put to death: for he has said words to us in the name of the Lord our God.

国中的长老就有几个人起来，对聚会的众民说，
Then some of the responsible men of the land got up and said to all the meeting of the people,

当犹大王希西家的日子，有摩利沙人弥迦对犹大众人预言说，万军之耶和华如此说，锡安必被耕种像一块田。耶路撒冷必变为乱堆。这殿的山必像丛林的高处。
Micah the Morashtite, who was a prophet in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, said to all the people of Judah, This is what the Lord of armies has said: Zion will become like a ploughed field, and Jerusalem will become a mass of broken walls, and the mountain of the house like the high places of the woodland.

犹大王希西家和犹大众人岂是把他治死呢？希西家岂不是敬畏耶和华，恳求他的恩吗？耶和华就后悔，不把自己所说的灾祸降与他们。若治死这人，我们就作了大恶，自害己命。
Did Hezekiah and all Judah put him to death? did he not in the fear of the Lord make prayer for the grace of the Lord, and the Lord let himself be turned from the decision he had made against them for evil? By this act we might do great evil against ourselves.

又有一个人奉耶和华的名说预言，是基列耶琳人示玛雅的儿子乌利亚，他照耶利米的一切话说预言，攻击这城和这地。
And there was another man who was a prophet of the Lord, Uriah, the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath-jearim; he said against this town and against this land all the words which Jeremiah had said:

约雅敬王和他众勇士，众首领听见了乌利亚的话，王就想要把他治死。乌利亚听见就惧怕，逃往埃及去了。
And when his words came to the ears of Jehoiakim the king and all his men of war and his captains, the king would have put him to death; but Uriah, hearing of it, was full of fear and went in flight into Egypt:

约雅敬王便打发亚革波的儿子以利拿单，带领几个人往埃及去。
And Jehoiakim the king sent Elnathan, the son of Achbor, and certain men with him, into Egypt.

他们就从埃及将乌利亚带出来，送到约雅敬王那里。王用刀杀了他，把他的尸首抛在平民的坟地中。
And they took Uriah out of Egypt and came back with him to Jehoiakim the king; who put him to death with the sword, and had his dead body put into the resting-place of the bodies of the common people.

然而，沙番的儿子亚希甘保护耶利米，不交在百姓的手中治死他。
But Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, gave Jeremiah his help, so that he was not given into the hands of the people to be put to death.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬（约雅敬是西底家的别名，看第三节）登基的时候，有这话从耶和华临到耶利米说，
When Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, first became king this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

耶和华对我如此说，你作绳索与轭，加在自己的颈项上，
This is what the Lord has said to me: Make for yourself bands and yokes and put them on your neck;

借那些来到耶路撒冷见犹大王西底家的使臣之手，把绳索与轭送到以东王，摩押王，亚扪王，推罗王，西顿王那里，
And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Zidon, by their servants who come to Jerusalem, to Zedekiah, king of Judah;

且嘱咐使臣，传与他们的主人说，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，
And give them orders to say to their masters, This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Say to your masters,

我用大能和伸出来的膀臂，创造大地和地上的人民，牲畜。我看给谁相宜，就把地给谁。
I have made the earth, and man and beast on the face of the earth, by my great power and by my outstretched arm; and I will give it to anyone at my pleasure.

现在我将这些地都交给我仆人巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手，我也将田野的走兽给他使用。
And now I have given all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant; and I have given the beasts of the field to him for his use.

列国都必服事他和他的儿孙，直到他本国遭报的日期来到。那时，多国和大君王要使他作他们的奴仆。
And all the nations will be servants to him and to his son and to his son's son, till the time comes for his land to be overcome: and then a number of nations and great kings will take it for their use.

无论哪一邦哪一国，不肯服事这巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒，也不把颈项放在巴比伦王的轭下，我必用刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫刑罚那邦，直到我借巴比伦王的手将他们毁灭。这是耶和华说的。
And it will come about, that if any nation does not become a servant to this same Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, and does not put its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, then I will send punishment on that nation, says the Lord, by the sword and need of food and by disease, till I have given them into his hands.

至于你们，不可听从你们的先知和占卜的，圆梦的，观兆的，以及行邪术的。他们告诉你们说，你们不至服事巴比伦王。
And you are not to give attention to your prophets or your readers of signs or your dreamers or those who see into the future or those who make use of secret arts, who say to you, You will not become servants of the king of Babylon:

他们向你们说假预言，要叫你们迁移，远离本地，以致我将你们赶出去，使你们灭亡。
For they say false words to you, so that you may be sent away far from your land, and so that you may be forced out by me and come to destruction.

但哪一邦肯把颈项放在巴比伦王的轭下服事他，我必使那邦仍在本地存留，得以耕种居住。这是耶和华说的。
But as for that nation which puts its neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and becomes his servant, I will let that nation keep on in its land, farming it and living in it, says the Lord.

我就照这一切的话对犹大王西底家说，要把你们的颈项放在巴比伦王的轭下，服事他和他的百姓，便得存活。
And I said all this to Zedekiah, king of Judah, saying, Put your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon and become his servants and his people, so that you may keep your lives.

你和你的百姓为何要因刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫死亡，正如耶和华论到不服事巴比伦王的那国说的话呢？
Why are you desiring death, you and your people, by the sword, and because food is gone, and by disease, as the Lord has said of the nation which does not become the servant of the king of Babylon?

不可听那些先知对你们所说的话。他们说，你们不至服事巴比伦王，其实他们向你们说假预言。
And you are not to give ear to the prophets who say to you, You will not become servants of the king of Babylon: for what they say is not true.

耶和华说，我并没有打发他们，他们却托我的名说假预言，好使我将你们和向你们说预言的那些先知赶出去，一同灭亡。
For I have not sent them, says the Lord, but they are saying what is false in my name, so that I might send you out by force, causing destruction to come on you and on your prophets.

我又对祭司和这众民说，耶和华如此说，你们不可听那先知对你们所说的预言。他们说，耶和华殿中的器皿快要从巴比伦带回来。其实他们向你们说假预言。
And I said to the priests and to all the people, This is what the Lord has said: Give no attention to the words of your prophets who say to you, See, in a very little time now the vessels of the Lord's house will come back again from Babylon: for what they say to you is false.

不可听从他们，只管服事巴比伦王便得存活。这城何至变为荒场呢？
Give no attention to them; become servants of the king of Babylon and keep yourselves from death: why let this town become a waste?

他们若果是先知，有耶和华的话临到他们，让他们祈求万军之耶和华，使那在耶和华殿中和犹大王宫内，并耶路撒冷剩下的器皿，不被带到巴比伦去。
But if they are prophets, and if the word of the Lord is with them, let them now make request to the Lord of armies that the vessels which are still in the house of the Lord and in the house of the king of Judah and at Jerusalem, may not go to Babylon.

因为万军之耶和华论到柱子，铜海，盆座，并剩在这城里的器皿，
For this is what the Lord has said about the rest of the vessels which are still in this town,

就是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒掳掠犹大王约雅敬的儿子耶哥尼雅，和犹大，耶路撒冷一切贵胄的时候所没有掠去的器皿。
Which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, did not take away, when he took Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, a prisoner from Jerusalem to Babylon, with all the great men of Judah and Jerusalem;

论到那在耶和华殿中和犹大王宫内，并耶路撒冷剩下的器皿，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，
For this is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said about the rest of the vessels in the house of the Lord and in the house of the king of Judah and at Jerusalem:

必被带到巴比伦存在那里，直到我眷顾以色列人的日子。那时，我必将这器皿带回来，交还此地。这是耶和华说的。
They will be taken away to Babylon, and there they will be till the day when I send their punishment on them, says the Lord. Then I will take them up and put them back in their place.

当年，就是犹大王西底家登基第四年五月，基遍人押朔的儿子，先知哈拿尼雅，在耶和华的殿中当着祭司和众民对我说，
And it came about in that year, when Zedekiah first became king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah, the son of Azzur the prophet, who came from Gibeon, said to Jeremiah in the house of the Lord, before the priests and all the people,

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我已经折断巴比伦王的轭。
These are the words of the Lord of armies, the God of Israel: By me the yoke of the king of Babylon has been broken.

二年之内，我要将巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒从这地掠到巴比伦的器皿，就是耶和华殿中的一切器皿都带回此地。
In the space of two years I will send back into this place all the vessels of the Lord's house which Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, took away from this place to Babylon:

我又要将犹大王约雅敬的儿子耶哥尼雅，和被掳到巴比伦去的一切犹大人，带回此地，因为我要折断巴比伦王的轭。这是耶和华说的。
And I will let Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, come back to this place, with all the prisoners of Judah who went to Babylon, says the Lord: for I will have the yoke of the king of Babylon broken.

先知耶利米当着祭司和站在耶和华殿里的众民对先知哈拿尼雅说，
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah, before the priests and all the people who had come into the house of the Lord,

阿们。愿耶和华如此行，愿耶和华成就你所预言的话，将耶和华殿中的器皿和一切被掳去的人从巴比伦带回此地。
The prophet Jeremiah said, So be it: may the Lord do so: may the Lord give effect to the words which you have said, and let the vessels of the Lord's house, and all the people who have been taken away, come back from Babylon to this place.

然而我向你和众民耳中所要说的话，你应当听。
But still, give ear to this word which I am saying to you and to all the people:

从古以来，在你我以前的先知，向多国和大邦说预言，论到争战，灾祸，瘟疫的事。
The prophets, who were before me and before you, from early times gave word to a number of countries and great kingdoms about war and destruction and disease.

先知预言的平安，到话语成就的时候，人便知道他真是耶和华所差来的。
The prophet whose words are of peace, when his words come true, will be seen to be a prophet whom the Lord has sent.

于是，先知哈拿尼雅将先知耶利米颈项上的轭取下来，折断了。
Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from the neck of the prophet Jeremiah and it was broken by his hands.

哈拿尼雅又当着众民说，耶和华如此说，二年之内我必照样从列国人的颈项上折断巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的轭。于是先知耶利米就走了。
And before all the people Hananiah said, The Lord has said, Even so will I let the yoke of the king of Babylon be broken off the necks of all the nations in the space of two years. Then the prophet Jeremiah went away.

先知哈拿尼雅把先知耶利米颈项上的轭折断以后，耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Then after the yoke had been broken off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah by Hananiah the prophet, the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

你去告诉哈拿尼雅说，耶和华如此说，你折断木轭，却换了铁轭。
Go and say to Hananiah, This is what the Lord has said: Yokes of wood have been broken by you, but in their place I will make yokes of iron.

因为万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我已将铁轭加在这些国的颈项上，使他们服事巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒，他们总要服事他。我也把田野的走兽给了他。
For the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: I have put a yoke of iron on the necks of all these nations, making them servants to Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon; and they are to be his servants: and in addition I have given him the beasts of the field.

于是先知耶利米对先知哈拿尼雅说，哈拿尼雅阿，你应当听。耶和华并没有差遣你，你竟使这百姓倚靠谎言。
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to Hananiah the prophet, Give ear, now, Hananiah; the Lord has not sent you; but you are making this people put their faith in what is false.

所以耶和华如此说，看哪，我要叫你去世，你今年必死，因为你向耶和华说了叛逆的话。
For this reason the Lord has said, See, I will send you away from off the face of the earth: this year death will overtake you, because you have said words against the Lord.

这样，先知哈拿尼雅当年七月间就死了。
So death came to Hananiah the prophet the same year, in the seventh month.

先知耶利米从耶路撒冷寄信与被掳的祭司，先知，和众民，并生存的长老，就是尼布甲尼撒从耶路撒冷掳到巴比伦去的。
Now these are the words of the letter which Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the responsible men among those who had been taken away, and to the priests and the prophets and to all the rest of the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had taken away prisoners from Jerusalem to Babylon;

（这在耶哥尼雅王和太后，太监，并犹大，耶路撒冷的首领，以及工匠，铁匠都离了耶路撒冷以后。）
(After Jeconiah the king and the queen-mother and the unsexed servants and the rulers of Judah and Jerusalem and the expert workmen and the metal-workers had gone away from Jerusalem;)

他借沙番的儿子以利亚萨和希勒家的儿子基玛利的手寄去。他们二人是犹大王西底家打发往巴比伦去见尼布甲尼撒王的。
By the hand of Elasah, the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah, the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah, king of Judah, sent to Babylon, to Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,) saying,

信上说，万军之耶和华以色列的神，对一切被掳去的，就是我使他们从耶路撒冷被掳到巴比伦的人，如此说，
This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said to all those whom I have taken away prisoners from Jerusalem to Babylon:

你们要盖造房屋，住在其中。栽种田园，吃其中所产的。
Go on building houses and living in them, and planting gardens and using the fruit of them;

娶妻生儿女，为你们的儿子娶妻，使你们的女儿嫁人，生儿养女。在那里生养众多，不至减少。
Take wives and have sons and daughters, and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, so that they may have sons and daughters; and be increased in number there and do not become less.

我所使你们被掳到的那城，你们要为那城求平安，为那城祷告耶和华。因为那城得平安，你们也随着得平安。
And be working for the peace of the land to which I have had you taken away prisoners, and make prayer to the Lord for it: for in its peace you will have peace.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，不要被你们中间的先知和占卜的诱惑，也不要听信自己所作的梦。
For this is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Do not let yourselves be tricked by the prophets who are among you, and the readers of signs, and give no attention to their dreams which they may have;

因为他们托我的名对你们说假预言，我并没有差遣他们。这是耶和华说的。
For they are saying to you what is false in my name: I have not sent them, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，为巴比伦所定的七十年满了以后，我要眷顾你们，向你们成就我的恩言，使你们仍回此地。
For this is what the Lord has said: When seventy years are ended for Babylon, I will have pity on you and give effect to my good purpose for you, causing you to come back to this place.

耶和华说，我知道我向你们所怀的意念是赐平安的意念，不是降灾祸的意念，要叫你们末后有指望。
For I am conscious of my thoughts about you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you hope at the end.

你们要呼求我，祷告我，我就应允你们。
And you will go on crying to me and making prayer to me, and I will give ear to you.

你们寻求我，若专心寻求我，就必寻见。
And you will be searching for me and I will be there, when you have gone after me with all your heart.

耶和华说，我必被你们寻见，我也必使你们被掳的人归回，将你们从各国中和我所赶你们到的各处招聚了来，又将你们带回我使你们被掳掠离开的地方。这是耶和华说的。
I will be near you again, says the Lord, and your fate will be changed, and I will get you together from all the nations and from all the places where I had sent you away, says the Lord; and I will take you back again to the place from which I sent you away prisoners.

你们说，耶和华在巴比伦为我们兴起先知。
For you have said, The Lord has given us prophets in Babylon.

所以耶和华论到坐大卫宝座的王和住在这城里的一切百姓，就是未曾与你们一同被掳的弟兄，
For this is what the Lord has said about the king who is seated on the seat of David's kingdom, and about all the people living in this town, your countrymen who have not gone out with you as prisoners;

万军之耶和华如此说，看哪，我必使刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫临到他们，使他们像极坏的无花果，坏得不可吃。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: See, I will send on them the sword and need of food and disease, and will make them like bad figs, which are of no use for food, they are so bad.

我必用刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫追赶他们，使他们在天下万国抛来抛去，在我所赶他们到的各国中，令人咒诅，惊骇，嗤笑，羞辱。
I will go after them, attacking them with the sword and with need of food and with disease, and will make them a cause of fear to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse and a wonder and a surprise and a name of shame among all the nations where I have sent them:

耶和华说，这是因为他们没有听从我的话，就是我从早起来差遣我仆人众先知去说的，无奈他们不听。这是耶和华说的。
Because they have not given ear to my words, says the Lord, when I sent to them my servants the prophets, getting up early and sending them; but you did not give ear, says the Lord.

所以你们一切被掳去的，就是我从耶路撒冷打发到巴比伦去的，当听耶和华的话。
And now, give ear to the word of the Lord, all you whom I have sent away prisoners from Jerusalem to Babylon.

万军之耶和华以色列的神论到哥赖雅的儿子亚哈，并玛西雅的儿子西底家，如此说，他们是托我名向你们说假预言的，我必将他们交在巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手中。他要在你们眼前杀害他们。
This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said about Ahab, the son of Kolaiah, and about Zedekiah, the son of Maaseiah, who are saying to you what is false in my name: See, I will give them up into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and he will put them to death before your eyes.

住巴比伦一切被掳的犹大人必借这二人赌咒说，愿耶和华使你像巴比伦王在火中烧的西底家和亚哈一样。
And their fate will be used as a curse by all the prisoners of Judah who are in Babylon, who will say, May the Lord make you like Zedekiah and like Ahab, who were burned in the fire by the king of Babylon;

这二人是在以色列中行了丑事，与邻舍的妻行淫，又假托我名说我未曾吩咐他们的话。知道的是我，作见证的也是我。这是耶和华说的。
Because they have done shame in Israel, and have taken their neighbours' wives, and in my name have said false words, which I did not give them orders to say; and I myself am the witness, says the Lord.

论到尼希兰人示玛雅，你当说，
About Shemaiah the Nehelamite.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你曾用自己的名寄信给耶路撒冷的众民和祭司玛西雅的儿子西番雅，并众祭司，说，
Shemaiah the Nehelamite sent a letter in his name to Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

耶和华已经立你西番雅为祭司，代替祭司耶何耶大，使耶和华殿中有官长，好将一切狂妄自称为先知的人用枷枷住，用锁锁住。
The Lord has made you priest in place of Jehoiada the priest, to be an overseer in the house of the Lord for every man who is off his head and is acting as a prophet, to put such men in prison and in chains.

现在亚拿突人耶利米向你们自称为先知，你们为何没有责备他呢？
So why have you made no protest against Jeremiah of Anathoth, who is acting as a prophet to you?

因为他寄信给我们在巴比伦的人说，被掳的事必长久。你们要盖造房屋，住在其中。栽种田园，吃其中所产的。
For he has sent to us in Babylon saying, The time will be long: go on building houses and living in them, and planting gardens and using the fruit of them.

祭司西番雅就把这信念给先知耶利米听。
And Zephaniah the priest made clear to Jeremiah the prophet what was said in the letter, reading it to him.

于是耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, saying,

你当寄信给一切被掳的人说，耶和华论到尼希兰人示玛雅说，因为示玛雅向你们说预言，我并没有差遣他，他使你们倚靠谎言。
Send to all those who have been taken away, saying, This is what the Lord has said about Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because Shemaiah has been acting as a prophet to you, and I did not send him, and has made you put your faith in what is false;

所以耶和华如此说，我必刑罚尼希兰人示玛雅和他的后裔，他必无一人存留住在这民中，也不得见我所要赐与我百姓的福乐，因为他向耶和华说了叛逆的话。这是耶和华说的。
For this cause the Lord has said, Truly I will send punishment on Shemaiah and on his seed; not a man of his family will have a place among this people, and he will not see the good which I am going to do to my people, says the Lord: because he has said words against the Lord.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

耶和华以色列的神如此说，你将我对你说过的一切话都写在书上。
The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, Put down in a book all the words which I have said to you.

耶和华说，日子将到，我要使我的百姓以色列和犹大被掳的人归回。我也要使他们回到我所赐给他们列祖之地，他们就得这地为业。这是耶和华说的。
For see, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will let the fate of my people Israel and Judah be changed, says the Lord: and I will make them come back to the land which I gave to their fathers, so that they may take it for their heritage.

以下是耶和华论到以色列和犹大所说的话，
And these are the words which the Lord said about Israel and about Judah.

耶和华如此说，我们听见声音，是战抖惧怕而不平安的声音。
This is what the Lord has said: A voice of shaking fear has come to our ears, of fear and not of peace.

你们且访问看看，男人有产难吗？我怎么看见人人用手掐腰，像产难的妇人，脸面都变青了呢？
Put the question and see if it is possible for a man to have birth-pains: why do I see every man with his hands gripping his sides, as a woman does when the pains of birth are on her, and all faces are turned green?

哀哉。那日为大，无日可比。这是雅各遭难的时候，但他必被救出来。
Ha! for that day is so great that there is no day like it: it is the time of Jacob's trouble: but he will get salvation from it.

万军之耶和华说，到那日，我必从你颈项上折断仇敌的轭，扭开他的绳索。外邦人不得再使你作他们的奴仆。
For it will come about on that day, says the Lord of armies, that his yoke will be broken off his neck, and his bands will be burst; and men of strange lands will no longer make use of him as their servant:

你们却要事奉耶和华你们的神和我为你们所要兴起的王大卫。
But they will be servants to the Lord their God and to David their king, whom I will give back to them.

故此，耶和华说，我的仆人雅各阿，不要惧怕。以色列阿，不要惊惶。因我要从远方拯救你，从被掳到之地拯救你的后裔。雅各必回来得享平靖安逸，无人使他害怕。
So have no fear, O Jacob, my servant, says the Lord; and do not be troubled, O Israel: for see, I will make you come back from far away, and your seed from the land where they are prisoners; and Jacob will come back, and will be quiet and at peace, and no one will give him cause for fear.

因我与你同在，要拯救你，也要将所赶散你到的那些国灭绝净尽，却不将你灭绝净尽，倒要从宽惩治你，万不能不罚你（不罚你或作以你为无罪）。这是耶和华说的。
For I am with you, says the Lord, to be your saviour: for I will put an end to all the nations where I have sent you wandering, but I will not put an end to you completely: though with wise purpose I will put right your errors, and will not let you go quite without punishment.

耶和华如此说，你的损伤无法医治。你的伤痕极其重大。
For the Lord has said, Your disease may not be made well and your wound is bitter.

无人为你分诉，使你的伤痕得以缠裹。你没有医治的良药。
There is no help for your wound, there is nothing to make you well.

你所亲爱的都忘记你，不来探问（或作理会）你。我因你的罪孽甚大，罪恶众多，曾用仇敌加的伤害伤害你，用残忍者的惩治惩治你。
Your lovers have no more thought for you, they go after you no longer; for I have given you the wound of a hater, even cruel punishment;

你为何因损伤哀号呢？你的痛苦无法医治。我因你的罪孽甚大，罪恶众多，曾将这些加在你身上。
Why are you crying for help because of your wound? for your pain may never be taken away: because your evil-doing was so great and because your sins were increased, I have done these things to you.

故此，凡吞吃你的必被吞吃。你的敌人个个都被掳去。掳掠你的必成为掳物。抢夺你的必成为掠物。
For this cause, all those who take you for their food will themselves become your food; and all your attackers, every one of them, will be taken prisoners; and those who send destruction on you will come to destruction; and all those who take away your goods by force will undergo the same themselves.

耶和华说，我必使你痊愈，医好你的伤痕，都因人称你为被赶散的，说，这是锡安，无人来探问（或作理会）的。
For I will make you healthy again and I will make you well from your wounds, says the Lord; because they have given you the name of an outlaw, saying, It is Zion cared for by no man.

耶和华如此说，我必使雅各被掳去的帐棚归回，也必顾惜他的住处。城必建造在原旧的山冈。宫殿也照旧有人居住。
The Lord has said, See, I am changing the fate of the tents of Jacob, and I will have pity on his houses; the town will be put up on its hill, and the great houses will be living-places again.

必有感谢和欢乐的声音从其中发出，我要使他们增多，不致减少。使他们尊荣，不致卑微。
And from them will go out praise and the sound of laughing: and I will make them great in number, and they will not become less; and I will give them glory, and they will not be small.

他们的儿女要如往日。他们的会众坚立在我面前。凡欺压他们的，我必刑罚他。
And their children will be as they were in the old days, and the meeting of the people will have its place before me, and I will send punishment on all who are cruel to them.

他们的君王必是属乎他们的。掌权的必从他们中间而出。我要使他就近我，他也要亲近我。不然，谁有胆量亲近我呢？这是耶和华说的。
And their chief will be of their number; their ruler will come from among themselves; and I will let him be present before me, so that he may come near to me: for who may have strength of heart to come near me? says the Lord.

你们要作我的子民，我要作你们的神。
And you will be my people, and I will be your God.

看哪，耶和华的忿怒好像暴风已经发出。是扫灭的暴风，必转到恶人的头上。
See, the storm-wind of the Lord, even the heat of his wrath, has gone out, a rolling storm, bursting on the heads of the evil-doers.

耶和华的烈怒必不转消，直到他心中所拟定的成就了。末后的日子你们要明白。
The wrath of the Lord will not be turned back till he has done, till he has put into effect, the purposes of his heart: in days to come you will have full knowledge of this.

耶和华说，那时，我必作以色列各家的神。他们必作我的子民。
At that time, says the Lord, I will be the God of all the families of Israel, and they will be my people.

耶和华如此说，脱离刀剑的就是以色列人。我使他享安息的时候，他曾在旷野蒙恩。
The Lord has said, Grace came in the waste land to a people kept safe from the sword, even to Israel on the way to his resting-place.

古时（或作从远方）耶和华向以色列（原文作我）显现，说，我以永远的爱爱你，因此我以慈爱吸引你。
From far away he saw the Lord: my love for you is an eternal love: so with mercy I have made you come with me.

以色列的民哪（民原文作处女），我要再建立你，你就被建立。你必再以击鼓为美，与欢乐的人一同跳舞而出。
I will again make new your buildings, O virgin of Israel, and you will take up your place: again you will take up your instruments of music, and go out in the dances of those who are glad.

又必在撒玛利亚的山上栽种葡萄园，栽种的人要享用所结的果子。
Again will your vine-gardens be planted on the hill of Samaria: the planters will be planting and using the fruit.

日子必到，以法莲山上守望的人必呼叫说，起来吧。我们可以上锡安，到耶和华我们的神那里去。
For there will be a day when those who get in the grapes on the hills of Ephraim will be crying, Up! let us go up to Zion to the Lord our God.

耶和华如此说，你们当为雅各欢乐歌唱，因万国中为首的欢呼。当传扬颂赞说，耶和华阿，求你拯救你的百姓以色列所剩下的人。
For the Lord has said, Make a glad song for Jacob and give a cry on the top of the mountains: give the news, give praise, and say, The Lord has given salvation to his people, even to the rest of Israel.

我必将他们从北方领来，从地极招聚。同着他们来的有瞎子，瘸子，孕妇，产妇。他们必成为大帮回到这里来。
See, I will take them from the north country, and get them from the inmost parts of the earth, and with them the blind and the feeble-footed, the woman with child and her who is in birth-pains together: a very great army, they will come back here.

他们要哭泣而来。我要照他们恳求的引导他们，使他们在河水旁走正直的路，在其上不致绊跌。因为我是以色列的父，以法莲是我的长子。
They will come with weeping, and going before them I will be their guide: guiding them by streams of water in a straight way where there is no falling: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is the first of my sons.

列国阿，要听耶和华的话，传扬在远处的海岛说，赶散以色列的必招聚他，又看守他，好像牧人看守羊群。
Give ear to the word of the Lord, O you nations, and give news of it in the sea-lands far away, and say, He who has sent Israel wandering will get him together and will keep him as a keeper does his flock.

因耶和华救赎了雅各，救赎他脱离比他更强之人的手。
For the Lord has given a price for Jacob, and made him free from the hands of him who was stronger than he.

他们要来到锡安的高处歌唱，又流归耶和华施恩之地，就是有五谷，新酒，和油，并羊羔，牛犊之地。他们的心必像浇灌的园子。他们也不再有一点愁烦。
So they will come with songs on the high places, flowing together to the good things of the Lord, to the grain and the wine and the oil, to the young ones of the flock and of the herd: their souls will be like a watered garden, and they will have no more sorrow.

那时，处女必欢乐跳舞。年少的，年老的，也必一同欢乐。因为我要使他们的悲哀变为欢喜，并要安慰他们，使他们的愁烦转为快乐。
Then the virgin will have joy in the dance, and the young men and the old will be glad: for I will have their weeping turned into joy, I will give them comfort and make them glad after their sorrow.

我必以肥油使祭司的心满足。我的百姓也要因我的恩惠知足。这是耶和华说的。
I will give the priests their desired fat things, and my people will have a full measure of my good things, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，在拉玛听见号啕痛哭的声音，是拉结哭她儿女，不肯受安慰，因为他们都不在了。
So has the Lord said: In Ramah there is a sound of crying, weeping and bitter sorrow; Rachel weeping for her children; she will not be comforted for their loss.

耶和华如此说，你禁止声音不要哀哭，禁止眼目不要流泪，因你所作之工必有赏赐。他们必从敌国归回。这是耶和华说的。
The Lord has said this: Keep your voice from sorrow and your eyes from weeping: for your work will be rewarded, says the Lord; and they will come back from the land of their hater.

耶和华说，你末后必有指望。你的儿女必回到自己的境界。
And there is hope for the future, says the Lord; and your children will come back to the land which is theirs.

我听见以法莲为自己悲叹说，你责罚我，我便受责罚，像不惯负轭的牛犊一样。求你使我回转，我便回转，因为你是耶和华我的神。
Certainly Ephraim's words of grief have come to my ears, You have given me training and I have undergone it like a young cow unused to the yoke: let me be turned and come back, for you are the Lord my God.

我回转以后就真正懊悔。受教以后就拍腿叹息。我因担当幼年的凌辱就抱愧蒙羞。
Truly, after I had been turned, I had regret for my ways; and after I had got knowledge, I made signs of sorrow: I was put to shame, truly, I was covered with shame, because I had to undergo the shame of my early years.

耶和华说，以法莲是我的爱子吗？是可喜悦的孩子吗？我每逢责备他，仍深顾念他。所以我的心肠恋慕他。我必要怜悯他。
Is Ephraim my dear son? is he the child of my delight? for whenever I say things against him, I still keep him in my memory: so my heart is troubled for him; I will certainly have mercy on him, says the Lord.

以色列民哪（民原文作处女），你当为自己设立指路碑，竖起引路柱。你要留心向大路，就是你所去的原路。你当回转，回转到你这些城邑。
Put up guiding pillars, make road signs for yourself: give attention to the highway, even the way in which you went: be turned again, O virgin of Israel, be turned to these your towns.

背道的民哪（民原文作女子），你反来复去要到几时呢？耶和华在地上造了一件新事，就是女子护卫男子。
How long will you go on turning this way and that, O wandering daughter? for the Lord has made a new thing on the earth, a woman changed into a man.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我使被掳之人归回的时候，他们在犹大地和其中的城邑必再这样说，公义的居所阿，圣山哪，愿耶和华赐福给你。
So the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, Again will these words be used in the land of Judah and in its towns, when I have let their fate be changed: May the blessing of the Lord be on you, O resting-place of righteousness, O holy mountain.

犹大和属犹大城邑的人，农夫和放羊的人，要一同住在其中。
And Judah and all its towns will be living there together; the farmers and those who go about with flocks.

疲乏的人，我使他饱饫。愁烦的人，我使他知足。
For I have given new strength to the tired soul and to every sorrowing soul in full measure.

先知说，我醒了，觉着睡得香甜。
At this, awaking from my sleep, I saw; and my sleep was sweet to me.

耶和华说，日子将到，我要把人的种和牲畜的种播种在以色列家和犹大家。
See, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will have Israel and Judah planted with the seed of man and with the seed of beast.

我先前怎样留意将他们拔出，拆毁，毁坏，倾覆，苦害，也必照样留意将他们建立，栽植。这是耶和华说的。
And it will come about that, as I have been watching over them for the purpose of uprooting and smashing down and overturning and sending destruction and causing trouble; so I will be watching over them for the purpose of building up and planting, says the Lord.

当那些日子，人不再说，父亲吃了酸葡萄，儿子的牙酸倒了。
In those days they will no longer say, The fathers have been tasting bitter grapes and the children's teeth are put on edge.

但各人必因自己的罪死亡。凡吃酸葡萄的，自己的牙必酸倒。
But everyone will be put to death for the evil which he himself has done: whoever has taken bitter grapes will himself have his teeth put on edge.

耶和华说，日子将到，我要与以色列家和犹大家另立新约，
See, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will make a new agreement with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah:

不像我拉着他们祖宗的手，领他们出埃及地的时候，与他们所立的约。我虽作他们的丈夫，他们却背了我的约。这是耶和华说的。
Not like the agreement which I made with their fathers, on the day when I took them by the hand to be their guide out of the land of Egypt; which agreement was broken by them, and I gave them up, says the Lord.

耶和华说，那些日子以后，我与以色列家所立的约乃是这样，我要将我的律法放在他们里面，写在他们心上。我要作他们的神，他们要作我的子民。
But this is the agreement which I will make with the people of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my law in their inner parts, writing it in their hearts; and I will be their God, and they will be my people.

他们各人不再教导自己的邻舍和自己的弟兄说，你该认识耶和华，因为他们从最小的到至大的都必认识我。我要赦免他们的罪孽，不再记念他们的罪恶。这是耶和华说的。
And no longer will they be teaching every man his neighbour and every man his brother, saying, Get knowledge of the Lord: for they will all have knowledge of me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord: for they will have my forgiveness for their evil-doing, and their sin will go from my memory for ever.

那使太阳白日发光，使星月有定例，黑夜发亮，又搅动大海，使海中波浪？？訇的，万军之耶和华是他的名。他如此说，
These are the words of the Lord, who has given the sun for a light by day, ordering the moon and stars for a light by night, who puts the sea in motion, causing the thunder of its waves; the Lord of armies is his name.

这些定例若能在我面前废掉，以色列的后裔也就在我面前断绝，永远不再成国。这是耶和华说的。
If the order of these things before me is ever broken, says the Lord, then will the seed of Israel come to an end as a nation before me for ever.

耶和华如此说，若能量度上天，寻察下地的根基，我就因以色列后裔一切所行的弃绝他们。这是耶和华说的。
This is what the Lord has said: If the heavens on high may be measured, and the bases of the earth searched out, then I will give up the seed of Israel, because of all they have done, says the Lord.

耶和华说，日子将到，这城必为耶和华建造，从哈楠业楼直到角门。
See, the days are coming, says the Lord, for the building of the Lord's town, from the tower of Hananel to the doorway of the angle.

准绳要往外量出，直到迦立山，又转到歌亚。
And the measuring-line will go out in front of it as far as the hill Gareb, going round to Goah.

抛尸的全谷和倒灰之处，并一切田地，直到汲沦溪，又直到东方马门的拐角，都要归耶和华为圣，不再拔出，不再倾覆，直到永远。
And all the valley of the dead bodies, and all the field of death as far as the stream Kidron, up to the angle of the horses' doorway to the east, will be holy to the Lord; it will not again be uprooted or overturned for ever.

犹大王西底家第十年，就是尼布甲尼撒十八年，耶和华的话临到耶利米。
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord in the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.

那时巴比伦王的军队围困耶路撒冷，先知耶利米囚在护卫兵的院内，在犹大王的宫中。
Now at that time the king of Babylon's army was round Jerusalem, shutting it in: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the place of the armed watchmen, in the house of the king of Judah.

因为犹大王西底家已将他囚禁，说，你为什么预言说，耶和华如此说，我必将这城交在巴比伦王的手中，他必攻取这城。
For Zedekiah, king of Judah, had had him shut up, saying, Why have you, as a prophet, been saying, The Lord has said, See, I will give this town into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he will take it;

犹大王西底家必不能逃脱迦勒底人的手，定要交在巴比伦王的手中，要口对口彼此说话，眼对眼彼此相看。
And Zedekiah, king of Judah, will not get away from the hands of the Chaldaeans, but will certainly be given up into the hands of the king of Babylon, and will have talk with him, mouth to mouth, and see him, eye to eye.

巴比伦王必将西底家带到巴比伦。西底家必住在那里，直到我眷顾他的时候。你们虽与迦勒底人争战，却不顺利。这是耶和华说的。
And he will take Zedekiah away to Babylon, where he will be till I have pity on him, says the Lord: though you are fighting with the Chaldaeans, things will not go well for you?

耶利米说，耶和华的话临到我说，
And Jeremiah said, The word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你叔叔沙龙的儿子哈拿篾必来见你，说，我在亚拿突的那块地，求你买来。因你买这地是合乎赎回之理。
See, Hanamel, the son of Shallum, your father's brother, will come to you and say, Give the price and get for yourself my property in Anathoth: for you have the right of the nearest relation.

我叔叔的儿子哈拿篾果然照耶和华的话来到护卫兵的院内，对我说，我在便雅悯境内，亚拿突的那块地，求你买来。因你买来是合乎承受之理，是你当赎的。你为自己买来吧。我耶利米就知道这是耶和华的话。
So Hanamel, the son of my father's brother, came to me, as the Lord had said, to the place of the armed watchmen, and said to me, Give the price and get my property which is in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin: for you have the nearest relation's right to the heritage; so get it for yourself. Then it was clear to me that this was the word of the Lord.

我便向我叔叔的儿子哈拿篾买了亚拿突的那块地，平了十七舍客勒银子给他。
So I got for a price the property in Anathoth from Hanamel, the son of my father's brother, and gave him the money, seventeen shekels of silver;

我在契上画押，将契封缄，又请见证人来，并用天平将银子平给他。
And I put it in writing, stamping it with my stamp, and I took witnesses and put the money into the scales.

我便将照例按规所立的买契，就是封缄的那一张和敞着的那一张，
So I took the paper witnessing the business, one copy rolled up and stamped, and one copy open:

当着我叔叔的儿子哈拿篾和画押作见证的人，并坐在护卫兵院内的一切犹大人眼前，交给玛西雅的孙子尼利亚的儿子巴录。
And I gave the paper to Baruch, the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, before the eyes of Hanamel, the son of my father's brother, and of the witnesses who had put their names to the paper, and before all the Jews who were seated in the place of the armed watchmen.

当着他们众人眼前，我嘱咐巴录说，
And I gave orders to Baruch in front of them, saying,

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，要将这封缄的和敞着的两张契放在瓦器里，可以存留多日。
This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Take these papers, the witness of this business, the one which is rolled up and stamped, and the one which is open; and put them in a vessel of earth so that they may be kept for a long time.

因为万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，将来在这地必有人再买房屋，田地，和葡萄园。
For the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, There will again be trading in houses and fields and vine-gardens in this land.

我将买契交给尼利亚的儿子巴录以后，便祷告耶和华说，
Now after I had given the paper to Baruch, the son of Neriah, I made my prayer to the Lord, saying,

主耶和华阿，你曾用大能和伸出来的膀臂创造天地，在你没有难成的事。
Ah Lord God! see, you have made the heaven and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm, and there is nothing you are not able to do:

你施慈爱与千万人，又将父亲的罪孽报应在他后世子孙的怀中，是至大全能的神，万军之耶和华是你的名。
You have mercy on thousands, and send punishment for the evil-doing of the fathers on their children after them: the great, the strong God, the Lord of armies is his name:

谋事有大略，行事有大能，注目观看世人一切的举动，为要照各人所行的和他作事的结果报应他。
Great in wisdom and strong in act: whose eyes are open on all the ways of the sons of men, giving to everyone the reward of his ways and the fruit of his doings:

在埃及地显神迹奇事，直到今日在以色列和别人中间也是如此，使自己得了名声，正如今日一样。
You have done signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, and even to this day, in Israel and among other men; and have made a name for yourself as at this day;

用神迹奇事和大能的手，并伸出来的膀臂与大可畏的事，领你的百姓以色列出了埃及。
And have taken your people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs and with wonders and with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, causing great fear;

将这地赐给他们，就是你向他们列祖起誓应许赐给他们流奶与蜜之地。
And have given them this land, which you gave your word to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;

他们进入这地得了为业，却不听从你的话，也不遵行你的律法。你一切所吩咐他们行的，他们一无所行，因此你使这一切的灾祸临到他们。
And they came in and took it for their heritage, but they did not give ear to your voice, and were not ruled by your law; they have done nothing of all you gave them orders to do: so you have made all this evil come on them:

看哪，敌人已经来到，筑垒要攻取这城。城也因刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫交在攻城的迦勒底人手中。你所说的话都成就了，你也看见了。
See, they have made earthworks against the town to take it; and the town is given into the hands of the Chaldaeans who are fighting against it, because of the sword and need of food and disease: and what you have said has taken place, and truly you see it.

主耶和华阿，你对我说，要用银子为自己买那块地，又请见证人。其实这城已交在迦勒底人的手中了。
And you have said to me, Give the money to get yourself a property, and have the business witnessed; though the town is given into the hands of the Chaldaeans.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

我是耶和华，是凡有血气者的神，岂有我难成的事吗？
See, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: is there anything so hard that I am unable to do it?

耶和华如此说，我必将这城交付迦勒底人的手和巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手，他必攻取这城。
So this is what the Lord has said: See, I am giving this town into the hands of the Chaldaeans and into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, and he will take it:

攻城的迦勒底人必来放火焚烧这城和其中的房屋。在这房屋上，人曾向巴力烧香，向别神浇奠，惹我发怒。
And the Chaldaeans, who are fighting against this town, will come and put the town on fire, burning it together with the houses, on the roofs of which perfumes have been burned to the Baal, and drink offerings have been drained out to other gods, moving me to wrath.

以色列人和犹大人自从幼年以来，专行我眼中看为恶的事。以色列人尽以手所作的惹我发怒。这是耶和华说的。
For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have done nothing but evil in my eyes from their earliest years: the children of Israel have only made me angry with the work of their hands, says the Lord.

这城自从建造的那日直到今日，常惹我的怒气和忿怒，使我将这城从我面前除掉。
For this town has been to me a cause of wrath and of burning passion from the day of its building till this day, so that I put it away from before my face:

是因以色列人和犹大人一切的邪恶，就是他们和他们的君王，首领，祭司，先知，并犹大的众人，以及耶路撒冷的居民所行的，惹我发怒。
Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to make me angry, they and their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem.

他们以背向我，不以面向我。我虽从早起来教训他们，他们却不听从，不受教训，
And they have been turning their backs and not their faces to me: and though I was their teacher, getting up early and teaching them, their ears were not open to teaching.

竟把可憎之物设立在称为我名下的殿中，污秽了这殿。
But they put their disgusting images into the house which is named by my name, making it unclean.

他们在欣嫩子谷建筑巴力的丘坛，好使自己的儿女经火归摩洛。他们行这可憎的事，使犹大陷在罪里，这并不是我所吩咐的，也不是我心所起的意。
And they put up the high places of the Baal in the valley of the son of Hinnom, making their sons and their daughters go through the fire to Molech; which I did not give them orders to do, and it never came into my mind that they would do this disgusting thing, causing Judah to be turned out of the way.

现在论到这城，就是你们所说，已经因刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫交在巴比伦王手中的，耶和华以色列的神如此说，
And now the Lord, the God of Israel, has said of this town, about which you say, It is given into the hands of the king of Babylon by the sword and by need of food and by disease:

我在怒气，忿怒，和大恼恨中，将以色列人赶到各国。日后我必从那里将他们招聚出来，领他们回到此地，使他们安然居住。
See, I will get them together from all the countries where I have sent them in my wrath and in the heat of my passion and in my bitter feeling; and I will let them come back into this place where they may take their rest safely.

他们要作我的子民，我要作他们的神。
And they will be my people, and I will be their God:

我要使他们彼此同心同道，好叫他们永远敬畏我，使他们和他们后世的子孙得福乐，
And I will give them one heart and one way, so that they may go on in the worship of me for ever, for their good and the good of their children after them:

又要与他们立永远的约，必随着他们施恩，并不离开他们，且使他们有敬畏我的心，不离开我。
And I will make an eternal agreement with them, that I will never give them up, but ever do them good; and I will put the fear of me in their hearts, so that they will not go away from me.

我必欢喜施恩与他们，要尽心尽意，诚诚实实将他们栽于此地。
And truly, I will take pleasure in doing them good, and all my heart and soul will be given to planting them in this land in good faith.

因为耶和华如此说，我怎样使这一切大祸临到这百姓，我也要照样使我所应许他们的一切福乐都临到他们。
For the Lord has said: As I have made all this great evil come on this people, so I will send on them all the good which I said about them.

你们说，这地是荒凉，无人民，无牲畜，是交付迦勒底人手之地。日后在这境内，必有人置买田地。
And there will be trading in fields in this land of which you say, It is a waste, without man or beast; it is given into the hands of the Chaldaeans.

在便雅悯地，耶路撒冷四围的各处，犹大的城邑，山地的城邑，高原的城邑，并南地的城邑，人必用银子买田地，在契上画押，将契封缄，请出见证人，因为我必使被掳的人归回。这是耶和华说的。
Men will get fields for money, and put the business in writing, stamping the papers and having them witnessed, in the land of Benjamin and in the country round Jerusalem and in the towns of Judah and in the towns of the hill-country and in the towns of the lowland and in the towns of the South: for I will let their fate be changed, says the Lord.

耶利米还囚在护卫兵的院内，耶和华的话第二次临到他说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still shut up in the place of the armed watchmen, saying,

成就的是耶和华，造作，为要建立的也是耶和华。耶和华是他的名。他如此说，
These are the words of the Lord, who is doing it, the Lord who is forming it, to make it certain; the Lord is his name;

你求告我，我就应允你，并将你所不知道，又大又难的事指示你。
Let your cry come to me, and I will give you an answer, and let you see great things and secret things of which you had no knowledge.

论到这城中的房屋和犹大王的宫室，就是拆毁为挡敌人高垒和刀剑的，耶和华以色列的神如此说，
For this is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said about the houses of this town and the houses of the kings of Judah, which have been broken down to make earthworks and ...;

人要与迦勒底人争战，正是拿死尸充满这房屋，就是我在怒气和忿怒中所杀的人，因他们的一切恶，我就掩面不顾这城。
... and to make them full of the dead bodies of men whom I have put to death in my wrath and in my passion, and because of whose evil-doing I have kept my face covered from this town.

看哪，我要使这城得以痊愈安舒，使城中的人得医治，又将丰盛的平安和诚实显明与他们。
See, I will make it healthy and well again, I will even make them well; I will let them see peace and good faith in full measure.

我也要使犹大被掳的和以色列被掳的归回，并建立他们和起初一样。
And I will let the fate of Judah and of Israel be changed, building them up as at first.

我要除净他们的一切罪，就是向我所犯的罪。又要赦免他们的一切罪，就是干犯我，违背我的罪。
And I will make them clean from all their sin, with which they have been sinning against me; I will have forgiveness for all their sins, with which they have been sinning against me, and with which they have done evil against me.

这城要在地上万国人面前使我得颂赞，得荣耀，名为可喜可乐之城。万国人因听见我向这城所赐的福乐，所施的恩惠平安，就惧怕战兢。
And this town will be to me for a name of joy, for a praise and a glory before all the nations of the earth, who, hearing of all the good which I am doing for them, will be shaking with fear because of all the good and the peace which I am doing for it.

耶和华如此说，你们论这地方，说是荒废无人民无牲畜之地，但在这荒凉无人民无牲畜的犹大城邑和耶路撒冷的街上，
This is what the Lord has said: There will again be sounding in this place, of which you say, It is a waste, without man and without beast; even in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem which are waste and unpeopled, without man and without beast,

必再听见有欢喜和快乐的声音，新郎和新妇的声音，并听见有人说，要称谢万军之耶和华，因耶和华本为善。他的慈爱永远长存。又有奉感谢祭到耶和华殿中之人的声音。因为我必使这地被掳的人归回，和起初一样。这是耶和华说的。
Happy sounds, the voice of joy, the voice of the newly-married man and the voice of the bride, the voices of those who say, Give praise to the Lord of armies, for the Lord is good, for his mercy is unchanging for ever: the voices of those who go with praise into the house of the Lord. For I will let the land come back to its first condition, says the Lord.

万军之耶和华如此说，在这荒废无人民无牲畜之地，并其中所有的城邑，必再有牧人的住处。他们要使羊群躺卧在那里。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Again there will be in this place, which is a waste, without man and without beast, and in all its towns, a resting-place where the keepers of sheep will make their flocks take rest.

在山地的城邑，高原的城邑，南地的城邑，便雅悯地，耶路撒冷四围的各处，和犹大的城邑必再有羊群从数点的人手下经过。这是耶和华说的。
In the towns of the hill-country, in the towns of the lowland, and in the towns of the South and in the land of Benjamin and in the country round Jerusalem and in the towns of Judah, the flocks will again go under the hand of him who is numbering them, says the Lord.

耶和华说，日子将到，我应许以色列家和犹大家的恩言必然成就。
See, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will give effect to the good word which I have said about the people of Israel and the people of Judah.

当那日子，那时候，我必使大卫公义的苗裔长起来。他必在地上施行公平和公义。
In those days and at that time, I will let a Branch of righteousness come up for David; and he will be a judge in righteousness in the land.

在那日子犹大必得救，耶路撒冷必安然居住，他的名必称为耶和华我们的义。
In those days, Judah will have salvation and Jerusalem will be safe: and this is the name which will be given to her: The Lord is our righteousness.

因为耶和华如此说，大卫必永不断人坐在以色列家的宝座上。
For the Lord has said, David will never be without a man to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of Israel;

祭司，利未人在我面前也不断人献燔祭，烧素祭，时常办理献祭的事。
And the priests and the Levites will never be without a man to come before me, offering burned offerings and perfumes and meal offerings and offerings of beasts at all times.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

耶和华如此说，你们若能废弃我所立白日黑夜的约，使白日黑夜不按时轮转，
The Lord has said: If it is possible for my agreement of the day and the night to be broken, so that day and night no longer come at their fixed times,

就能废弃我与我仆人大卫所立的约，使他没有儿子在他的宝座上为王，并能废弃我与事奉我的祭司，利未人所立的约。
Then my agreement with my servant David may be broken, so that he no longer has a son to take his place on the seat of the kingdom; and my agreement with the Levites, the priests, my servants.

天上的万象不能数算，海边的尘沙也不能斗量。我必照样使我仆人大卫的后裔和事奉我的利未人多起来。
As it is not possible for the army of heaven to be numbered, or the sand of the sea measured, so will I make the seed of my servant David, and the Levites my servants.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

你没有揣摩这百姓的话吗？他们说，耶和华所拣选的二族，他已经弃绝了。他们这样藐视我的百姓，以为不再成国。
Have you taken note of what these people have said, The two families, which the Lord took for himself, he has given up? This they say, looking down on my people as being, in their eyes, no longer a nation.

耶和华如此说，若是我立白日黑夜的约不能存住，若是我未曾安排天地的定例，
The Lord has said, If I have not made day and night, and if the limits of heaven and earth have not been fixed by me,

我就弃绝雅各的后裔和我仆人大卫的后裔，不使大卫的后裔治理亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各的后裔。因为我必使他们被掳的人归回，也必怜悯他们。
Then I will give up caring for the seed of Jacob and of David my servant, so that I will not take of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will let their fate be changed and will have mercy on them.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒率领他的全军和地上属他的各国各邦，攻打耶路撒冷和属耶路撒冷所有的城邑。那时，耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, when Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth which were under his rule, and all the peoples, were fighting against Jerusalem and all its towns, saying,

耶和华以色列的神说，你去告诉犹大王西底家，耶和华如此说，我要将这城交付巴比伦王的手，他必用火焚烧。
The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, Go and say to Zedekiah, king of Judah, This is what the Lord has said: See, I will give this town into the hands of the king of Babylon, and he will have it burned with fire:

你必不能逃脱他的手，定被拿住，交在他的手中。你的眼要见巴比伦王的眼，他要口对口和你说话，你也必到巴比伦去。
And you will not get away from him, but will certainly be taken and given up into his hands; and you will see the king of Babylon, eye to eye, and he will have talk with you, mouth to mouth, and you will go to Babylon.

犹大王西底家阿，你还要听耶和华的话。耶和华论到你如此说，你必不被刀剑杀死，
But give ear to the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah, king of Judah; this is what the Lord has said about you: Death will not come to you by the sword:

你必平安而死，人必为你焚烧物件，好像为你列祖，就是在你以前的先王焚烧一般。人必为你举哀，说，哀哉。我主阿。耶和华说，这话是我说的。
You will come to your end in peace; and such burnings as they made for your fathers, the earlier kings before you, will be made for you; and they will be weeping for you and saying, Ah lord! for I have said the word, says the Lord.

于是，先知耶利米在耶路撒冷将这一切话告诉犹大王西底家。
Then Jeremiah the prophet said all these things to Zedekiah, king of Judah, in Jerusalem,

那时，巴比伦王的军队正攻打耶路撒冷，又攻打犹大所剩下的城邑，就是拉吉和亚西加。原来犹大的坚固城只剩下这两座。
When the army of the king of Babylon was fighting against Jerusalem and against all the towns of Judah which had not been taken, against Lachish and against Azekah; for these were the last of the walled towns of Judah.

西底家王与耶路撒冷的众民立约，要向他们宣告自由，叫各人任他希伯来的仆人和婢女自由出去，谁也不可使他的一个犹大弟兄作奴仆。（此后，有耶和华的话临到耶利米。）
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, after King Zedekiah had made an agreement with all the people in Jerusalem, to give news in public that servants were to be made free;


That every man was to let his Hebrew man-servant and his Hebrew servant-girl go free; so that no one might make use of a Jew, his countryman, as a servant:

所有立约的首领和众民就任他的仆人婢女自由出去，谁也不再叫他们作奴仆。大家都顺从，将他们释放了。
And this was done by all the rulers and the people who had taken part in the agreement, and every one let his man-servant and his servant-girl go free, not to be used as servants any longer; they did so, and let them go.

后来却又反悔，叫所任去自由的仆人婢女回来，勉强他们仍为仆婢。
But later, they took back again the servants and the servant-girls whom they had let go free, and put them again under the yoke as servants and servant-girls.

因此耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
For this reason the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

耶和华以色列的神如此说，我将你们的列祖从埃及地为奴之家领出来的时候，与他们立约说，
The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, I made an agreement with your fathers on the day when I took them out of Egypt, out of the prison-house, saying,

你的一个希伯来弟兄若卖给你，服事你六年，到第七年你们各人就要任他自由出去。只是你们列祖不听从我，也不侧耳而听。
At the end of seven years every man is to let go his countryman who is a Hebrew, who has become yours for a price and has been your servant for six years; you are to let him go free: but your fathers gave no attention and did not give ear.

如今你们回转，行我眼中看为正的事，各人向邻舍宣告自由，并且在称为我名下的殿中，在我面前立约。
And now, turning away from evil, you had done what is right in my eyes, giving a public undertaking for every man to make his neighbour free; and you had made an agreement before me in the house which is named by my name:

你们却又反悔，亵渎我的名，各人叫所任去随意自由的仆人婢女回来，勉强他们仍为仆婢。
But again you have put shame on my name, and you have taken back, every one his man-servant and his servant-girl, whom you had sent away free, and you have put them under the yoke again to be your servants and servant-girls.

所以耶和华如此说，你们没有听从我，各人向弟兄邻舍宣告自由。看哪。我向你们宣告一样自由，就是使你们自由于刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫之下，并且使你们在天下万国中抛来抛去。这是耶和华说的。
And so the Lord has said, You have not given ear to me and undertaken publicly, every man to let loose his countryman and his neighbour: see, I undertake to let loose against you the sword and disease and need of food; and I will send you wandering among all the kingdoms of the earth.

犹大的首领，耶路撒冷的首领，太监，祭司，和国中的众民曾将牛犊劈开，分成两半，从其中经过，在我面前立约。后来又违背我的约，不遵行这约上的话。
And I will give the men who have gone against my agreement and have not given effect to the words of the agreement which they made before me, when the ox was cut in two and they went between the parts of it,


The rulers of Judah and the rulers of Jerusalem, the unsexed servants and the priests and all the people of the land who went between the parts of the ox,

我必将他们交在仇敌和寻索其命的人手中。他们的尸首必给空中的飞鸟和地上的野兽作食物。
Even these I will give up into the hands of their haters and into the hands of those who have designs against their lives: and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of heaven and the beasts of the earth.

并且我必将犹大王西底家和他的首领交在他们仇敌和寻索其命的人，与那暂离你们而去巴比伦王军队的手中。
And Zedekiah, king of Judah, and his rulers I will give into the hands of their haters and into the hands of those who have designs against their lives, and into the hands of the king of Babylon's army which has gone away from you.

耶和华说，我必吩咐他们回到这城，攻打这城，将城攻取，用火焚烧。我也要使犹大的城邑变为荒场，无人居住。
See, I will give orders, says the Lord, and make them come back to this town; and they will make war on it and take it and have it burned with fire: and I will make the towns of Judah waste and unpeopled.

当犹大王约西亚之子约雅敬的时候，耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, in the days of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying,

你去见利甲族的人，和他们说话，领他们进入耶和华殿的一间屋子，给他们酒喝。
Go into the house of the Rechabites, and have talk with them, and take them into the house of the Lord, into one of the rooms, and give them wine.

我就将哈巴洗尼雅的孙子雅利米雅的儿子雅撒尼亚和他弟兄，并他众子，以及利甲全族的人，
Then I took Jaazaniah, the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, and his brothers and all his sons and all the Rechabites;

领到耶和华的殿，进入神人伊基大利的儿子哈难众子的屋子。那屋子在首领的屋子旁边，在沙龙之子把门的玛西雅屋子以上。
And I took them into the house of the Lord, into the room of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, the man of God, which was near the rulers' room, which was over the room of Maaseiah, the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door;

于是我在利甲族人面前设摆盛满酒的碗和杯，对他们说，请你们喝酒。
And I put before the sons of the Rechabites basins full of wine and cups, and I said to them, Take some wine.

他们却说，我们不喝酒。因为我们先祖利甲的儿子约拿达曾吩咐我们说，你们与你们的子孙永不可喝酒，
But they said, We will take no wine: for Jonadab, the son of Rechab our father, gave us orders, saying, You are to take no wine, you or your sons, for ever:

也不可盖房，撒种，栽种葡萄园，但一生的年日要住帐棚，使你们的日子在寄居之地得以延长。
And you are to make no houses, or put in seed, or get vine-gardens planted, or have any: but all your days you are to go on living in tents, so that you may have a long life in the land where you are living as in a strange country.

凡我们先祖利甲的儿子约拿达所吩咐我们的话，我们都听从了。我们和我们的妻子儿女一生的年日都不喝酒，
And we have kept the rules of Jonadab, the son of Rechab our father, in everything which he gave us orders to do, drinking no wine all our days, we and our wives and our sons and our daughters;

也不盖房居住，也没有葡萄园，田地，和种子，
Building no houses for ourselves, having no vine-gardens or fields or seed:

但住帐棚，听从我们先祖约拿达的话，照他所吩咐我们的去行。
But we have been living in tents, and have done everything which Jonadab our father gave us orders to do.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒上此地来，我们因怕迦勒底的军队和亚兰的军队，就说，来吧，我们到耶路撒冷去。这样，我们才住在耶路撒冷。
But when Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, came up into the land, we said, Come, let us go to Jerusalem, away from the army of the Chaldaeans and from the army of the Aramaeans: and so we are living in Jerusalem.

耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你去对犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民说，耶和华说，你们不受教训，不听从我的话吗？
This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Go and say to the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem, Is there no hope of teaching you to give ear to my words? says the Lord.

利甲的儿子约拿达所吩咐他子孙不可喝酒的话，他们已经遵守，直到今日也不喝酒，因为他们听从先祖的吩咐。我从早起来警戒你们，你们却不听从我。
The orders which Jonadab, the son of Rechab, gave to his sons to take no wine, are done, and to this day they take no wine, for they do the orders of their father: but I have sent my words to you, getting up early and sending them, and you have not given ear to me.

我从早起来，差遣我的仆人众先知去，说，你们各人当回头，离开恶道，改正行为，不随从事奉别神，就必住在我所赐给你们和你们列祖的地上。只是你们没有听从我，也没有侧耳而听。
And I have sent you all my servants the prophets, getting up early and sending them, saying, Come back, now, every man from his evil way, and do better, and go not after other gods to become their servants, and you will go on living in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but your ears have not been open, and you have not given attention to me.

利甲的儿子约拿达的子孙能遵守先人所吩咐他们的命，这百姓却没有听从我。
Though the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have done the orders of their father which he gave them, this people has not given ear to me:

因此，耶和华万军之神，以色列的神如此说，我要使我所说的一切灾祸临到犹大人和耶路撒冷的一切居民。因为我对他们说话，他们没有听从。我呼唤他们，他们没有答应。
For this reason the Lord, the God of armies, the God of Israel, has said, See, I will send on Judah and on all the people of Jerusalem all the evil which I said I would do to them: because I sent my words to them, but they did not give ear; crying out to them, but they gave no answer.

耶利米对利甲族的人说，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，因你们听从你们先祖约拿达的吩咐，谨守他的一切诫命，照他所吩咐你们的去行，
But to the Rechabites Jeremiah said, This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Because you have done the orders of Jonadab your father, and have kept his rules, and done everything as he gave you orders to do it;

所以万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，利甲的儿子约拿达必永不缺人侍立在我面前。
For this reason the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, Jonadab, the son of Rechab, will never be without a man to take his place before me.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬第四年，耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Now it came about in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying,

你取一书卷，将我对你说攻击以色列和犹大，并各国的一切话，从我对你说话的那日，就是从约西亚的日子起直到今日，都写在其上。
Take a book and put down in it all the words I have said to you against Israel and against Judah and against all the nations, from the day when my word came to you in the days of Josiah till this day.

或者犹大家听见我想要降与他们的一切灾祸，各人就回头，离开恶道，我好赦免他们的罪孽和罪恶。
It may be that the people of Judah, hearing of all the evil which it is my purpose to do to them, will be turned, every man from his evil ways; so that they may have my forgiveness for their evil-doing and their sin.

所以，耶利米召了尼利亚的儿子巴录来。巴录就从耶利米口中，将耶和华对耶利米所说的一切话写在书卷上。
Then Jeremiah sent for Baruch, the son of Neriah; and Baruch took down from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord which he had said to him, writing them in a book.

耶利米吩咐巴录说，我被拘管，不能进耶和华的殿。
And Jeremiah gave orders to Baruch, saying, I am shut up, and am not able to go into the house of the Lord:

所以你要去趁禁食的日子，在耶和华殿中将耶和华的话，就是你从我口中所写在书卷上的话，念给百姓和一切从犹大城邑出来的人听。
So you are to go, reading there from the book, which you have taken down from my mouth, the words of the Lord, in the hearing of the people in the Lord's house, on a day when they go without food, and in the hearing of all the men of Judah who have come out from their towns.

或者他们在耶和华面前恳求各人回头，离开恶道，因为耶和华向这百姓所说要发的怒气和忿怒是大的。
It may be that their prayer for grace will go up to the Lord, and that every man will be turned from his evil ways: for great is the wrath and the passion made clear by the Lord against this people.

尼利亚的儿子巴录就照先知耶利米一切所吩咐的去行，在耶和华的殿中从书上念耶和华的话。
And Baruch, the son of Neriah, did as Jeremiah the prophet gave him orders to do, reading from the book the words of the Lord in the Lord's house.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬第五年九月，耶路撒冷的众民和那从犹大城邑来到耶路撒冷的众民，在耶和华面前宣告禁食的日子，
Now it came about in the fifth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that it was given out publicly that all the people in Jerusalem, and all the people who came from the towns of Judah to Jerusalem, were to keep from food before the Lord.

巴录就在耶和华殿的上院，耶和华殿的新门口，沙番的儿子文士基玛利雅的屋内，念书上耶利米的话给众民听。
Then Baruch gave a public reading of the words of Jeremiah from the book, in the house of the Lord, in the room of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher square, as one goes in by the new doorway of the Lord's house, in the hearing of all the people.

沙番的孙子，基玛利雅的儿子米该亚听见书上耶和华的一切话，
And Micaiah, the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, after hearing all the words of the Lord from the book,

他就下到王宫，进入文士的屋子。众首领，就是文士以利沙玛，示玛雅的儿子第莱雅，亚革波的儿子以利拿单，沙番的儿子基玛利雅，哈拿尼雅的儿子西底家，和其余的首领都坐在那里。
Went down to the king's house, to the scribe's room: and all the rulers were seated there, Elishama the scribe and Delaiah, the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan, the son of Achbor, and Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah, the son of Hananiah, and all the rulers.

于是米该亚对他们述说他所听见的一切话，就是巴录向百姓念那书的时候所听见的。
Then Micaiah gave them an account of all the words which had come to his ears when Baruch was reading the book to the people.

众首领就打发古示的曾孙，示利米雅的孙子，尼探雅的儿子犹底到巴录那里，对他说，你将所念给百姓听的书卷拿在手中到我们这里来。尼利亚的儿子巴录就手拿书卷来到他们那里。
So all the rulers sent Jehudi, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, saying, Take in your hand the book from which you have been reading to the people and come. So Baruch, the son of Neriah, took the book in his hand and came down to them.

他们对他说，请你坐下，念给我们听。巴录就念给他们听。
Then they said to him, Be seated now, and give us a reading from it. So Baruch did so, reading it to them.

他们听见这一切话就害怕，面面相观，对巴录说，我们必须将这一切话告诉王。
Now it came about that, after hearing all the words, they said to one another in fear, We will certainly give the king an account of all these words.

他们问巴录说，请你告诉我们，你怎样从他口中写这一切话呢？
And questioning Baruch, they said, Say now, how did you put all these words down in writing from his mouth?

巴录回答说，他用口向我说这一切话，我就用笔墨写在书上。
Then Baruch, answering, said, He said all these things to me by word of mouth, and I put them down with ink in the book.

众首领对巴录说，你和耶利米要去藏起来，不可叫人知道你们在哪里。
Then the rulers said to Baruch, Go and put yourself in a safe place, you and Jeremiah, and let no man have knowledge of where you are.

众首领进院见王，却先把书卷存在文士以利沙玛的屋内，以后将这一切话说给王听。
Then they went into the open square to the king; but the book they put away in the room of Elishama the scribe; and they gave the king an account of all the words.

王就打发犹底去拿这书卷来，他便从文士以利沙玛的屋内取来，念给王和王左右侍立的众首领听。
So the king sent Jehudi to get the book, and he took it from the room of Elishama the scribe. And Jehudi gave a reading of it in the hearing of the king and all the rulers who were by the king's side.

那时正是九月，王坐在过冬的房屋里，王的前面火盆中有烧着的火。
Now the king was seated in the winter house, and a fire was burning in the fireplace in front of him.

犹底念了三四篇（或作行），王就用文士的刀将书卷割破，扔在火盆中，直到全卷在火中烧尽了。
And it came about that whenever Jehudi, in his reading, had got through three or four divisions, the king, cutting them with his penknife, put them into the fire, till all the book was burned up in the fire which was burning in the fireplace.

王和听见这一切话的臣仆都不惧怕，也不撕裂衣服。
But they had no fear and gave no signs of grief, not the king or any of his servants, after hearing all these words.

以利拿单和第莱雅，并基玛利雅恳求王不要烧这书卷，他却不听。
And Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made a strong request to the king not to let the book be burned, but he would not give ear to them.

王就吩咐哈米勒的儿子（或作王的儿子）耶拉篾和亚斯列的儿子西莱雅，并亚伯叠的儿子示利米雅，去捉拿文士巴录和先知耶利米。耶和华却将他们隐藏。
And the king gave orders to Jerahmeel, the king's son, and Seraiah, the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah, the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the Lord kept them safe.

王烧了书卷。其上有巴录从耶利米口中所写的话。以后耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Then after the book, in which Baruch had put down the words of Jeremiah, had been burned by the king, the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, saying,

你再取一卷，将犹大王约雅敬所烧第一卷上的一切话写在其上。
Take another book and put down in it all the words which were in the first book, which Jehoiakim, king of Judah, put into the fire.

论到犹大王约雅敬你要说，耶和华如此说，你烧了书卷，说，你为什么在其上写着，说巴比伦王必要来毁灭这地，使这地上绝了人民牲畜呢？
And about Jehoiakim, king of Judah, you are to say, This is what the Lord has said: You have put this book into the fire, saying, Why have you put in it that the king of Babylon will certainly come, causing the destruction of this land and putting an end to every man and beast in it?

所以耶和华论到犹大王约雅敬说，他后裔中必没有人坐在大卫的宝座上。他的尸首必被抛弃，白日受炎热，黑夜受寒霜。
For this reason the Lord has said of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, He will have no son to take his place on the seat of David: his dead body will be put out to undergo the heat of the day and the cold of the night.

我必因他和他后裔，并他臣仆的罪孽刑罚他们。我要使我所说的一切灾祸临到他们和耶路撒冷的居民，并犹大人。只是他们不听。
And I will send punishment on him and on his seed and on his servants for their evil-doing; I will send on them and on the people of Jerusalem and the men of Judah, all the evil which I said against them, but they did not give ear.

于是，耶利米又取一书卷交给尼利亚的儿子文士巴录，他就从耶利米的口中写了犹大王约雅敬所烧前卷上的一切话，另外又添了许多相彷的话。
Then Jeremiah took another book, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who put down in it, from the mouth of Jeremiah, all the words of the book which had been burned in the fire by Jehoiakim, king of Judah: and in addition a number of other words of the same sort.

约西亚的儿子西底家代替约雅敬的儿子哥尼雅为王，是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒立在犹大地作王的。
And Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, became king in place of Coniah, the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, made king in the land of Judah.

但西底家和他的臣仆，并国中的百姓，都不听从耶和华借先知耶利米所说的话。
But he and his servants and the people of the land did not give ear to the words of the Lord which he said by Jeremiah the prophet.

西底家王打发示利米雅的儿子犹甲，和祭司玛西雅的儿子西番雅，去见先知耶利米，说，求你为我们祷告耶和华我们的神。
And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah, the son of Maaseiah the priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Make prayer now to the Lord our God for us.

那时耶利米在民中出入，因为他们还没有把他囚在监里。
(Now Jeremiah was going about among the people, for they had not put him in prison.

法老的军队已经从埃及出来，那围困耶路撒冷的迦勒底人听见他们的风声，就拔营离开耶路撒冷去了。
And Pharaoh's army had come out from Egypt: and the Chaldaeans, who were attacking Jerusalem, hearing news of them, went away from Jerusalem.)

耶和华的话临到先知耶利米说，
Then the word of the Lord came to the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

耶和华以色列的神如此说，犹大王打发你们来求问我，你们要如此对他说，那出来帮助你们法老的军队必回埃及本国去。
The Lord, the God of Israel, has said: This is what you are to say to the king of Judah who sent you to get directions from me: See, Pharaoh's army, which has come out to your help, will go back to Egypt, to their land.

迦勒底人必再来攻打这城，并要攻取，用火焚烧。
And the Chaldaeans will come back again and make war against this town and they will take it and put it on fire.

耶和华如此说，你们不要自欺说迦勒底人必定离开我们，因为他们必不离开。
The Lord has said, Have no false hopes, saying to yourselves, The Chaldaeans will go away from us: for they will not go away.

你们即便杀败了与你们争战的迦勒底全军，但剩下受伤的人也必各人从帐棚里起来，用火焚烧这城。
For even if you had overcome all the army of the Chaldaeans fighting against you, and there were only wounded men among them, still they would get up, every man in his tent, and put this town on fire.

迦勒底的军队因怕法老的军队，拔营离开耶路撒冷的时候，
And it came about that when the Chaldaean army outside Jerusalem had gone away for fear of Pharaoh's army,

耶利米就杂在民中出离耶路撒冷，要往便雅悯地去，在那里得自己的地业。
Jeremiah went out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, with the purpose of taking up his heritage there among the people.

他到了便雅悯门那里，有守门官名叫伊利雅，是哈拿尼亚的孙子，示利米雅的儿子，他就拿住先知耶利米，说，你是投降迦勒底人哪。
But when he was at the Benjamin door, a captain of the watch named Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah, who was stationed there, put his hand on Jeremiah the prophet, saying, You are going to give yourself up to the Chaldaeans.

耶利米说，你这是谎话，我并不是投降迦勒底人。伊利雅不听他的话，就拿住他，解到首领那里。
Then Jeremiah said, That is not true; I am not going to the Chaldaeans. But he would not give ear to him: so Irijah made him prisoner and took him to the rulers.

首领恼怒耶利米，就打了他，将他囚在文士约拿单的房屋中，因为他们以这房屋当作监牢。
And the rulers were angry with Jeremiah, and gave him blows and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison.

耶利米来到狱中，进入牢房，在那里囚了多日。
So Jeremiah came into the hole of the prison, under the arches, and was there for a long time.

西底家王打发人提出他来，在自己的宫内私下问他说，从耶和华有什么话临到没有。耶利米说，有。又说，你必交在巴比伦王手中。
Then King Zedekiah sent and got him out: and the king, questioning him secretly in his house, said, Is there any word from the Lord? And Jeremiah said, There is. Then he said, You will be given up into the hands of the king of Babylon.

耶利米又对西底家王说，我在什么事上得罪你，或你的臣仆，或这百姓，你竟将我囚在监里呢？
Then Jeremiah said to King Zedekiah, What has been my sin against you or against your servants or against this people, that you have put me in prison?

对你们预言巴比伦王必不来攻击你们和这地的先知，现今在哪里呢？
Where now are your prophets who said to you, The king of Babylon will not come against you and against this land?

主我的王阿，求你现在垂听，准我在你面前的恳求，不要使我回到文士约拿单的房屋中，免得我死在那里。
And now be pleased to give ear, O my lord the king; let my prayer for help come before you, and do not make me go back to the house of Jonathan the scribe, for fear that I may come to my death there.

于是，西底家王下令，他们就把耶利米交在护卫兵的院中，每天从饼铺街取一个饼给他，直到城中的饼用尽了。这样，耶利米仍在护卫兵的院中。
Then by the order of Zedekiah the king, Jeremiah was put into the place of the armed watchmen, and they gave him every day a cake of bread from the street of the bread-makers, till all the bread in the town was used up. So Jeremiah was kept in the place of the armed watchmen.

玛坦的儿子示法提雅，巴施户珥的儿子基大利，示利米雅的儿子犹甲，玛基雅的儿子巴示户珥听见耶利米对众人所说的话，说，
Now it came to the ears of Shephatiah, the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah, the son of Pashhur, and Jucal, the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur, the son of Malchiah, that Jeremiah had said to all the people,

耶和华如此说，住在这城里的必遭刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫而死。但出去归降迦勒底人的必得存活，就是以自己命为掠物的，必得存活。
These are the words of the Lord: Whoever goes on living in this town will come to his death by the sword or through need of food or by disease: but whoever goes out to the Chaldaeans will keep his life out of the power of the attackers and be safe.

耶和华如此说，这城必要交在巴比伦王军队的手中，他必攻取这城。
The Lord has said, This town will certainly be given into the hands of the army of the king of Babylon, and he will take it.

于是首领对王说，求你将这人治死。因他向城里剩下的兵丁和众民说这样的话，使他们的手发软。这人不是求这百姓得平安，乃是叫他们受灾祸。
Then the rulers said to the king, Let this man be put to death, because he is putting fear into the hearts of the men of war who are still in the town, and into the hearts of the people, by saying such things to them: this man is not working for the well-being of the people, but for their damage.

西底家王说，他在你们手中，无论何事，王也不能与你们反对。
Then Zedekiah the king said, See, he is in your hands: for the king was not able to do anything against them.

他们就拿住耶利米，下在哈米勒的儿子（或作王的儿子）玛基雅的牢狱里。那牢狱在护卫兵的院中。他们用绳子将耶利米系下去。牢狱里没有水，只有淤泥，耶利米就陷在淤泥中。
So they took Jeremiah and put him into the water-hole of Malchiah, the king's son, in the place of the armed watchmen: and they let Jeremiah down with cords. And in the hole there was no water, but wet earth: and Jeremiah went down into the wet earth.

在王宫的太监古实人以伯米勒，听见他们将耶利米下了牢狱（那时王坐在便雅悯门口），
Now it came to the ears of Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, an unsexed servant in the king's house, that they had put Jeremiah into the water-hole; the king at that time being seated in the doorway of Benjamin:

以伯米勒就从王宫里出来，对王说，
And Ebed-melech went out from the king's house and said to the king,

主我的王阿，这些人向先知耶利米一味地行恶，将他下在牢狱中。他在那里必因饥饿而死，因为城中再没有粮食。
My lord the king, these men have done evil in all they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have put into the water-hole; and he will come to his death in the place where he is through need of food: for there is no more bread in the town.

王就吩咐古实人以伯米勒说，你从这里带领三十人，趁着先知耶利米未死以前，将他从牢狱中提上来。
Then the king gave orders to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take with you three men from here and get Jeremiah out of the water-hole before death overtakes him.

于是以伯米勒带领这些人同去，进入王宫，到库房以下，从那里取了些碎布和破烂的衣服，用绳子缒下牢狱去到耶利米那里。
So Ebed-melech took the men with him and went into the house of the king, to the place where the clothing was kept, and got from there old clothing and bits of old cloth, and let them down by cords into the water-hole where Jeremiah was.

古实人以伯米勒对耶利米说，你用这些碎布和破烂的衣服放在绳子上，垫你的胳肢窝。耶利米就照样行了。
And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to Jeremiah, Put these bits of old cloth under your arms under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.

这样，他们用绳子将耶利米从牢狱里拉上来。耶利米仍在护卫兵的院中。
So pulling Jeremiah up with the cords they got him out of the water-hole: and Jeremiah was kept in the place of the armed watchmen.

西底家王打发人带领先知耶利米，进耶和华殿中第三门里见王。王就对耶利米说，我要问你一件事，你丝毫不可向我隐瞒。
Then King Zedekiah sent for Jeremiah the prophet and took him into the rulers' doorway in the house of the Lord: and the king said to Jeremiah, I have a question to put to you; keep nothing back from me.

耶利米对西底家说，我若告诉你，你岂不定要杀我吗？我若劝戒你，你必不听从我。
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I give you the answer to your question, will you not certainly put me to death? and if I make a suggestion to you, you will not give it a hearing.

西底家王就私下向耶利米说，我指着那造我们生命之永生的耶和华起誓，我必不杀你，也不将你交在寻索你命的人手中。
So King Zedekiah gave his oath to Jeremiah secretly, saying, By the living Lord, who gave us our life, I will not put you to death, or give you up to these men who are desiring to take your life.

耶利米对西底家说，耶和华万军之神，以色列的神如此说，你若出去归降巴比伦王的首领，你的命就必存活，这城也不至被火焚烧，你和你的全家都必存活。
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, These are the words of the Lord, the God of armies, the God of Israel: If you go out to the king of Babylon's captains, then you will have life, and the town will not be burned with fire, and you and your family will be kept from death:

你若不出去归降巴比伦王的首领，这城必交在迦勒底人手中。他们必用火焚烧，你也不得脱离他们的手。
But if you do not go out to the king of Babylon's captains, then this town will be given into the hands of the Chaldaeans and they will put it on fire, and you will not get away from them.

西底家王对耶利米说，我怕那些投降迦勒底人的犹大人，恐怕迦勒底人将我交在他们手中，他们戏弄我。
And King Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, I am troubled on account of the Jews who have gone over to the Chaldaeans, for fear that they may give me up to them and they will put me to shame.

耶利米说，迦勒底人必不将你交出。求你听从我对你所说耶和华的话，这样你必得好处，你的命也必存活。
But Jeremiah said, They will not give you up: be guided now by the word of the Lord as I have given it to you, and it will be well for you, and you will keep your life.

你若不肯出去，耶和华指示我的话乃是这样，
But if you do not go out, this is what the Lord has made clear to me:

犹大王宫里所剩的妇女必都带到巴比伦王的首领那里。这些妇女必说，你知己的朋友催逼你，胜过你。见你的脚陷入淤泥中，就转身退后了。
See, all the rest of the women in the house of the king of Judah will be taken out to the king of Babylon's captains, and these women will say, Your nearest friends have been false to you and have got the better of you: they have made your feet go deep into the wet earth, and they are turned away back from you.

人必将你的后妃和你的儿女带到迦勒底人那里。你也不得脱离他们的手，必被巴比伦王的手捉住。你也必使这城被火焚烧。
And they will take all your wives and your children out to the Chaldaeans: and you will not get away out of their hands, but will be taken by the hands of the king of Babylon: and this town will be burned with fire.

西底家对耶利米说，不要使人知道这些话，你就不至于死。
Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, Let no man have knowledge of these words, and you will not be put to death.

首领若听见了我与你说话，就来见你，问你说，你对王说什么话不要向我们隐瞒，我们就不杀你。王向你说什么话也要告诉我们。
But if it comes to the ears of the rulers that I have been talking with you, and they come and say to you, Give us word now of what you have said to the king and what the king said to you, keeping nothing back and we will not put you to death;

你就对他们说，我在王面前恳求不要叫我回到约拿单的房屋死在那里。
Then you are to say to them, I made my request to the king, that he would not send me back to my death in Jonathan's house.

随后众首领来见耶利米，问他，他就照王所吩咐的一切话回答他们。他们不再与他说话，因为事情没有泄漏。
Then all the rulers came to Jeremiah, questioning him: and he gave them an answer in the words the king had given him orders to say. So they said nothing more to him; for the thing was not made public.

于是耶利米仍在护卫兵的院中，直到耶路撒冷被攻取的日子。
So Jeremiah was kept in the place of the armed watchmen till the day when Jerusalem was taken.

犹大王西底家第九年十月，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒率领全军来围困耶路撒冷。
And it came about, that when Jerusalem was taken, (in the ninth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, with all his army, came against Jerusalem, shutting it in on every side;

西底家十一年四月初九日，城被攻破。
In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the town was broken into:)

耶路撒冷被攻取的时候，巴比伦王的首领尼甲沙利薛，三甲尼波，撒西金，拉撒力，尼甲沙利薛，拉墨，并巴比伦王其余的一切首领都来坐在中门。
All the captains of the king of Babylon came in and took their places in the middle doorway of the town, Nergal-shar-ezer, ruler of Sin-magir, the Rabmag, and Nebushazban, the Rab-saris, and all the captains of the king of Babylon.

犹大王西底家和一切兵丁看见他们，就在夜间从靠近王园两城中间的门出城逃跑，往亚拉巴逃去。
And when Zedekiah, king of Judah, and all the men of war saw it, they went in flight from the town by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the doorway between the two walls: and they went out by the Arabah.

迦勒底的军队追赶他们，在耶利哥的平原追上西底家，将他拿住，带到哈马地的利比拉，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒那里。尼布甲尼撒就审判他。
But the Chaldaean army went after them and overtook Zedekiah in the lowlands of Jericho: and they made him a prisoner and took him up to Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, to Riblah in the land of Hamath, to be judged by him.

巴比伦王在利比拉，西底家眼前杀了他的众子，又杀了犹大的一切贵胄，
Then the king of Babylon put the sons of Zedekiah to death before his eyes in Riblah: and the king of Babylon put to death all the great men of Judah.

并且剜西底家的眼睛，用铜链锁着他，要带到巴比伦去。
And more than this, he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and had him put in chains to take him away to Babylon.

迦勒底人用火焚烧王宫和百姓的房屋，又拆毁耶路撒冷的城墙。
And the Chaldaeans put the king's house on fire, as well as the houses of the people, and had the walls of Jerusalem broken down.

那时，护卫长尼布撒拉旦将城里所剩下的百姓和投降他的逃民，以及其余的民都掳到巴比伦去了。
Then Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took away to Babylon as prisoners, all the rest of the workmen who were still in the town, as well as those who had given themselves up to him, and all the rest of the people.

护卫长尼布撒拉旦却将民中毫无所有的穷人留在犹大地，当时给他们葡萄园和田地。
But Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, let the poorest of the people, who had nothing whatever, go on living in the land of Judah, and gave them vine-gardens and fields at the same time.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒提到耶利米，嘱咐护卫长尼布撒拉旦说，
Now Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, gave orders about Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, saying,

你领他去，好好地看待他，切不可害他。他对你怎么说，你就向他怎么行。
Take him and keep an eye on him and see that no evil comes to him; but do with him whatever he says to you.

护卫长尼布撒拉旦和尼布沙斯班，拉撒力，尼甲沙利薛，拉墨，并巴比伦王的一切官长，
So Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, sent Nebushazban, the Rab-saris, and Nergal-shar-ezer, the Rabmag, and all the chief captains of the king of Babylon,

打发人去，将耶利米从护卫兵院中提出来，交与沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利，带回家去。于是耶利米住在民中。
And they sent and took Jeremiah out of the place of the watchmen, and gave him into the care of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, to take him to his house: so he was living among the people.

耶利米还囚在护卫兵院中的时候，耶和华的话临到他说，
Now the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah while he was shut up in the place of the armed watchmen, saying,

你去告诉古实人以伯米勒说，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我说降祸不降福的话必临到这城，到那时必在你面前成就了。
Go and say to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, my words will come true for this town, for evil and not for good: they will come about before your eyes on that day.

耶和华说，到那日我必拯救你，你必不至交在你所怕的人手中。
But I will keep you safe on that day, says the Lord: you will not be given into the hands of the men you are fearing.

我定要搭救你，你不至倒在刀下，却要以自己的命为掠物，因你倚靠我。这是耶和华说的。
For I will certainly let you go free, and you will not be put to the sword, but your life will be given to you out of the hands of your attackers: because you have put your faith in me, says the Lord.

耶利米锁在耶路撒冷和犹大被掳到巴比伦的人中，护卫长尼布撒拉旦将他从拉玛释放以后，耶和华的话临到耶利米。
The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, after Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him; for he had been put in chains, among all the prisoners of Jerusalem and Judah who were taken away prisoners to Babylon.

护卫长将耶利米叫来，对他说，耶和华你的神曾说要降这祸与此地。
And the captain of the armed men took Jeremiah and said to him, The Lord your God gave word of the evil which was to come on this place:

耶和华使这祸临到，照他所说的行了。因为你们得罪耶和华，没有听从他的话，所以这事临到你们。
*** and the Lord has made it come, and has done as he said; because of your sin against the Lord in not giving ear to his voice; and that is why this thing has come on you.

现在我解开你手上的链子，你若看与我同往巴比伦去好，就可以去，我必厚待你。你若看与我同往巴比伦去不好，就不必去。看哪，全地在你面前，你以为哪里美好，哪里合宜，只管上哪里去吧。
Now see, this day I am freeing you from the chains which are on your hands. If it seems good to you to come with me to Babylon, then come, and I will keep an eye on you; but if it does not seem good to you to come with me to Babylon, then do not come: see, all the land is before you; if it seems good and right to you to go on living in the land,

耶利米还没有回去，护卫长说，你可以回到沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利那里去。现在巴比伦王立他作犹大城邑的省长。你可以在他那里住在民中，不然，你看哪里合宜就可以上哪里去。于是护卫长送他粮食和礼物，释放他去了。
Then go back to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has made ruler over the towns of Judah, and make your living-place with him among the people; or go wherever it seems right to you to go. So the captain of the armed men gave him food and some money and let him go.

耶利米就到米斯巴见亚希甘的儿子基大利，在他那里住在境内剩下的民中。
So Jeremiah went to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, in Mizpah, and was living with him among the people who were still in the land.

在田野的一切军长，和属他们的人，听见巴比伦王立了亚希甘的儿子基大利作境内的省长，并将没有掳到巴比伦的男人，妇女，孩童，和境内极穷的人全交给他。
Now when it came to the ears of all the captains of the forces who were in the field, and their men, that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, ruler in the land, and had put under his care the men and women and children, all the poorest of the land, those who had not been taken away to Babylon;

于是军长尼探雅的儿子以实玛利，加利亚的两个儿子约哈难和约拿单，单户篾的儿子西莱雅，并尼陀法人以斐的众子，玛迦人的儿子耶撒尼亚和属他们的人，都到米斯巴见基大利。
Then they came to Gedaliah in Mizpah, even Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Seraiah, the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah, the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.

沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利向他们和属他们的人起誓说，不要怕服事迦勒底人，只管住在这地，服事巴比伦王，就可以得福。
And Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, took an oath to them and their men, saying, Have no fear of the servants of the Chaldaeans: go on living in the land, and become the servants of the king of Babylon, and all will be well.

至于我，我要住在米斯巴，伺候那到我们这里来的迦勒底人。只是你们当积蓄酒，油，和夏天的果子，收在器皿里，住在你们所占的城邑中。
As for me, I will be living in Mizpah as your representative before the Chaldaeans who come to us: but you are to get in your wine and summer fruits and oil and put them in your vessels, and make living-places for yourselves in the towns which you have taken.

在摩押地和亚扪人中，在以东地和各国的一切犹大人，听见巴比伦王留下些犹大人，并立沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利管理他们。
In the same way, when all the Jews who were in Moab and among the children of Ammon and in Edom and in all the countries, had news that the king of Babylon had let Judah keep some of its people and that he had put over them Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan;

这一切犹大人就从所赶到的各处回来，到犹大地的米斯巴基大利那里，又积蓄了许多的酒，并夏天的果子。
Then all the Jews came back from all the places to which they had gone in flight, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and got in a great store of wine and summer fruit.

加利亚的儿子约哈难和在田野的一切军长来到米斯巴见基大利，
Now Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which were in the field, came to Gedaliah in Mizpah,

对他说，亚扪人的王巴利斯打发尼探雅的儿子以实玛利来要你的命，你知道吗？亚希甘的儿子基大利却不信他们的话。
And said to him, Has it come to your knowledge that Baalis, the king of the children of Ammon, has sent Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, to take your life? But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, put no faith in what they said.

加利亚的儿子约哈难在米斯巴私下对基大利说，求你容我去杀尼探雅的儿子以实玛利，必无人知道。何必让他要你的命，使聚集到你这里来的犹大人都分散，以致犹大剩下的人都灭亡呢？
Then Johanan, the son of Kareah, said to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, Let me now go and put Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, to death without anyone's knowledge: why let him take your life so that all the Jews who have come together to you may be sent in flight, and the rest of the men of Judah come to an end?

亚希甘的儿子基大利对加利亚的儿子约哈难说，你不可行这事，你所论以实玛利的话是假的。
But Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, said to Johanan, the son of Kareah, You are not to do this: for what you say about Ishmael is false.

七月间，王的大臣宗室以利沙玛的孙子，尼探雅的儿子以实玛利带着十个人，来到米斯巴见亚希甘的儿子基大利。他们在米斯巴一同吃饭。
Now it came about in the seventh month that Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the king's seed, having with him ten men, came to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, in Mizpah; and they had a meal together in Mizpah.

尼探雅的儿子以实玛利和同他来的那十个人起来，用刀杀了沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利，就是巴比伦王所立为全地省长的。
Then Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men who were with him, got up, and attacking Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, with the sword, put to death him whom the king of Babylon had made ruler over the land.

以实玛利又杀了在米斯巴，基大利那里的一切犹大人和所遇见的迦勒底兵丁。
And Ishmael put to death all the Jews who were with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldaean men of war.

他杀了基大利，无人知道。
Now on the second day after he had put Gedaliah to death, when no one had knowledge of it,

第二天，有八十人从示剑和示罗，并撒玛利亚来，胡须剃去，衣服撕裂，身体划破，手拿素祭和乳香，要奉到耶和华的殿。
Some people came from Shechem, from Shiloh and Samaria, eighty men, with the hair of their faces cut off and their clothing out of order, and with cuts on their bodies, and in their hands meal offerings and perfumes which they were taking to the house of the Lord.

尼探雅的儿子以实玛利出米斯巴迎接他们，随走随哭。遇见了他们，就对他们说，你们可以来见亚希甘的儿子基大利。
And Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, went out from Mizpah with the purpose of meeting them, weeping on his way: and it came about that when he was face to face with them he said, Come to Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam.

他们到了城中，尼探雅的儿子以实玛利和同着他的人就将他们杀了，抛在坑中。
And when they came inside the town, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and the men who were with him, put them to death and put their bodies into a deep hole.

只是他们中间有十个人对以实玛利说，不要杀我们，因为我们有许多大麦，小麦，油，蜜藏在田间。于是他住了手，没有将他们杀在弟兄中间。
But there were ten men among them who said to Ishmael, Do not put us to death, for we have secret stores, in the country, of grain and oil and honey. So he did not put them to death with their countrymen.

以实玛利将所杀之人的尸首都抛在坑里基大利的旁边。这坑是从前亚撒王因怕以色列王巴沙所挖的。尼探雅的儿子以实玛利将那些被杀的人填满了坑。
Now the hole into which Ishmael had put the dead bodies of the men whom he had put to death, was the great hole which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha, king of Israel: and Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, made it full of the bodies of those who had been put to death.

以实玛利将米斯巴剩下的人，就是众公主和仍住在米斯巴所有的百姓，原是护卫长尼布撒拉旦交给亚希甘的儿子基大利的，都掳去了。尼探雅的儿子以实玛利掳了他们，要往亚扪人那里去。
Then Ishmael took away as prisoners all the rest of the people who were in Mizpah, the king's daughters and all the people still in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, had put under the care of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam: Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, took them away prisoners with the purpose of going over to the children of Ammon.

加利亚的儿子约哈难，和同着他的众军长，听见尼探雅的儿子以实玛利所行的一切恶，
But when Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the armed forces who were with him, had news of all the evil which Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had done,

就带领众人前往，要和尼探雅的儿子以实玛利争战，在基遍的大水旁（或作大水池旁）遇见他。
They took their men and went out to make war on Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and they came face to face with him by the great waters in Gibeon.

以实玛利那里的众人看见加利亚的儿子约哈难和同着他的众军长，就都欢喜。
Now when all the people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces with him, then they were glad.

这样，以实玛利从米斯巴所掳去的众人都转身归加利亚的儿子约哈难去了。
And all the people whom Ishmael had taken away prisoners from Mizpah, turning round, came back and went to Johanan, the son of Kareah.

尼探雅的儿子以实玛利和八个人脱离约哈难的手，逃往亚扪人那里去了。
But Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, got away from Johanan, with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon.

尼探雅的儿子以实玛利杀了亚希甘的儿子基大利，从米斯巴将剩下的一切百姓，兵丁，妇女，孩童，太监掳到基遍之后，加利亚的儿子约哈难和同着他的众军长将他们都夺回来，
Then Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, took all the rest of the people whom Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had made prisoners, after he had put to death Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the people from Mizpah, that is, the men of war and the women and the children and the unsexed servants, whom he had taken back with him from Gibeon:

带到靠近伯利恒的金罕寓（或作基罗特金罕）住下，要进入埃及去。
And they went and were living in the resting-place of Chimham, which is near Beth-lehem on the way into Egypt,

因为尼探雅的儿子以实玛利杀了巴比伦王所立为省长的亚希甘的儿子基大利，约哈难惧怕迦勒底人。
Because of the Chaldaeans: for they were in fear of them because Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, had put to death Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon had made ruler over the land.

众军长和加利亚的儿子约哈难，并何沙雅的儿子耶撒尼亚（耶撒尼亚又名亚撒利雅，见四十三章二节）以及众百姓，从最小的到至大的都进前来，
Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah, the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least to the greatest, came near,

对先知耶利米说，求你准我们在你面前祈求，为我们这剩下的人祷告耶和华你的神。我们本来众多，现在剩下的极少，这是你亲眼所见的。
And said to Jeremiah the prophet, Let our request come before you, and make prayer for us to the Lord your God, even for this small band of us; for we are only a small band out of what was a great number, as your eyes may see:

愿耶和华你的神指示我们所当走的路，所当作的事。
That the Lord your God may make clear to us the way in which we are to go and what we are to do.

先知耶利米对他们说，我已经听见你们了，我必照着你们的话祷告耶和华你们的神。耶和华无论回答什么，我必都告诉你们，毫不隐瞒。
Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, I have given ear to you; see, I will make prayer to the Lord your God, as you have said; and it will be that, whatever the Lord may say in answer to you, I will give you word of it, keeping nothing back.

于是他们对耶利米说，我们若不照耶和华你的神差遣你来说的一切话行，愿耶和华在我们中间作真实诚信的见证。
Then they said to Jeremiah, May the Lord be a true witness against us in good faith, if we do not do everything which the Lord your God sends you to say to us.

我们现在请你到耶和华我们的神面前，他说的无论是好是歹，我们都必听从。我们听从耶和华我们神的话，就可以得福。
If it is good or if it is evil, we will be guided by the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we are sending you; so that it may be well for us when we give ear to the voice of the Lord our God.

过了十天，耶和华的话临到耶利米。
And it came about that after ten days the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah.

他就将加利亚的儿子约哈难和同着他的众军长，并众百姓，从最小的到至大的都叫了来，
And he sent for Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were still with him, and all the people, from the least to the greatest,

对他们说，耶和华以色列的神，就是你们请我在他面前为你们祈求的主，如此说，
And said to them, These are the words of the Lord, the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to put your request before him:

你们若仍住在这地，我就建立你们，必不拆毁，栽植你们，并不拔出，因我为降与你们的灾祸后悔了。
If you still go on living in the land, then I will go on building you up and not pulling you down, planting you and not uprooting you: for my purpose of doing evil to you has been changed.

不要怕你们所怕的巴比伦王。耶和华说，不要怕他。因为我与你们同在，要拯救你们脱离他的手。
Have no fear of the king of Babylon, of whom you are now in fear; have no fear of him, says the Lord: for I am with you to keep you safe and to give you salvation from his hands.

我也要使他发怜悯，好怜悯你们，叫你们归回本地。
And I will have mercy on you, so that he may have mercy on you and let you go back to your land.

倘若你们说，我们不住在这地，以致不听从耶和华你们神的话，
But if you say, We have no desire to go on living in this land; and do not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God,

说，我们不住这地，却要进入埃及地，在那里看不见争战，听不见角声，也不至无食饥饿。我们必住在那里。
Saying, No, but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we will not see war, or be hearing the sound of the horn, or be in need of food; there we will make our living-place;

你们所剩下的犹大人哪，现在要听耶和华的话。万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们若定意要进入埃及，在那里寄居，
Then give ear now to the word of the Lord, O you last of Judah: the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said, If your minds are fixed on going into Egypt and stopping there;

你们所惧怕的刀剑在埃及地必追上你们。你们所惧怕的饥荒在埃及要紧紧地跟随你们。你们必死在那里。
Then it will come about that the sword, which is the cause of your fear, will overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and need of food, which you are fearing, will go after you there in Egypt; and there death will come to you.

凡定意要进入埃及在那里寄居的必遭刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫而死，无一人存留，逃脱我所降与他们的灾祸。
Such will be the fate of all the men whose minds are fixed on going into Egypt and stopping there; they will come to their end by the sword, by being short of food, and by disease: not one of them will keep his life or get away from the evil which I will send on them.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我怎样将我的怒气和忿怒倾在耶路撒冷的居民身上，你们进入埃及的时候，我也必照样将我的忿怒倾在你们身上，以致你们令人辱骂，惊骇，咒诅，羞辱，你们不得再见这地方。
For this is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: As my wrath and passion have been let loose on the people of Jerusalem, so will my passion be let loose on you when you go into Egypt: and you will become an oath and a cause of wonder and a curse and a name of shame; and you will never see this place again.

所剩下的犹大人哪，耶和华论到你们说，不要进入埃及去。你们要确实地知道我今日警教你们了。
The Lord has said about you, O last of Judah, Go not into Egypt: be certain that I have given witness to you this day.

你们用诡诈自害。因为你们请我到耶和华你们的神那里，说，求你为我们祷告耶和华我们神，照耶和华我们的神一切所说的告诉我们，我们就必遵行。
For you have been acting with deceit in your hearts; for you sent me to the Lord your God, saying, Make prayer for us to the Lord our God, and give us word of everything he may say, and we will do it.

我今日将这话告诉你们，耶和华你们的神为你们的事差遣我到你们那里说的，你们却一样没有听从。
And this day I have made it clear to you, and you have not given ear to the voice of the Lord your God in anything for which he has sent me to you.

现在你们要确实地知道，你们在所要去寄居之地必遭刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫而死。
And now be certain that you will come to your end by the sword and by being short of food and by disease, in the place to which you are pleased to go for a living-place.

耶利米向众百姓说完了耶和华他们神的一切话，就是耶和华他们神差遣他去所说的一切话。
And it came about that when Jeremiah had come to the end of giving all the people the words of the Lord their God, which the Lord their God had sent him to say to them, even all these words,

何沙雅的儿子亚撒利雅和加利亚的儿子约哈难，并一切狂傲的人，就对耶利米说，你说谎言。耶和华我们的神并没有差遣你来说，你们不可进入埃及，在那里寄居。
Then Azariah, the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the men of pride, said to Jeremiah, You have said what is false: the Lord our God has not sent you to say, You are not to go into the land of Egypt and make your living-place there:

这是尼利亚的儿子巴录挑唆你害我们，要将我们交在迦勒底人的手中，使我们有被杀的，有被掳到巴比伦去的。
But Baruch, the son of Neriah, is moving you against us, to give us up into the hands of the Chaldaeans so that they may put us to death, and take us away prisoners into Babylon.

于是加利亚的儿子约哈难和一切军长，并众百姓，不听从耶和华的话住在犹大地。
So Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, did not give ear to the order of the Lord that they were to go on living in the land of Judah.

加利亚的儿子约哈难和一切军长却将所剩下的犹大人，就是从被赶到各国回来在犹大地寄居的男人，妇女，孩童，和众公主，并护卫长尼布撒拉旦所留在沙番的孙子亚希甘的儿子基大利那里的众人，与先知耶利米，以及尼利亚的儿子巴录，
But Johanan, the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces took all the rest of Judah who had come back into the land of Judah from all the nations where they had been forced to go;


The men and the women and the children and the king's daughters, and every person whom Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, had put under the care of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet and Baruch, the son of Neriah;

都带入埃及地，到了答比匿。这是因他们不听从耶和华的话。
And they came into the land of Egypt; for they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord: and they came to Tahpanhes.

在答比匿，耶和华的话临到耶利米说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

你在犹大人眼前要用手拿几块大石头，藏在砌砖的灰泥中，就是在答比匿法老的宫门那里，
Take in your hand some great stones, and put them in a safe place in the paste in the brickwork which is at the way into Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, before the eyes of the men of Judah;

对他们说，万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必召我的仆人巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒来。在所藏的石头上我要安置他的宝座。他必将光华的宝帐支搭在其上。
And say to them, This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar, the king of Babylon, my servant, and he will put the seat of his kingdom on these stones which have been put in a safe place here by you; and his tent will be stretched over them.

他要来攻击埃及地，定为死亡的，必至死亡。定为掳掠的，必被掳掠。定为刀杀的，必交刀杀。
And he will come and overcome the land of Egypt; those who are for death will be put to death, those who are to be prisoners will be made prisoners, and those who are for the sword will be given to the sword.

我要在埃及神的庙中使火着起，巴比伦王要将庙宇焚烧，神像掳去。他要得（得原文作披上）埃及地，好像牧人披上外衣，从那里安然而去。
And he will put a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and they will be burned by him: and he will make Egypt clean as a keeper of sheep makes clean his clothing; and he will go out from there in peace.

他必打碎埃及地伯示麦的柱像，用火焚烧埃及神的庙宇。
And the stone pillars of Beth-shemesh in the land of Egypt will be broken by him, and the houses of the gods of Egypt burned with fire.

有临到耶利米的话，论及一切住在埃及地的犹大人，就是住在密夺，答比匿，挪弗，巴忒罗境内的犹大人，说，
The word which came to Jeremiah about all the Jews who were living in the land of Egypt, in Migdol and at Tahpanhes and at Noph and in the country of Pathros, saying,

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我所降与耶路撒冷和犹大各城的一切灾祸你们都看见了。那些城邑今日荒凉，无人居住。
The Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: You have seen all the evil which I have sent on Jerusalem and on all the towns of Judah; and now, this day they are waste and unpeopled;

这是因居民所行的恶，去烧香事奉别神，就是他们和你们，并你们列祖所不认识的神，惹我发怒。
Because of the evil which they have done, moving me to wrath by burning perfumes in worship to other gods, who were not their gods or yours or the gods of their fathers.

我从早起来差遣我的仆人众先知去说，你们切不要行我所厌恶这可憎之事。
And I sent all my servants the prophets to you, getting up early and sending them, saying, Do not do this disgusting thing which is hated by me.

他们却不听从，不侧耳而听，不转离恶事，仍向别神烧香。
But they gave no attention, and their ears were not open so that they might be turned from their evil-doing and from burning perfume to other gods.

因此，我的怒气和忿怒都倒出来，在犹大城邑中和耶路撒冷的街市上，如火着起，以致都荒废凄凉，正如今日一样。
Because of this, my passion and my wrath were let loose, burning in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are waste and unpeopled as at this day.

现在耶和华万军之神，以色列的神如此说，你们为何作这大恶自害己命，使你们的男人，妇女，婴孩，和吃奶的都从犹大中剪除，不留一人呢？
So now, the Lord, the God of armies, the God of Israel, has said, Why are you doing this great evil against yourselves, causing every man and woman, little child and baby at the breast among you in Judah to be cut off till not one is still living;

就是因你们手所作的，在所去寄居的埃及地向别神烧香惹我发怒，使你们被剪除，在天下万国中令人咒诅羞辱。
Moving me to wrath with the work of your hands, burning perfumes to other gods in the land of Egypt, where you have gone to make a place for yourselves, so that you may become a curse and a name of shame among all the nations of the earth?

你们列祖的恶行，犹大列王和他们后妃的恶行，你们自己和你们妻子的恶行，就是在犹大地，耶路撒冷街上所行的，你们都忘了吗？
Have you no memory of the evil-doing of your fathers, and the evil-doing of the kings of Judah, and the evil-doing of their wives, and the evil which you yourselves have done, and the evil which your wives have done, in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

到如今还没有懊悔，没有惧怕，没有遵行我在你们和你们列祖面前所设立的法度律例。
Even to this day their hearts are not broken, and they have no fear, and have not gone in the way of my law or of my rules which I gave to you and to your fathers.

所以万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必向你们变脸降灾，以致剪除犹大众人。
So this is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, my face will be turned against you for evil, for the cutting off of all Judah;

那定意进入埃及地，在那里寄居的，就是所剩下的犹大人，我必使他们尽都灭绝，必在埃及地仆倒，必因刀剑饥荒灭绝。从最小的到至大的都必遭刀剑饥荒而死，以致令人辱骂，惊骇，咒诅，羞辱。
And I will take the last of Judah, whose minds are fixed on going into the land of Egypt and stopping there, and they will all come to their end, falling in the land of Egypt by the sword and by being short of food and by disease; death will overtake them, from the least to the greatest, death by the sword and by need of food: they will become an oath and a cause of wonder and a curse and a name of shame.

我怎样用刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫刑罚耶路撒冷，也必照样刑罚那些住在埃及地的犹大人。
For I will send punishment on those who are living in the land of Egypt, as I have sent punishment on Jerusalem, by the sword and by need of food and by disease:

甚至那进入埃及地寄居的，就是所剩下的犹大人，都不得逃脱，也不得存留归回犹大地。他们心中甚想归回居住之地。除了逃脱的以外，一个都不能归回。
So that not one of the rest of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt and are living there, will get away or keep his life, to come back to the land of Judah where they are hoping to come back and be living again: for not one will come back, but only those who are able to get away.

那些住在埃及地巴忒罗知道自己妻子向别神烧香的，与旁边站立的众妇女，聚集成群，回答耶利米说，
Then all the men who had knowledge that their wives were burning perfumes to other gods, and all the women who were present, a great meeting, answering Jeremiah, said,

论到你奉耶和华的名向我们所说的话，我们必不听从。
As for the word which you have said to us in the name of the Lord, we will not give ear to you.

我们定要成就我们口中所出的一切话，向天后烧香，浇奠祭，按着我们与我们列祖，君王，首领在犹大的城邑中和耶路撒冷的街市上素常所行的一样。因为那时我们吃饱饭，享福乐，并不见灾祸。
But we will certainly do every word which has gone out of our mouths, burning perfumes to the queen of heaven and draining out drink offerings to her as we did, we and our fathers and our kings and our rulers, in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem: for then we had food enough and did well and saw no evil.

自从我们停止向天后烧香，浇奠祭，我们倒缺乏一切，又因刀剑饥荒灭绝。
But from the time when we gave up burning perfumes to the queen of heaven and draining out drink offerings to her, we have been in need of all things, and have been wasted by the sword and by need of food.

妇女说，我们向天后烧香，浇奠祭，作天后像的饼供奉她，向她浇奠祭，是外乎我们的丈夫吗？
And the women said, When we were burning perfumes to the queen of heaven and draining out drink offerings to her, did we make cakes in her image and give her our drink offerings without the knowledge of our husbands?

耶利米对一切那样回答他的男人妇女说，
Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men and women and all the people who had given him that answer,

你们与你们列祖，君王，首领，并国内的百姓，在犹大城邑中和耶路撒冷街市上所烧的香，耶和华岂不记念，心中岂不思想吗？
The perfumes which you have been burning in the towns of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers and your kings and your rulers and the people of the land, had the Lord no memory of them, and did he not keep them in mind?

耶和华因你们所作的恶，所行可憎的事，不能再容忍，所以你们的地荒凉，令人惊骇咒诅，无人居住，正如今日一样。
And the Lord was no longer able to put up with the evil of your doings and the disgusting things you did; and because of this your land has become a waste and a cause of wonder and a curse, with no one living in it, as at this day.

你们烧香，得罪耶和华，没有听从他的话，没有遵行他的律法，条例，法度，所以你们遭遇这灾祸，正如今日一样。
Because you have been burning perfumes, and sinning against the Lord, and have not given ear to the voice of the Lord, or gone in the way of his law or his rules or his orders; for this reason this evil has come on you, as it is today.

耶利米又对众民和众妇女说，你们在埃及地的一切犹大人当听耶和华的话。
Further, Jeremiah said to all the people and all the women, Give ear to the word of the Lord, all those of Judah who are living in Egypt:

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们和你们的妻都口中说，手里作，说，我们定要偿还所许的愿，向天后烧香，浇奠祭。现在你们只管坚定所许的愿而偿还吧。
This is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: You women have said with your mouths, and with your hands you have done what you said, We will certainly give effect to the oaths we have made, to have perfumes burned to the queen of heaven and drink offerings drained out to her: then give effect to your oaths and do them.

所以你们住在埃及地的一切犹大人当听耶和华的话。耶和华说，我指着我的大名起誓，在埃及全地，我的名不再被犹大一个人的口称呼说，我指着主永生的耶和华起誓。
And now give ear to the word of the Lord, all you of Judah who are living in the land of Egypt: Truly, I have taken an oath by my great name, says the Lord, that my name is no longer to be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, By the life of the Lord God.

我向他们留意降祸不降福。在埃及地的一切犹大人必因刀剑，饥荒所灭，直到灭尽。
See, I am watching over them for evil and not for good: all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt will be wasted by the sword and by need of food till there is an end of them.

脱离刀剑，从埃及地归回犹大地的人数很少。那进入埃及地要在那里寄居的，就是所剩下的犹大人，必知道是谁的话立得住，是我的话呢？是他们的话呢？
And those who get away safe from the sword will come back from the land of Egypt to the land of Judah, a very small number; and all the rest of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt and are living there, will see whose word has effect, mine or theirs.

耶和华说，我在这地方刑罚你们，必有预兆，使你们知道我降祸与你们的话必要立得住。
And this will be the sign to you, says the Lord, that I will give you punishment in this place, so that you may see that my words will certainly have effect against you for evil:

耶和华如此说，我必将埃及王法老合弗拉交在他仇敌和寻索其命的人手中，像我将犹大王西底家交在他仇敌，和寻索其命的巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒手中一样。
The Lord has said, See, I will give up Pharaoh Hophra, king of Egypt, into the hands of those who are fighting against him and desiring to take his life, as I gave Zedekiah, king of Judah, into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, his hater, who had designs against his life.

犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬第四年，尼利亚的儿子巴录将先知耶利米口中所说的话写在书上。耶利米说，
The words which Jeremiah the prophet said to Baruch, the son of Neriah, when he put these words down in a book from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah; he said,

巴录阿，耶和华以色列的神说，
This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said of you, O Baruch:

巴录（原文作你）曾说，哀哉。耶和华将忧愁加在我的痛苦上，我因唉哼而困乏，不得安歇。
You said, Sorrow is mine! for the Lord has given me sorrow in addition to my pain; I am tired with the sound of my sorrow, and I get no rest.

你要这样告诉他，耶和华如此说，我所建立的，我必拆毁。我所栽植的，我必拔出。在全地我都如此行。
This is what you are to say to him: The Lord has said, Truly, the building which I put up will be broken down, and that which was planted by me will be uprooted, and this through all the land;

你为自己图谋大事吗？不要图谋。我必使灾祸临到凡有血气的。但你无论往哪里去，我必使你以自己的命为掠物。这是耶和华说的。
And as for you, are you looking for great things for yourself? Have no desire for them: for truly I will send evil on all flesh, says the Lord: but your life I will keep safe from attack wherever you go.

耶和华论列国的话临到先知耶利米。
The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet about the nations.

论到关乎埃及王法老尼哥的军队，这军队安营在伯拉河边的迦基米施，是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒在犹大王约西亚的儿子约雅敬第四年所打败的。
Of Egypt: about the army of Pharaoh-neco, king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, overcame in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah.

你们要预备大小盾牌，往前上阵。
Get out the breastplate and body-cover, and come together to the fight.

你们套上车，骑上马。顶盔站立，磨枪贯甲。
Make the horses ready, and get up, you horsemen, and take your places with your head-dresses; make the spears sharp and put on the breastplates.

我为何看见他们惊惶转身退后呢？他们的勇士打败了，急忙逃跑，并不回头。惊吓四围都有。这是耶和华说的。
What have I seen? they are overcome with fear and turned back; their men of war are broken and have gone in flight, not looking back: fear is on every side, says the Lord.

不要容快跑的逃避。不要容勇士逃脱（或作快跑的不能逃避。勇士不能逃脱）。他们在北方伯拉河边绊跌仆倒。
Let not the quick-footed go in flight, or the man of war get away; on the north, by the river Euphrates, they are slipping and falling.

像尼罗河涨发，像江河之水翻腾的是谁呢？
Who is this coming up like the Nile, whose waters are lifting their heads like the rivers?

埃及像尼罗河涨发，像江河的水翻腾。他说，我要涨发遮盖遍地。我要毁灭城邑和其中的居民。
Egypt is coming up like the Nile, and his waters are lifting their heads like the rivers, and he says, I will go up, covering the earth; I will send destruction on the town and its people.

马匹上去吧。车辆急行吧。勇士，就是手拿盾牌的古实人和弗人（又作吕彼亚人），并拉弓的路德族，都出去吧。
Go up, you horses; go rushing on, you carriages of war; go out, you men of war: Cush and Put, gripping the body-cover, and the Ludim, with bent bows.

那日是主万军之耶和华报仇的日子，要向敌人报仇。刀剑必吞吃得饱，饮血饮足。因为主万军之耶和华在北方伯拉河边有献祭的事。
But that day is the day of the Lord, the Lord of armies, a day of punishment when he will take payment from his haters: and the sword will have all its desire, drinking their blood in full measure: for there is an offering to the Lord, the Lord of armies, in the north country by the river Euphrates.

埃及的民哪（民原文作处女），可以上基列取乳香去。你虽多服良药，总是徒然，不得治好。
Go up to Gilead and take sweet oil, O virgin daughter of Egypt: there is no help in all your medical arts; nothing will make you well.

列国听见你的羞辱，遍地满了你的哀声。勇士与勇士彼此相碰，一齐跌倒。
Your shame has come to the ears of the nations, and the earth is full of your cry: for the strong man is falling against the strong, they have come down together.

耶和华对先知耶利米所说的话，论到巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒要来攻击埃及地，
The word which the Lord said to Jeremiah the prophet, of how Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, would come and make war on the land of Egypt.

你们要传扬在埃及，宣告在密夺，报告在挪弗，答比匿说，要站起出队，自作准备，因为刀剑在你四围施行吞灭的事。
Give the news in Migdol, make it public in Noph: say, Take up your positions and make yourselves ready; for on every side of you the sword has made destruction.

你的壮士为何被冲去呢？他们站立不住。因为耶和华驱逐他们，
Why has Apis, your strong one, gone in flight? he was not able to keep his place, because the Lord was forcing him down with strength.

使多人绊跌。他们也彼此撞倒，说，起来吧。我们再往本民本地去，好躲避欺压的刀剑。
... are stopped in their going, they are falling; and they say one to another, Let us get up and go back to our people, to the land of our birth, away from the cruel sword.

他们在那里喊叫说，埃及王法老不过是个声音（不过是个声音或作已经败亡）。他已错过所定的时候了。
Give a name to Pharaoh, king of Egypt: A noise who has let the time go by.

君王名为万军之耶和华的说，我指着我的永生起誓，尼布甲尼撒（原文作他）来的势派必像他泊在众山之中，像迦密在海边一样。
By my life, says the King, whose name is the Lord of armies, truly, like Tabor among the mountains and like Carmel by the sea, so will he come.

住在埃及的民哪（民原文作女子），要预备掳去时所用的物件。因为挪弗必成为荒场，且被烧毁，无人居住。
O daughter living in Egypt, make ready the vessels of a prisoner: for Noph will become a waste, it will be burned up and become unpeopled.

埃及是肥美的母牛犊。但出于北方的毁灭（毁灭或作牛虻）来到了。来到了。
Egypt is a fair young cow; but a biting insect has come on her out of the north.

其中的雇勇好像圈里的肥牛犊，他们转身退后，一齐逃跑，站立不住。因为他们遭难的日子，追讨的时候已经临到。
And those who were her fighters for payment are like fat oxen; for they are turned back, they have gone in flight together, they do not keep their place: for the day of their fate has come on them, the time of their punishment.

其中的声音好像蛇行一样。敌人要成队而来，如砍伐树木的手拿斧子攻击他。
She makes a sound like the hiss of a snake when they come on with strength; they go against her with axes, like wood-cutters.

耶和华说，埃及的树林虽然不能寻察（或作穿不过），敌人却要砍伐，因他们多于蝗虫，不可胜数。
They will be cutting down her woods, for they may not be searched out; because they are like locusts, more than may be numbered.

埃及的民（民原文作女子）必然蒙羞，必交在北方人的手中。
The daughter of Egypt will be put to shame; she will be given up into the hands of the people of the north.

万军之耶和华以色列的神说，我必刑罚挪的亚扪（埃及尊大之神）和法老，并埃及与埃及的神，以及君王，也必刑罚法老和倚靠他的人。
The Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, I will send punishment on Amon of No and on Pharaoh and on those who put their faith in him;

我要将他们交付寻索其命之人的手和巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒与他臣仆的手。以后埃及必再有人居住，与从前一样。这是耶和华说的。
And I will give them up into the hands of those who will take their lives, and into the hands of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, and into the hands of his servants: and later, it will be peopled as in the past, says the Lord.

我的仆人雅各阿，不要惧怕。以色列阿，不要惊惶。因我要从远方拯救你，从被掳到之地拯救你的后裔。雅各必回来，得享平靖安逸，无人使他害怕。
But have no fear, O Jacob, my servant, and do not be troubled, O Israel: for see, I will make you come back from far away, and your seed from the land where they are prisoners; and Jacob will come back, and will be quiet and in peace, and no one will give him cause for fear.

我的仆人雅各阿，不要惧怕。因我与你同在。我要将我所赶你到的那些国灭绝净尽，却不将你灭绝净尽，倒要从宽惩治你，万不能不罚你（不罚你或作以你为无罪）。这是耶和华说的。
Have no fear, O Jacob, my servant, says the Lord; for I am with you: for I will put an end to all the nations where I have sent you, but I will not put an end to you completely: though with wise purpose I will put right your errors, and will not let you go quite without punishment.

法老攻击迦萨之先，有耶和华论非利士人的话临到先知耶利米。
The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet about the Philistines, before Pharaoh's attack on Gaza.

耶和华如此说，有水从北方发起，成为涨溢的河，要涨过遍地和其中所有的，并城和其中所住的。人必呼喊。境内的居民都必哀号。
This is what the Lord has said: See, waters are coming up out of the north, and will become an overflowing stream, overflowing the land and everything in it, the town and those who are living in it; and men will give a cry, and all the people of the land will be crying out in pain.

听见敌人壮马蹄跳的响声和战车隆隆，车轮轰轰。为父的手就发软，不回头看顾儿女。
At the noise of the stamping of the feet of his war-horses, at the rushing of his carriages and the thunder of his wheels, fathers will give no thought to their children, because their hands are feeble;

因为日子将到，要毁灭一切非利士人，剪除帮助推罗，西顿所剩下的人。原来耶和华必毁灭非利士人，就是迦斐托海岛余剩的人。
Because of the day which is coming with destruction on all the Philistines, cutting off from Tyre and Zidon the last of their helpers: for the Lord will send destruction on the Philistines, the rest of the sea-land of Caphtor.

迦萨成了光秃。平原中所剩的亚实基伦归于无有。你用刀划身，要到几时呢？
The hair is cut off from the head of Gaza; Ashkelon has come to nothing; the last of the Anakim are deeply wounding themselves.

耶和华的刀剑哪，你到几时才止息呢？你要入鞘，安靖不动。
O sword of the Lord, how long will you have no rest? put yourself back into your cover; be at peace, be quiet.

耶和华既吩咐你攻击亚实基伦和海边之地，他已经派定你，焉能止息呢？
How is it possible for it to be quiet, seeing that the Lord has given it orders? against Ashkelon and against the sea-land he has given it directions.

论摩押。万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，尼波有祸了。因变为荒场。基列亭蒙羞被攻取。米斯迦蒙羞被毁坏。
Of Moab. The Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: Sorrow on Nebo, for it has been made waste; Kiriathaim has been put to shame and is taken: the strong place is put to shame and broken down.

摩押不再被称赞。有人在希实本设计谋害她，说，来吧。我们将她剪除，不再成国。玛得缅哪，你也必默默无声。刀剑必追赶你。
The praise of Moab has come to an end; as for Heshbon, evil has been designed against her; come, let us put an end to her as a nation. But your mouth will be shut, O Madmen; the sword will go after you.

从何罗念有喊荒凉大毁灭的哀声，
There is the sound of crying from Horonaim, wasting and great destruction;

摩押毁灭了。她的孩童（或作家僮）发哀声，使人听见。
Moab is broken; her cry has gone out to Zoar.

人上鲁希坡随走随哭，因为在何罗念的下坡听见毁灭的哀声。
For by the slope of Luhith they will go up, weeping all the way; for on the way down to Horonaim the cry of destruction has come to their ears.

你们要奔逃，自救性命，独自居住，好像旷野的杜松。
Go in flight, get away with your lives, and let your faces be turned to Aroer in the Arabah.

你因倚靠自己所作的和自己的财宝必被攻取。基抹和属他的祭司，首领也要一同被掳去。
For because you have put your faith in your strong places, you, even you, will be taken: and Chemosh will go out as a prisoner, his priests and his rulers together.

行毁灭的必来到各城，并无一城得免。山谷必至败落，平原必被毁坏。正如耶和华所说的。
And the attacker will come against every town, not one will be safe; and the valley will be made waste, and destruction will come to the lowland, as the Lord has said.

要将翅膀给摩押，使她可以飞去。她的城邑必至荒凉，无人居住。
Put up a pillar for Moab, for she will come to a complete end: and her towns will become a waste, without anyone living in them.

懒惰为耶和华行事的，必受咒诅。禁止刀剑不经血的，必受咒诅。
Let him be cursed who does the Lord's work half-heartedly; let him be cursed who keeps back his sword from blood.

摩押自幼年以来常享安逸，如酒在渣滓上澄清，没有从这器皿倒在那器皿里，也未曾被掳去。因此，它的原味尚存，香气未变。
From his earliest days, Moab has been living in comfort; like wine long stored he has not been drained from vessel to vessel, he has never gone away as a prisoner: so his taste is still in him, his smell is unchanged.

耶和华说，日子将到，我必打发倒酒的往她那里去，将她倒出来，倒空她的器皿，打碎她的坛子。
So truly, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will send to him men who will have him turned over till there is no more wine in his vessels, and his wine-skins will be completely broken.

摩押必因基抹羞愧，像以色列家从前倚靠伯特利的神羞愧一样。
And Moab will be shamed on account of Chemosh, as the children of Israel were shamed on account of Beth-el their hope.

你们怎么说，我们是勇士，是有勇力打仗的呢？
How say you, We are men of war and strong fighters?

摩押变为荒场，敌人上去进了她的城邑。她所特选的少年人下去遭了杀戮。这是君王名为万军之耶和华说的。
He who makes Moab waste has gone up against her; and the best of her young men have gone down to their death, says the King, whose name is the Lord of armies.

摩押的灾殃临近。她的苦难速速来到。
The fate of Moab is near, and trouble is coming on him very quickly.

凡在她四围的和认识她名的，你们都要为她悲伤，说，那结实的杖和那美好的棍，何竟折断了呢？
All you who are round about him, give signs of grief for him, and all you who have knowledge of his name, say, How is the strong rod broken, even the beautiful branch!

住在底本的民哪（民原文作女子），要从你荣耀的位上下来，坐受干渴。因毁灭摩押的上来攻击你，毁坏了你的保障。
Come down from your glory, O people of Dibon, and take your seat in the place of the waste; for the attacker of Moab has gone up against you, sending destruction on your strong places.

住亚罗珥的阿，要站在道旁观望，问逃避的男人和逃脱的女人说，是什么事呢？
O daughter of Aroer, take your station by the way, on the watch: questioning him who is in flight, and her who has got away safe, say, What has been done?

摩押因毁坏蒙羞。你们要哀号呼喊，要在亚嫩旁报告说，摩押变为荒场。
Moab has been put to shame, she is broken: make loud sounds of grief, crying out for help; give the news in Arnon, that Moab has been made waste.

刑罚临到平原之地的何伦，雅杂，米法押，
And punishment has come on the lowlands; on Holon and Jahzah, and on Mephaath,

底本，尼波，伯低比拉太音，
And on Dibon, and on Nebo, and on Beth-diblathaim,

基列亭，伯迦末，伯米恩，
And on Kiriathaim, and on Beth-gamul, and on Beth-meon,

加略，波斯拉，和摩押地远近所有的城邑。
And on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, and on all the towns of the land of Moab, far and near.

摩押的角砍断了，摩押的膀臂折断了。这是耶和华说的。
The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, says the Lord.

你们要使摩押沉醉，因她向耶和华夸大。她要在自己所吐之中打滚，又要被人嗤笑。
Make him full of wine, for his heart has been lifted up against the Lord: and Moab will be rolling in the food he was not able to keep down, and everyone will be making sport of him.

摩押阿，你不曾嗤笑以色列吗？她岂是在贼中查出来的呢？你每逢提到她便摇头。
For did you not make sport of Israel? was he taken among thieves? for whenever you were talking about him, you were shaking your head over him.

摩押的居民哪，要离开城邑，住在山崖里，像鸽子在深渊口上搭窝。
O people of Moab, go away from the towns and take cover in the rock; be like the dove of the Arabah, which makes her living-place in holes.

我们听说摩押人骄傲，是极其骄傲。听说他自高自傲，并且狂妄，居心自大。
We have had word of the pride of Moab, how great it is; how he is lifted up in pride; and his great opinion of himself, and that his heart is lifted up.

耶和华说，我知道他的忿怒是虚空的。他夸大的话一无所成。
I have knowledge of his wrath, says the Lord, that it is nothing; his high-sounding words have done nothing.

因此，我要为摩押哀号，为摩押全地呼喊。人必为吉珥哈列设人叹息。
For this cause I will give cries of grief for Moab, crying out for Moab, even for all of it; I will be sorrowing for the men of Kir-heres.

西比玛的葡萄树阿，我为你哀哭，甚于雅谢人哀哭。你的枝子蔓延过海，直长到雅谢海。那行毁灭的已经临到你夏天的果子和你所摘的葡萄。
My weeping for you, O vine of Sibmah, will be more than the weeping of Jazer: your branches have gone over the sea, stretching even to Jazer: destruction has come down on your summer fruits and your cut grapes.

肥田和摩押地的欢喜快乐都被夺去。我使酒榨的酒绝流，无人踹酒欢呼。那欢呼却变为仇敌的呐喊（原文作那欢呼却不是欢呼）。
All joy is gone; no longer are they glad for the fertile field and for the land of Moab; I have made the wine come to an end from the crushing vessels: no longer will the grapes be crushed with the sound of glad voices.

希实本人发的哀声达到以利亚利，直达到雅杂。从琐珥达到何罗念，直到伊基拉施利施亚，因为宁林的水必然干涸。
The cry of Heshbon comes even to Elealeh; to Jahaz their voice is sounding; from Zoar even to Horonaim and to Eglath-shelishiyah: for the waters of Nimrim will become dry.

耶和华说，我必在摩押地使那在丘坛献祭的，和那向他的神烧香的都断绝了。
And I will put an end in Moab, says the Lord, to him who is making offerings in the high place and burning perfumes to his gods.

我心腹为摩押哀鸣如箫，我心肠为吉珥哈列设人也是如此，因摩押人所得的财物都灭没了。
So my heart is sounding for Moab like the sound of pipes, and my heart is sounding like pipes for the men of Kir-heres: for the wealth he has got for himself has come to an end.

各人头上光秃，胡须剪短，手有划伤，腰束麻布。
For everywhere the hair of the head and the hair of the face is cut off: on every hand there are wounds, and haircloth on every body.

在摩押的各房顶上和街市上处处有人哀哭。因我打碎摩押，好像打碎无人喜悦的器皿。这是耶和华说的。
On all the house-tops of Moab and in its streets there is weeping everywhere; for Moab has been broken like a vessel in which there is no pleasure, says the Lord.

摩押何等毁坏。何等哀号。何等羞愧转背。这样，摩押必令四围的人嗤笑惊骇。
How is it broken down! how is Moab's back turned in shame! so Moab will be a cause of sport and of fear to everyone round about him.

耶和华如此说，仇敌必如大鹰飞起，展开翅膀，攻击摩押。
For the Lord has said, See, he will come like an eagle in flight, stretching out his wings against Moab.

加略被攻取，保障也被占据。到那日，摩押的勇士心中疼痛如临产的妇人。
Kerioth is taken, and the strong places have been forced, and the hearts of Moab's men of war in that day will be like the heart of a woman in birth-pains.

摩押必被毁灭，不再成国，因她向耶和华夸大。
And Moab will come to an end as a people, because he has been lifting himself up against the Lord.

耶和华说，摩押的居民哪，恐惧，陷坑，网罗都临近你。
Fear and death and the net have come on you, O people of Moab, says the Lord.

躲避恐惧的必坠入陷坑。从陷坑上来的必被网罗缠住。因我必使追讨之年临到摩押。这是耶和华说的。
He who goes in flight from the fear will be overtaken by death; and he who gets free from death will be taken in the net: for I will make this come on Moab, even the year of their punishment, says the Lord.

躲避的人无力站在希实本的影下。因为有火从希实本发出，有火焰出于西宏的城，烧尽摩押的角和哄嚷人的头顶。
Those who went in flight from the fear are waiting under the shade of Heshbon: for a fire has gone out from Heshbon and a flame from the house of Sihon, burning up the pride of Moab and the crown of the head of the violent ones.

摩押阿，你有祸了。属基抹的民灭亡了。因你的众子都被掳去，你的众女也被掳去。
Sorrow is yours, O Moab! the people of Chemosh are overcome: for your sons have been taken away as prisoners, and your daughters made servants.

耶和华说，到末后，我还要使被掳的摩押人归回。摩押受审判的话到此为止。
But still, I will let the fate of Moab be changed in the last days, says the Lord.

论亚扪人。耶和华如此说，以色列没有儿子吗？没有后嗣吗？玛勒堪为何得迦得之地为业呢？属他的民为何住其中的城邑呢？
About the children of Ammon. These are the words of the Lord: Has Israel no sons? has he no one to take the heritage? why then has Milcom taken Gad for himself, putting his people in its towns?

耶和华说，日子将到，我必使人听见打仗的喊声，是攻击亚扪人拉巴的喊声。拉巴要成为乱堆。属她的乡村（原文作女子）要被火焚烧。先前得以色列地为业的，此时以色列倒要得他们的地为业。这是耶和华说的。
Because of this, see, the days are coming when I will have a cry of war sounded against Rabbah, the town of the children of Ammon; it will become a waste of broken walls, and her daughter-towns will be burned with fire: then Israel will take the heritage of those who took his heritage, says the Lord.

希实本哪，你要哀号，因为爱地变为荒场。拉巴的居民哪（居民原文作女子），要呼喊，以麻布束腰。要哭号，在篱笆中跑来跑去。因玛勒堪和属他的祭司，首领要一同被掳去。
Make sounds of grief, O Heshbon, for Ai is wasted; give loud cries, O daughters of Rabbah, and put haircloth round you: give yourselves to weeping, running here and there and wounding yourselves; for Milcom will be taken prisoner together with his rulers and his priests.

背道的民哪（民原文作女子），你们为何因有山谷，就是水流的山谷夸张呢？为何倚靠财宝说，谁能来到我们这里呢？
Why are you lifted up in pride on account of your valleys, your flowing valley, O daughter ever turning away? who puts her faith in her wealth, saying, Who will come against me?

主万军之耶和华说，我要使恐吓从四围的人中临到你们。你们必被赶出，各人一直前往，没有人收聚逃民。
See, I will send fear on you, says the Lord, the Lord of armies, from those who are round you on every side; you will be forced out, every man straight before him, and there will be no one to get together the wanderers.

后来我还要使被掳的亚扪人归回。这是耶和华说的。
But after these things, I will let the fate of the children of Ammon be changed, says the Lord.

论以东。万军之耶和华如此说，提幔中再没有智慧吗？明哲人不再有谋略吗？他们的智慧尽归无有吗？
About Edom. This is what the Lord of armies has said. Is there no more wisdom in Teman? have wise suggestions come to an end among men of good sense? has their wisdom completely gone?

底但的居民哪，要转身逃跑，住在深密处。因为我向以扫追讨的时候，必使灾殃临到他。
Go in flight, go back, take cover in deep places, you who are living in Dedan; for I will send the fate of Edom on him, even the time of his punishment.

摘葡萄的若来到他那里，岂不剩下些葡萄呢？盗贼若夜间而来，岂不毁坏直到够了呢？
If men came to get your grapes, would they not let some be uncut on the vines? if thieves came by night, would they not make waste till they had enough?

我却使以扫赤露，显出他的隐密处。他不能自藏。他的后裔，弟兄，邻舍尽都灭绝。他也归于无有。
I have had Esau searched out, uncovering his secret places, so that he may not keep himself covered: his seed is wasted and has come to an end, and there is no help from his neighbours.

你撇下孤儿，我必保全他们的命。你的寡妇可以倚靠我。
Put in my care your children who have no father, and I will keep them safe; and let your widows put their faith in me.

耶和华如此说，原不该喝那杯的一定要喝。你能尽免刑罚吗？你必不能免，一定要喝。
For the Lord has said, Those for whom the cup was not made ready will certainly be forced to take of it; and are you to go without punishment? you will not be without punishment, but will certainly be forced to take from the cup.

耶和华说，我指着自己起誓，波斯拉必令人惊骇，羞辱，咒诅，并且荒凉。她的一切城邑必变为永远的荒场。
For I have taken an oath by myself, says the Lord, that Bozrah will become a cause of wonder, a name of shame, a waste and a curse; and all its towns will be waste places for ever.

我从耶和华那里听见信息，并有使者被差往列国去，说，你们聚集来攻击以东，要起来争战。
Word has come to me from the Lord, and a representative has been sent to the nations, to say, Come together and go up against her, and take your places for the fight.

我使你在列国中为最小，在世人中被藐视。
For see, I have made you small among the nations, looked down on by men.

住在山穴中据守山顶的阿，论到你的威吓，你因心中的狂傲自欺。你虽如大鹰高高搭窝，我却从那里拉下你来。这是耶和华说的。
... the pride of your heart has been a false hope, O you who are living in the cracks of the rock, keeping your place on the top of the hill: even if you made your living-place as high as the eagle, I would make you come down, says the Lord.

以东必令人惊骇。凡经过的人就受惊骇，又因她一切的灾祸嗤笑。
And Edom will become a cause of wonder: everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder, and make sounds of fear at all her punishments.

耶和华说，必无人住在那里，也无人在其中寄居，要像所多玛，蛾摩拉，和邻近的城邑倾覆的时候一样。
As at the downfall of Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighbouring towns, says the Lord, no man will be living in it, no son of man will have a resting-place there.

仇敌必像狮子从约旦河边的丛林上来，攻击坚固的居所。转眼之间，我要使以东人逃跑，离开这地。谁蒙拣选，我就派谁治理这地。谁能比我呢？谁能给我定规日期呢？有何牧人能在我面前站立得住呢？
See, he will come up like a lion from the thick growth of Jordan against the resting-place of Teman: but I will suddenly make him go in flight from her; and I will put over her the man of my selection: for who is like me? and who will put forward his cause against me? and what keeper of sheep will be able to keep his place before me?

你们要听耶和华攻击以东所说的谋略和他攻击提幔居民所定的旨意。仇敌定要将他们群众微弱的拉去，定要使他们的居所荒凉。
For this cause give ear to the decision of the Lord which he has made against Edom, and to his purposes designed against the people of Teman: Truly, they will be pulled away by the smallest of the flock; truly, he will make waste their fields with them.

因他们仆倒的声音，地就震动。人在红海那里必听见呼喊的声音。
The earth is shaking with the noise of their fall; their cry is sounding in the Red Sea.

仇敌必如大鹰飞起，展开翅膀攻击波斯拉。到那日，以东的勇士心中疼痛如临产的妇人。
See, he will come up like an eagle in flight, stretching out his wings against Bozrah: and the hearts of Edom's men of war on that day will be like the heart of a woman in birth-pains.

论大马色。哈马和亚珥拔蒙羞，因他们听见凶恶的信息就消化了。海上有忧愁，不得平静。
About Damascus. Hamath is put to shame, and Arpad; for the word of evil has come to their ears, their heart in its fear is turned to water, it will not be quiet.

大马色发软，转身逃跑。战兢将她捉住。痛苦忧愁将她抓住，如产难的妇人一样。
Damascus has become feeble, she is turned to flight, fear has taken her in its grip: pain and sorrows have come on her, as on a woman in birth-pains.

我所喜乐可称赞的城，为何被撇弃了呢？
How has the town of praise been wasted, the place of joy!

她的少年人必仆倒在街上。当那日，一切兵丁必默默无声。这是万军之耶和华说的。
So her young men will be falling in her streets, and all the men of war will be cut off in that day, says the Lord of armies.

我必在大马色城中使火着起，烧灭便哈达的宫殿。
And I will have a fire lighted on the wall of Damascus, burning up the great houses of Ben-hadad.

论巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒所攻打的基达和夏琐的诸国。耶和华如此说，迦勒底人哪，起来上基达去，毁灭东方人。
About Kedar and the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, overcame. This is what the Lord has said: Up! go against Kedar, and make an attack on the children of the east.

他们的帐棚和羊群都要夺去，将幔子和一切器皿，并骆驼为自己掠去。人向他们喊着说，四围都有惊吓。
Their tents and their flocks they will take; they will take away for themselves their curtains and all their vessels and their camels: they will give a cry to them, Fear on every side.

耶和华说，夏琐的居民哪，要逃奔远方，住在深密处。因为巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒设计谋害你们，起意攻击你们。
Go in flight, go wandering far off, take cover in deep places, O people of Hazor, says the Lord; for Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, has made a design against you, he has a purpose against you in mind.

耶和华说，迦勒底人哪，起来。上安逸无虑的居民那里去。他们是无门无闩，独自居住的。
Up! go against a nation which is living in comfort and without fear of danger, says the Lord, without doors or locks, living by themselves.

他们的骆驼必成为掠物。他们众多的牲畜必成为掳物。我必将剃周围头发的人分散四方（方原文作风），使灾殃从四围临到他们。这是耶和华说的。
And their camels will be taken from them by force, and their great herds will come into the hands of their attackers: those who have the ends of their hair cut I will send in flight to all the winds; and I will send their fate on them from every side, says the Lord.

夏琐必成为野狗的住处，永远凄凉。必无人住在那里，也无人在其中寄居。
And Hazor will be a hole for jackals, a waste for ever: no one will be living in it, and no son of man will have a resting-place there.

犹大王西底家登基的时候，耶和华论以拦的话临到先知耶利米说，
The word of the Lord which came to Jeremiah the prophet about Elam, when Zedekiah first became king of Judah, saying,

万军之耶和华如此说，我必折断以拦人的弓，就是他们为首的权力。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: See, I will have the bow of Elam, their chief strength, broken.

我要使四风从天的四方刮来，临到以拦人，将他们分散四方（方原文作风）。这被赶散的人没有一国不到的。
And I will send on Elam four winds from the four quarters of heaven, driving them out to all those winds; there will be no nation into which the wanderers from Elam do not come.

耶和华说，我必使以拦人在仇敌和寻索其命的人面前惊惶。我也必使灾祸，就是我的烈怒临到他们，又必使刀剑追杀他们，直到将他们灭尽。
And I will let Elam be broken before their haters, and before those who are making designs against their lives: I will send evil on them, even my burning wrath, says the Lord; and I will send the sword after them till I have put an end to them:

我要在以拦设立我的宝座，从那里除灭君王和首领。这是耶和华说的。
I will put the seat of my power in Elam, and in Elam I will put an end to kings and rulers, says the Lord.

到末后，我还要使被掳的以拦人归回。这是耶和华说的。
But it will come about that, in the last days, I will let the fate of Elam be changed, says the Lord.

耶和华借先知耶利米论巴比伦和迦勒底人之地所说的话。
The word which the Lord said about Babylon, about the land of the Chaldaeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.

你们要在万国中传扬报告，竖立大旗。要报告，不可隐瞒，说，巴比伦被攻取，彼勒蒙羞，米罗达惊惶。巴比伦的神像都蒙羞。她的偶像都惊惶。
Give it out among the nations, make it public, and let the flag be lifted up; give the word and keep nothing back; say, Babylon is taken, Bel is put to shame, Merodach is broken, her images are put to shame, her gods are broken.

因有一国从北方上来攻击她，使她的地荒凉，无人居住，连人带牲畜都逃走了。
For out of the north a nation is coming up against her, which will make her land waste and unpeopled: they are in flight, man and beast are gone.

耶和华说，当那日子，那时候，以色列人要和犹大人同来，随走随哭，寻求耶和华他们的神。
In those days and in that time, says the Lord, the children of Israel will come, they and the children of Judah together; they will go on their way weeping and making prayer to the Lord their God.

他们必访问锡安，又面向这里，说，来吧，你们要与耶和华联合为永远不忘的约。
They will be questioning about the way to Zion, with their faces turned in its direction, saying, Come, and be united to the Lord in an eternal agreement which will be kept in mind for ever.

我的百姓作了迷失的羊，牧人使他们走差路，使他们转到山上。他们从大山走到小山，竟忘了安歇之处。
My people have been wandering sheep: their keepers have made them go out of the right way, turning them loose on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, having no memory of their resting-place.

凡遇见他们的，就把他们吞灭。敌人说，我们没有罪。因他们得罪那作公义居所的耶和华，就是他们列祖所仰望的耶和华。
They have been attacked by all those who came across them: and their attackers said, We are doing no wrong, because they have done evil against the Lord in whom is righteousness, against the Lord, the hope of their fathers.

我民哪，你们要从巴比伦中逃走，从迦勒底人之地出去，要像羊群前面走的公山羊。
Go in flight out of Babylon, go out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and be like he-goats before the flocks.

因我必激动联合的大国从北方上来攻击巴比伦，他们要摆阵攻击她。她必从那里被攻取。他们的箭好像善射之勇士的箭，一枝也不徒然返回。
For see, I am moving and sending up against Babylon a band of great nations from the north country: and they will put their armies in position against her; and from there she will be taken: their arrows will be like those of an expert man of war; not one will come back without getting its mark.

迦勒底必成为掠物。凡掳掠她的都必心满意足。这是耶和华说的。
And the wealth of Chaldaea will come into the hands of her attackers: all those who take her wealth will have enough, says the Lord.

抢夺我产业的阿，你们因欢喜快乐，且像踹谷撒欢的母牛犊，又像发嘶声的壮马。
Because you are glad, because you are lifted up with pride, you wasters of my heritage, because you are playing like a young cow put out to grass, and you make a noise like strong horses;

你们的母巴比伦就极其抱愧，生你们的必然蒙羞。她要列在诸国之末，成为旷野，旱地，沙漠。
Your mother will be put to shame; she who gave you birth will be looked down on: see, she will be the last of the nations, a waste place, a dry and unwatered land.

因耶和华的忿怒，必无人居住，要全然荒凉。凡经过巴比伦的要受惊骇，又因她所遭的灾殃嗤笑。
Because of the wrath of the Lord no one will be living in it, and it will be quite unpeopled: everyone who goes by Babylon will be overcome with wonder, and make sounds of fear at all her punishments.

所有拉弓的，你们要在巴比伦的四围摆阵，射箭攻击她。不要爱惜箭枝，因她得罪了耶和华。
Put your armies in position against Babylon on every side, all you bowmen; let loose your arrows at her, not keeping any back: for she has done evil against the Lord.

你们要在她四围呐喊。她已经投降。外郭坍塌了，城墙拆毁了，因为这是耶和华报仇的事。你们要向巴比伦报仇。她怎样待人，也要怎样待她。
Give a loud cry against her on every side; she has given herself up, her supports are overturned, her walls are broken down: for it is the payment taken by the Lord; give her payment; as she has done, so do to her.

你们要将巴比伦撒种的和收割时拿镰刀的都剪除了。他们各人因怕欺压的刀剑，必归回本族，逃到本土。
Let the planter of seed be cut off from Babylon, and everyone using the curved blade at the time of the grain-cutting: for fear of the cruel sword, everyone will be turned to his people, everyone will go in flight to his land.

以色列是打散的羊，是被狮子赶出的。首先是亚述王将他吞灭，末后是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒将他的骨头折断。
Israel is a wandering sheep; the lions have been driving him away: first he was attacked by the king of Assyria, and now his bones have been broken by Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon.

所以万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必罚巴比伦王和他的地，像我从前罚亚述王一样。
So this is what the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, has said: See, I will send punishment on the king of Babylon and on his land, as I have given punishment to the king of Assyria.

我必再领以色列回他的草场，他必在迦密和巴珊吃草，又在以法莲山上和基列境内得以饱足。
And I will make Israel come back to his resting-place, and he will get his food on Carmel and Bashan, and have his desire in full measure on the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead.

耶和华说，当那日子，那时候，虽寻以色列的罪孽，一无所有。虽寻犹大的罪恶，也无所见。因为我所留下的人，我必赦免。
In those days and in that time, says the Lord, when the evil-doing of Israel is looked for, there will be nothing; and in Judah no sins will be seen: for I will have forgiveness for those whom I will keep safe.

耶和华说，上去攻击米拉大翁之地，又攻击比割的居民。要追杀灭尽，照我一切所吩咐你的去行。
Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the people of Pekod; put them to death and send destruction after them, says the Lord, and do everything I have given you orders to do.

境内有打仗和大毁灭的响声。
There is a sound of war in the land and of great destruction.

全地的大锤何竟砍断破坏。巴比伦在列国中何竟荒凉。
How is the hammer of all the earth cut in two and broken! how has Babylon become a waste among the nations!

巴比伦哪，我为你设下网罗，你不知不觉被缠住。你被寻着，也被捉住。因为你与耶和华争竞。
I have put a net for you, and you have been taken, O Babylon, without your knowledge: you have been uncovered and taken because you were fighting against the Lord.

耶和华已经开了武库，拿出他恼恨的兵器。因为主万军之耶和华在迦勒底人之地有当作的事。
From his store-house the Lord has taken the instruments of his wrath: for the Lord, the Lord of armies, has a work to do in the land of the Chaldaeans.

你们要从极远的边界来攻击她，开她的仓廪，将她堆如高堆，毁灭净尽，丝毫不留。
Come up against her one and all, let her store-houses be broken open: make her into a mass of stones, give her to the curse, till there is nothing of her to be seen.

要杀她的一切牛犊，使他们下去遭遇杀戮。他们有祸了，因为追讨他们的日子已经来到。
Put all her oxen to the sword; let them go down to death: sorrow is theirs, for their day has come, the time of their punishment.

有从巴比伦之地逃避出来的人，在锡安扬声报告耶和华我们的神报仇，就是为他的殿报仇。
The voice of those who are in flight, who have got away safe from the land of Babylon, to give news in Zion of punishment from the Lord our God, even payment for his Temple.

招集一切弓箭手来攻击巴比伦。要在巴比伦四围安营，不要容一人逃脱，照着她所作的报应她。她怎样待人，也要怎样待她，因为她向耶和华以色列的圣者发了狂傲。
Send for the archers to come together against Babylon, all the bowmen; put up your tents against her on every side; let no one get away: give her the reward of her work; as she has done, so do to her: for she has been uplifted in pride against the Lord, against the Holy One of Israel.

所以她的少年人必仆倒在街上。当那日，一切兵丁必默默无声。这是耶和华说的。
For this cause her young men will be falling in her streets, and all her men of war will be cut off in that day, says the Lord.

主万军之耶和华说，你这狂傲的阿，我与你反对，因为我追讨你的日子已经来到。
See, I am against you, O pride, says the Lord, the Lord of armies, for your day has come, the time when I will send punishment on you.

狂傲的必绊跌仆倒，无人扶起。我也必使火在他的城邑中着起来，将他四围所有的尽行烧灭。
And pride will go with uncertain steps and have a fall, and there will be no one to come to his help: and I will put a fire in his towns, burning up everything round about him.

万军之耶和华如此说，以色列人和犹大人一同受欺压。凡掳掠他们的都紧紧抓住他们，不肯释放。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: The children of Israel and the children of Judah are crushed down together: all those who took them prisoner keep them in a tight grip; they will not let them go.

他们的救赎主大有能力，万军之耶和华是他的名。他必伸清他们的冤，好使全地得平安，并搅扰巴比伦的居民。
Their saviour is strong; the Lord of armies is his name: he will certainly take up their cause, so that he may give rest to the earth and trouble to the people of Babylon.

耶和华说，有刀剑临到迦勒底人和巴比伦的居民，并她的首领与智慧人。
A sword is on the Chaldaeans, says the Lord, and on the people of Babylon, and on her rulers and on her wise men.

有刀剑临到矜夸的人，他们就成为愚昧。有刀剑临到她的勇士，他们就惊惶。
A sword is on the men of pride, and they will become foolish: a sword is on her men of war, and they will be broken.

有刀剑临到她的马匹，车辆，和其中杂族的人民。他们必像妇女一样。有刀剑临到她的宝物，就被抢夺。
A sword is on all the mixed people in her, and they will become like women: a sword is on her store-houses, and they will be taken by her attackers.

有干旱临到她的众水，就必干涸。因为这是有雕刻偶像之地，人因偶像而颠狂。
A sword is on her waters, drying them up; for it is a land of images, and their minds are fixed on false gods.

所以旷野的走兽和豺狼必住在那里，鸵鸟也住在其中，永无人烟，世世代代无人居住。
For this reason the beasts of the waste land with the wolves will make their holes there and the ostriches will be living in it: never again will men be living there, it will be unpeopled from generation to generation.

耶和华说，必无人住在那里，也无人在其中寄居，要像我倾覆所多玛，蛾摩拉，和邻近的城邑一样。
As when Sodom and Gomorrah and their neighbouring towns were overturned by God, says the Lord, so no man will be living in it, and no son of man will have a resting-place there.

看哪，有一种民从北方而来，并有一大国和许多君王被激动，从地极来到。
See, a people is coming from the north; a great nation and a number of kings will be put in motion from the inmost parts of the earth.

他们拿弓和枪，性情残忍，不施怜悯。他们的声音像海浪？？訇。巴比伦城（城原文作女子）阿，他们骑马，都摆队伍如上战场的人，要攻击你。
Bows and spears are in their hands; they are cruel and have no mercy; their voice is like the thunder of the sea, and they go on horses; everyone in his place like men going to the fight, against you, O daughter of Babylon.

巴比伦王听见他们的风声，手就发软，痛苦将他抓住，疼痛仿佛产难的妇人。
The king of Babylon has had news of them, and his hands have become feeble: trouble has come on him and pain like the pain of a woman in childbirth.

仇敌必像狮子从约旦河边的丛林上来，攻击坚固的居所。转眼之间，我要使他们逃跑，离开这地。谁蒙拣选，我就派谁治理这地。谁能比我呢？谁能给我定规日期呢？有何牧人能在我面前站立得住呢？
See, he will come up like a lion from the thick growth of Jordan against the resting-place of Teman: but I will suddenly make them go in flight from her; and I will put over her the man of my selection: for who is like me? and who will put forward his cause against me? and what keeper of sheep will keep his place before me?

你们要听耶和华攻击巴比伦所说的谋略和他攻击迦勒底人之地所定的旨意。仇敌定要将他们群众微弱的拉去，定要使他们的居所荒凉。
So give ear to the decision of the Lord which he has made against Babylon, and to his purposes designed against the land of the Chaldaeans; Truly, they will be pulled away by the smallest of the flock; truly, he will make waste their fields with them.

因巴比伦被取的声音，地就震动，人在列邦都听见呼喊的声音。
At the cry, Babylon is taken! the earth is shaking, and the cry comes to the ears of the nations.

耶和华如此说，我必使毁灭的风刮起，攻击巴比伦和住在立加米的人。
The Lord has said: See, I will make a wind of destruction come up against Babylon and against those who are living in Chaldaea;

我要打发外邦人来到巴比伦，簸扬她，使她的地空虚。在她遭祸的日子，他们要周围攻击她。
And I will send men to Babylon to make her clean and get her land cleared: for in the day of trouble they will put up their tents against her on every side.

拉弓的，要向拉弓的和贯甲挺身的射箭。不要怜惜她的少年人。要灭尽她的全军。
Against her the bow of the archer is bent, and he puts on his coat of metal: have no mercy on her young men, give all her army up to the curse.

他们必在迦勒底人之地被杀仆倒，在巴比伦的街上被刺透。
And the dead will be stretched out in the land of the Chaldaeans, and the wounded in her streets.

以色列和犹大虽然境内充满违背以色列圣者的罪，却没有被他的神万军之耶和华丢弃。
For Israel has not been given up, or Judah, by his God, by the Lord of armies; for their land is full of sin against the Holy One of Israel.

你们要从巴比伦中逃奔，各救自己的性命。不要陷在她的罪孽中一同灭亡。因为这是耶和华报仇的时候，他必向巴比伦施行报应。
Go in flight out of Babylon, so that every man may keep his life; do not be cut off in her evil-doing: for it is the time of the Lord's punishment; he will give her her reward.

巴比伦素来是耶和华手中的金杯，使天下沉醉。万国喝了她的酒就颠狂了。
Babylon has been a gold cup in the hand of the Lord, which has made all the earth overcome with wine: the nations have taken of her wine, and for this cause the nations have gone off their heads.

巴比伦忽然倾覆毁坏。要为她哀号。为止她的疼痛，拿乳香或者可以治好。
Sudden is the downfall of Babylon and her destruction: make cries of grief for her; take sweet oil for her pain, if it is possible for her to be made well.

我们想医治巴比伦，她却没有治好。离开她吧。我们各人归回本国。因为她受的审判通于上天，达到穹苍。
We would have made Babylon well, but she is not made well: give her up, and let us go everyone to his country: for her punishment is stretching up to heaven, and lifted up even to the skies.

耶和华已经彰显我们的公义。来吧。我们可以在锡安报告耶和华我们神的作为。
The Lord has made clear our righteousness: come, and let us give an account in Zion of the work of the Lord our God.

你们要磨尖了箭头，抓住盾牌。耶和华定意攻击巴比伦，将她毁灭，所以激动了玛代君王的心。因这是耶和华报仇，就是为自己的殿报仇。
Make bright the arrows; take up the body-covers: the Lord has been moving the spirit of the king of the Medes; because his design against Babylon is its destruction: for it is the punishment from the Lord, the payment for his Temple.

你们要竖立大旗，攻击巴比伦的城墙。要坚固了望台，派定守望的设下埋伏。因为耶和华指着巴比伦居民所说的话，所定的意，他已经作成。
Let the flag be lifted up against the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, put the watchmen in their places, make ready a surprise attack: for it is the Lord's purpose, and he has done what he said about the people of Babylon.

住在众水之上多有财宝的阿，你的结局到了。你贪婪之量满了。
O you whose living-place is by the wide waters, whose stores are great, your end is come, your evil profit is ended.

万军之耶和华指着自己起誓说，我必使敌人充满你，像蚂蚱一样。他们必呐喊攻击你。
The Lord of armies has taken an oath by himself, saying, Truly, I will make you full with men as with locusts, and their voices will be loud against you.

耶和华用能力创造大地，用智慧建立世界，用聪明铺张穹苍。
He has made the earth by his power, he has made the world strong in its place by his wisdom, and by his wise design the heavens have been stretched out:

他一发声，空中便有多水激动。他使云雾从地极上腾。他造电随雨而闪，从他府库中带出风来。
At the sound of his voice there is a massing of the waters in the heavens, and he makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes the thunder-flames for the rain and sends out the wind from his store-houses.

各人都成了畜类，毫无知识。各银匠都因他的偶像羞愧。他所铸的偶像本是虚假的，其中并无气息，
Then every man becomes like a beast without knowledge; every gold-worker is put to shame by the image he has made: for his metal image is deceit, and there is no breath in them.

都是虚无的，是迷惑人的工作，到追讨的时候，必被除灭。
They are nothing, a work of error: in the time of their punishment, destruction will overtake them.

雅各的分不像这些，因他是造作万有的主。以色列也是他产业的支派。万军之耶和华是他的名。
The heritage of Jacob is not like these; for the maker of all things is his heritage: the Lord of armies is his name.

你是我争战的斧子和打仗的兵器。我要用你打碎列国，用你毁灭列邦。
You are my fighting axe and my instrument of war: with you the nations will be broken; with you kingdoms will be broken;

用你打碎马和骑马的。用你打碎战车和坐在其上的。
With you the horse and the horseman will be broken; with you the war-carriage and he who goes in it will be broken;

用你打碎男人和女人。用你打碎老年人和少年人。用你打碎壮丁和处女。
With you man and woman will be broken; with you the old man and the boy will be broken; with you the young man and the virgin will be broken;

用你打碎牧人和他的群畜。用你打碎农夫和他一对牛。用你打碎省长和副省长。
With you the keeper of sheep with his flock will be broken, and with you the farmer and his oxen will be broken, and with you captains and rulers will be broken.

耶和华说，我必在你们眼前报复巴比伦人和迦勒底居民在锡安所行的诸恶。
And I will give to Babylon, and to all the people of Chaldaea, their reward for all the evil they have done in Zion before your eyes, says the Lord.

耶和华说，你这行毁灭的山哪，就是毁灭天下的山，我与你反对。我必向你伸手，将你从山岩滚下去，使你成为烧毁的山。
See, I am against you, says the Lord, O mountain of destruction, causing the destruction of all the earth: and my hand will be stretched out on you, rolling you down from the rocks, and making you a burned mountain.

人必不从你那里取石头为房角石，也不取石头为根基石。你必永远荒凉。这是耶和华说的。
And they will not take from you a stone for the angle of a wall or the base of a building; but you will be a waste place for ever, says the Lord.

要在境内竖立大旗，在各国中吹角，使列国预备攻击巴比伦，将亚拉腊，米尼，亚实基拿各国招来攻击她。又派军长来攻击她，使马匹上来如蚂蚱，
Let a flag be lifted up in the land, let the horn be sounded among the nations, make the nations ready against her; get the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz together against her, make ready a scribe against her; let the horses come up against her like massed locusts.

使列国和玛代君王，与省长和副省长，并他们所管全地之人，都预备攻击她。
Make the nations ready for war against her, the king of the Medes and his rulers and all his captains, and all the land under his rule.

地必震动而瘠苦。因耶和华向巴比伦所定的旨意成立了，使巴比伦之地荒凉，无人居住。
And the land is shaking and in pain: for the purposes of the Lord are fixed, to make the land of Babylon an unpeopled waste.

巴比伦的勇士止息争战，藏在坚垒之中。他们的勇力衰尽，好像妇女一样。巴比伦的住处有火着起，门闩都折断了。
Babylon's men of war have kept back from the fight, waiting in their strong places; their strength has given way, they have become like women: her houses have been put on fire, her locks are broken.

通报的要彼此相遇，送信的要互相迎接，报告巴比伦王说，城的四方被攻取了，
One man, running, will give word to another, and one who goes with news will be handing it on to another, to give word to the king of Babylon that his town has been taken from every quarter:

渡口被占据了，苇塘被火烧了，兵丁也惊慌了。
And the ways across the river have been taken, and the water-holes ... burned with fire, and the men of war are in the grip of fear.

万军之耶和华以色列的神如此说，巴比伦城（城原文作女子）好像踹谷的禾场。再过片时，收割她的时候就到了。
For these are the words of the Lord of armies, the God of Israel: The daughter of Babylon is like a grain-floor when it is stamped down; before long, the time of her grain-cutting will come.

以色列人说，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒吞灭我，压碎我，使我成为空虚的器皿。他像大鱼将我吞下，用我的美物充满他的肚腹，又将我赶出去。
Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, has made a meal of me, violently crushing me, he has made me a vessel with nothing in it, he has taken me in his mouth like a dragon, he has made his stomach full with my delicate flesh, crushing me with his teeth.

锡安的居民要说，巴比伦以强暴待我，损害我的身体，愿这罪归给她。耶路撒冷人要说，愿流我们血的罪归到迦勒底的居民。
May the violent things done to me, and my downfall, come on Babylon, the daughter of Zion will say; and, May my blood be on the people of Chaldaea, Jerusalem will say.

所以，耶和华如此说，我必为你伸冤，为你报仇。我必使巴比伦的海枯竭，使她的泉源干涸。
For this reason the Lord has said: See, I will give support to your cause, and take payment for what you have undergone; I will make her sea dry, and her fountain without water.

巴比伦必成为乱堆，为野狗的住处，令人惊骇，嗤笑，并且无人居住。
And Babylon will become a mass of broken walls, a hole for jackals, a cause of wonder and surprise, without a living man in it.

他们要像少壮狮子咆哮，像小狮子吼叫。
They will be crying out together like lions, their voices will be like the voices of young lions.

他们火热的时候，我必为他们设摆酒席，使他们沉醉，好叫他们快乐，睡了长觉，永不醒起。这是耶和华说的。
When they are heated, I will make a feast for them, and overcome them with wine, so that they may become unconscious, sleeping an eternal sleep without awaking, says the Lord.

我必使他们像羊羔，像公绵羊和公山羊下到宰杀之地。
I will make them go down to death like lambs, like he-goats together.

示沙克（就是巴比伦）何竟被攻取，天下所称赞的何竟被占据。巴比伦在列国中何竟变为荒场。
How is Babylon taken! and the praise of all the earth surprised! how has Babylon become a cause of wonder among the nations!

海水涨起，漫过巴比伦。她被许多海浪遮盖。
The sea has come up over Babylon; she is covered with the mass of its waves.

她的城邑变为荒场，旱地，沙漠，无人居住，无人经过之地。
Her towns have become a waste, a dry and unwatered land, where no man has his living-place and no son of man goes by.

我必刑罚巴比伦的彼勒，使他吐出所吞的。万民必不再流归他那里。巴比伦的城墙也必坍塌了。
And I will send punishment on Bel in Babylon, and take out of his mouth what went into it; no longer will the nations be flowing together to him: truly, the wall of Babylon will come down.

我的民哪，你们要从其中出去。各人拯救自己，躲避耶和华的烈怒。
My people, go out from her, and let every man get away safe from the burning wrath of the Lord.

你们不要心惊胆怯，也不要因境内所听见的风声惧怕。因为这年有风声传来。那年也有风声传来，境内有强暴的事，官长攻击官长。
So that your hearts may not become feeble and full of fear because of the news which will go about in the land; for a story will go about one year, and after that in another year another story, and violent acts in the land, ruler against ruler.

日子将到，我必刑罚巴比伦雕刻的偶像。她全地必然抱愧。她被杀的人必在其中仆倒。
For this cause, truly, the days are coming when I will send punishment on the images of Babylon, and all her land will be shamed, and her dead will be falling down in her.

那时，天地和其中所有的，必因巴比伦欢呼，因为行毁灭的要从北方来到她那里。这是耶和华说的。
And the heaven and the earth and everything in them, will make a song of joy over Babylon: for those who make her waste will come from the north, says the Lord.

巴比伦怎样使以色列被杀的人仆倒，照样她全地被杀的人也必在巴比伦仆倒。
As Babylon had the dead of Israel put to the sword, so in Babylon the dead of all the land will be stretched out.

你们躲避刀剑的要快走，不要站住。要在远方记念耶和华，心中追想耶路撒冷。
You who have got away safe from the sword, go, waiting for nothing; have the Lord in memory when you are far away, and keep Jerusalem in mind.

我们听见辱骂就蒙羞，满面惭愧，因为外邦人进入耶和华殿的圣所。
We are shamed because bitter words have come to our ears; our faces are covered with shame: for men from strange lands have come into the holy places of the Lord's house.

耶和华说，日子将到，我必刑罚巴比伦雕刻的偶像，通国受伤的人必唉哼。
For this reason, see, the days are coming, says the Lord, when I will send punishment on her images; and through all her land the wounded will be crying out in pain.

巴比伦虽升到天上，虽使她坚固的高处更坚固，还有行毁灭的从我这里到她那里。这是耶和华说的。
Even if Babylon was lifted up to heaven, even if she had the high places of her strength shut in with walls, still I would send against her those who will make her waste, says the Lord.

有哀号的声音从巴比伦出来。有大毁灭的响声从迦勒底人之地发出。
There is the sound of a cry from Babylon, and of a great destruction from the land of the Chaldaeans:

因耶和华使巴比伦变为荒场，使其中的大声灭绝。仇敌仿佛众水，波浪？？訇，响声已经发出。
For the Lord is making Babylon waste, and putting an end to the great voice coming out of her; and her waves are thundering like great waters, their voice is sounding loud:

这是行毁灭的临到巴比伦。巴比伦的勇士被捉住，他们的弓折断了。因为耶和华是施行报应的神，必定施行报应。
For the waster has come on her, even on Babylon, and her men of war are taken, their bows are broken: for the Lord is a rewarding God, and he will certainly give payment.

君王名为万军之耶和华的说，我必使巴比伦的首领，智慧人，省长，副省长，和勇士都沉醉，使他们睡了长觉，永不醒起。
And I will make her chiefs and her wise men, her rulers and her captains and her men of war, overcome with wine; their sleep will be an eternal sleep without awaking, says the King; the Lord of armies is his name.

万军之耶和华如此说，巴比伦宽阔的城墙必全然倾倒。她高大的城门必被火焚烧。众民所劳碌的必致虚空。列国所劳碌的被火焚烧，他们都必困乏。
The Lord of armies has said: The wide walls of Babylon will be completely uncovered and her high doorways will be burned with fire; so peoples keep on working for nothing, and the weariness of nations comes to an end in the smoke.

犹大王西底家在位第四年，上巴比伦去的时候，玛西雅的孙子，尼利亚的儿子西莱雅与王同去（西莱雅是王宫的大臣），先知耶利米有话吩咐他。
The order which Jeremiah the prophet gave to Seraiah, the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah, the king of Judah, to Babylon in the fourth year of his rule. Now Seraiah was the chief controller of the house.

耶利米将一切要临到巴比伦的灾祸，就是论到巴比伦的一切话，写在书上。
And Jeremiah put in a book all the evil which was to come on Babylon.

耶利米对西莱雅说，你到了巴比伦务要念这书上的话。
And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When you come to Babylon, see that you give them all these words;

又说，耶和华阿，你曾论到这地方说，要剪除，甚至连人带牲畜没有在这里居住的，必永远荒凉。
And after reading them, say, O Lord, you have said about this place that it is to be cut off, so that no one will be living in it, not a man or a beast, but it will be unpeopled for ever.

你念完了这书，就把一块石头拴在书上，扔在伯拉河中。
And it will be that, when you have come to an end of reading this book, you are to have a stone fixed to it, and have it dropped into the Euphrates:

说，巴比伦因耶和华所要降与她的灾祸，必如此沉下去，不再兴起，人民也必困乏。耶利米的话到此为止。
And you are to say, So Babylon will go down, never to be lifted up again, because of the evil which I will send on her: and weariness will overcome them. So far, these are the words of Jeremiah.

西底家登基的时候年二十一岁，在耶路撒冷作王十一年。他母亲名叫哈慕她，是立拿人耶利米的女儿。
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king; he was king for eleven years in Jerusalem: and his mother's name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

西底家行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，是照约雅敬一切所行的。
And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as Jehoiakim had done.

因此耶和华的怒气在耶路撒冷和犹大发作，以致将人民从自己的面前赶出。
And because of the wrath of the Lord this came about in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had sent them away from before him: and Zedekiah took up arms against the king of Babylon.

西底家背叛巴比伦王。他作王第九年十月初十日，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒率领全军来攻击耶路撒冷，对城安营，四围筑垒攻城。
And in the ninth year of his rule, on the tenth day of the tenth month, Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, came against Jerusalem with all his army and took up his position before it, building earthworks all round it.

于是城被围困直到西底家王十一年。
So the town was shut in by their forces till the eleventh year of King Zedekiah.

四月初九日，城里有大饥荒，甚至百姓都没有粮食。
In the fourth month, on the ninth day of the month, the store of food in the town was almost gone, so that there was no food for the people of the land.

城被攻破，一切兵丁就在夜间从靠近王园两城中间的门，出城逃跑。迦勒底人正在四围攻城。他们就往亚拉巴逃去。
Then an opening was made in the wall of the town, and all the men of war went in flight out of the town by night through the doorway between the two walls which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldaeans were stationed round the town:) and they went by the way of the Arabah.

迦勒底的军队追赶西底家王，在耶利哥的平原追上他。他的全军都离开他四散了。
And the Chaldaean army went after King Zedekiah and overtook him on the other side of Jericho, and all his army went in flight from him in every direction.

迦勒底人就拿住王，带他到哈马地的利比拉巴比伦王那里。巴比伦王便审判他。
Then they made the king a prisoner and took him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath to be judged.

巴比伦王在西底家眼前杀了他的众子，又在利比拉杀了犹大的一切首领，
And the king of Babylon put the sons of Zedekiah to death before his eyes: and he put to death all the rulers of Judah in Riblah.

并且剜了西底家的眼睛，用铜链锁着他，带到巴比伦去，将他囚在监里，直到他死的日子。
And he put out Zedekiah's eyes; and the king of Babylon, chaining him in iron bands, took him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒十九年五月初十日，在巴比伦王面前侍立的护卫长尼布撒拉旦进入耶路撒冷，
Now in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, in the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, a servant of the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.

用火焚烧耶和华的殿和王宫，又焚烧耶路撒冷的房屋，就是各大户家的房屋。
And he had the house of the Lord and the king's house and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house, burned with fire:

跟从护卫长迦勒底的全军就拆毁耶路撒冷四围的城墙。
And the walls round Jerusalem were broken down by the Chaldaean army which was with the captain.

那时护卫长尼布撒拉旦将民中最穷的和城里所剩下的百姓，并已经投降巴比伦王的人，以及大众所剩下的人，都掳去了。
Then Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took away as prisoners the rest of the people who were still in the town, and those who had given themselves up to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the workmen.

但护卫长尼布撒拉旦留下些民中最穷的，使他们修理葡萄园，耕种田地。
But Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, let the poorest of the land go on living there, to take care of the vines and the fields.

耶和华殿的铜柱并殿内的盆座和铜海，迦勒底人都打碎了，将那铜运到巴比伦去了，
And the brass pillars which were in the house of the Lord, and the wheeled bases and the great brass water-vessel in the house of the Lord, were broken up by the Chaldaeans, who took all the brass away to Babylon.

又带去锅，铲子，蜡剪，盘子，调羹，并所用的一切铜器，
And the pots and the spades and the scissors for the lights and the spoons, and all the brass vessels used in the Lord's house, they took away.

杯，火鼎，碗，盆，灯台，调羹，爵，无论金的银的，护卫长也都带去了。
And the cups and the fire-trays and the basins and the pots and the supports for the lights and the spoons and the wide basins; the gold of the gold vessels, and the silver of the silver vessels, the captain of the armed men took away.

所罗门为耶和华殿所造的两根铜柱，一个铜海，并座下的十二只铜牛，这一切的铜多得无法可称。
The two pillars, the great water-vessel, and the twelve brass oxen which were under it, and the ten wheeled bases, which King Solomon had made for the house of the Lord: the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

这一根柱子高十八肘，厚四指，是空的，围十二肘。
And as for the pillars, one pillar was eighteen cubits high, and twelve cubits measured all round, and it was as thick as a man's hand: it was hollow.

柱上有铜顶，高五肘。铜顶的周围有网子和石榴，都是铜的。那一根柱子照此一样，也有石榴。
And there was a crown of brass on it: the crown was five cubits high, circled with a network and apples all of brass; and the second pillar had the same.

柱子四面有九十六个石榴，在网子周围，共有一百石榴。
There were ninety-six apples on the outside; the number of apples all round the network was a hundred.

护卫长拿住大祭司西莱雅，副祭司西番亚，和三个把门的，
And the captain of the armed men took Seraiah, the chief priest, and Zephaniah, the second priest, and the three door-keepers;

又从城中拿住一个管理兵丁的官（或作太监），并在城里所遇常见王面的七个人和检点国民军长的书记，以及城里所遇见的国民六十个人。
And from the town he took the unsexed servant who was over the men of war, and seven of the king's near friends who were in the town, and the scribe of the captain of the army, who was responsible for getting the people of the land together in military order, and sixty men of the people of the land who were in the town.

护卫长尼布撒拉旦将这些人带到利比拉巴比伦王那里。
These Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took with him to the king of Babylon at Riblah.

巴比伦王就把他们击杀在哈马地的利比拉。这样，犹大人被掳去离开本地。
And the king of Babylon put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was taken prisoner away from his land.

尼布甲尼撒所掳的民数记在下面，在他第七年掳去犹大人三千零二十三名。
These are the people whom Nebuchadrezzar took away prisoner: in the seventh year, three thousand and twenty-three Jews:

尼布甲尼撒十八年从耶路撒冷掳去八百三十二人。
And in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he took away as prisoners from Jerusalem eight hundred and thirty-two persons:

尼布甲尼撒二十三年，护卫长尼布撒拉旦掳去犹大人七百四十五名。共有四千六百人。
In the twenty-third year of Nebuchadrezzar, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took away as prisoners seven hundred and forty-five of the Jews: all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.

犹大王约雅斤被掳后三十七年，巴比伦王以未米罗达元年十二月二十五日，使犹大王约雅斤抬头，提他出监，
And in the thirty-seventh year after Jehoiachin, king of Judah, had been taken prisoner, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-fifth day of the month, Evil-merodach, king of Babylon, in the first year after he became king, took Jehoiachin, king of Judah, out of prison.

又对他说恩言，使他的位高过与他一同在巴比伦众王的位，
And he said kind words to him and put his seat higher than the seats of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.

给他脱了囚服。他终身在巴比伦王面前吃饭。
And his prison clothing was changed, and he was a guest at the king's table every day for the rest of his life.

巴比伦王赐他所需用的食物，日日赐他一分，终身是这样，直到他死的日子。
And for his food, the king gave him a regular amount every day till the day of his death, for the rest of his life.

