以斯帖记 Esther


亚哈随鲁作王，从印度直到古实，统管一百二十七省。
Now it came about in the days of Ahasuerus, (that Ahasuerus who was ruler of a hundred and twenty-seven divisions of the kingdom, from India as far as Ethiopia:)

亚哈随鲁王在书珊城的宫登基。
That in those days, when King Ahasuerus was ruling in Shushan, his strong town,

在位第三年，为他一切首领臣仆设摆筵席，有波斯和玛代的权贵，就是各省的贵胄与首领，在他面前。
In the third year of his rule he gave a feast to all his captains and his servants; and the captains of the army of Persia and Media, the great men and the rulers of the divisions of his kingdom, were present before him;

他把他荣耀之国的丰富，和他美好威严的尊贵，给他们看了许多日，就是一百八十日。
And for a long time, even a hundred and eighty days, he let them see all the wealth and the glory of his kingdom and the great power and honour which were his.

这日子满了，又为所有住书珊城的大小人民，在御园的院子里设摆筵席七日。
And at the end of that time, the king gave a feast for all the people who were present in Shushan, the king's town, small as well as great, for seven days, in the outer square of the garden of the king's house.

有白色，绿色，蓝色的帐子，用细麻绳，紫色绳从银环内系在白玉石柱上。有金银的床榻摆在红，白，黄，黑玉石铺的石地上。
There were fair hangings of white and green and blue, fixed with cords of purple and the best linen to silver rings and pillars of polished stone: the seats were of gold and silver on a floor of red and white and yellow and black stone.

用金器皿赐酒，器皿各有不同。御酒甚多，足显王的厚意。
And they gave them drink in gold vessels, every vessel being different, and wine of the kingdom, freely given by the king.

喝酒有例，不准勉强人，因王吩咐宫里的一切臣宰，让人各随己意。
And the drinking was in keeping with the law; no one was forced: for the king had given orders to all the chief servants of his house to do as was pleasing to every man.

王后瓦实提在亚哈随鲁王的宫内，也为妇女设摆筵席。
And Vashti the queen gave a feast for the women in the house of King Ahasuerus.

第七日，亚哈随鲁王饮酒，心中快乐，就吩咐在他面前侍立的七个太监，米户幔，比斯他，哈波拿，比革他，亚拔他，西达，甲迦，
On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was glad with wine, he gave orders to Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven unsexed servants who were waiting before Ahasuerus the king,

请王后瓦实提头戴王后的冠冕到王面前，使各等臣民看她的美貌，因为她容貌甚美。
That Vashti the queen was to come before him, crowned with her crown, and let the people and the captains see her: for she was very beautiful.

王后瓦实提却不肯遵太监所传的王命而来，所以王甚发怒，心如火烧。
But when the servants gave her the king's order, Vashti the queen said she would not come: then the king was very angry, and his heart was burning with wrath.

那时，在王左右常见王面，国中坐高位的，有波斯和玛代的七个大臣，就是甲示拿，示达，押玛他，他施斯，米力，玛西拿，米母干，都是达时务的明哲人。按王的常规，办事必先询问知例明法的人。王问他们说，
And the king said to the wise men, who had knowledge of the times, (for this was the king's way with all who were expert in law and in the giving of decisions:


And second only to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven rulers of Persia and Media, who were friends of the king, and had the first places in the kingdom:)

王后瓦实提不遵太监所传的王命，照例应当怎样办理呢？
What is to be done by law to Vashti the queen, because she has not done what King Ahasuerus, by his servants, gave her orders to do?

米母干在王和众首领面前回答说，王后瓦实提这事，不但得罪王，并且有害于王各省的臣民。
And before the king and the captains, Memucan gave his answer: Vashti the queen has done wrong, not only to the king, but to all the captains and to all the peoples in all the divisions of the kingdom of King Ahasuerus;

因为王后这事必传到众妇人的耳中，说，亚哈随鲁王吩咐王后瓦实提到王面前，她却不来，她们就藐视自己的丈夫。
For news of what the queen has done will come to the ears of all women, and they will no longer give respect to their husbands when it is said to them, King Ahasuerus gave orders for Vashti the queen to come before him and she came not.

今日波斯和玛代的众夫人听见王后这事，必向王的大臣照样行。从此必大开藐视和忿怒之端。
And the wives of the captains of Persia and Media, hearing what the queen has done, will say the same to all the king's captains. So there will be much shame and wrath.

王若以为美，就降旨写在波斯和玛代人的例中，永不更改，不准瓦实提再到王面前，将她王后的位分赐给比她还好的人。
If it is pleasing to the king, let an order go out from him, and let it be recorded among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, so that it may never be changed, that Vashti is never again to come before King Ahasuerus; and let the king give her place to another who is better than she.

所降的旨意传遍通国（国度本来广大），所有的妇人，无论丈夫贵贱都必尊敬他。
And when this order, given by the king, is made public through all his kingdom (for it is great), all the wives will give honour to their husbands, great as well as small.

王和众首领都以米母干的话为美，王就照这话去行，
And this suggestion seemed good to the king and the captains; and the king did as Memucan said;

发诏书，用各省的文字，各族的方言通知各省，使为丈夫的在家中作主，各说本地的方言。
And sent letters to all the divisions of the kingdom, to every division in the writing commonly used there, and to every people in the language which was theirs, saying that every man was to be the ruler in his house, and that this order was to be given out in the language of his people.

这事以后，亚哈随鲁王的忿怒止息，就想念瓦实提和她所行的，并怎样降旨办她。
After these things, when the king's feelings were calmer, the thought of Vashti and what she had done and the order he had made against her, came back to his mind.

于是王的侍臣对王说，不如为王寻找美貌的处女。
Then the servants who were waiting on the king said to him, Let search be made for some fair young virgins for the king:

王可以派官在国中的各省，招聚美貌的处女到书珊城（或作宫）的女院，交给掌管女子的太监希该，给她们当用的香品。
Let the king give authority to certain men in all the divisions of his kingdom, to get together all the fair young virgins and send them to Shushan, the king's town, to the women's house, under the care of Hegai, the king's servant, the keeper of the women: and let the things needed for making them clean be given to them;

王所喜爱的女子可以立为王后，代替瓦实提。王以这事为美，就如此行。
And let the girl who is pleasing to the king be queen in place of Vashti. And the king was pleased with this suggestion; and he did so.

书珊城有一个犹大人，名叫末底改，是便雅悯人基士的曾孙，示每的孙子，睚珥的儿子。
Now there was a certain Jew in Shushan named Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite;

从前巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒，将犹大王耶哥尼雅（又名约雅斤）和百姓从耶路撒冷掳去，末底改也在其内。
Who had been taken away from Jerusalem among those who had been made prisoner with Jeconiah, king of Judah, when Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, had taken him away.

末底改抚养他叔叔的女儿哈大沙（后名以斯帖），因为她没有父母。这女子又容貌俊美，她父母死了，末底改就收她为自己的女儿。
And he had been a father to Hadassah, that is Esther, the daughter of his father's brother: for she had no father or mother, and she was very beautiful; and when her father and mother were dead, Mordecai took her for his daughter.

王的谕旨传出，就招聚许多女子到书珊城，交给掌管女子的希该。以斯帖也送入王宫，交付希该。
So when the order made by the king was publicly given out, and a number of girls had been placed in the care of Hegai in the king's house in Shushan, Esther was taken into the king's house and put in the care of Hegai, the keeper of the women.

希该喜悦以斯帖，就恩待她。急忙给她需用的香品和她所当得的分，又派所当得的七个宫女服事她，使她和她的宫女搬入女院上好的房屋。
And he was pleased with the girl and was kind to her; and he quickly gave her what was needed for making her clean, and the things which were hers by right, and seven servant-girls who were to be hers from the king's house: and he had her and her servant-girls moved to the best place in the women's part of the house.

以斯帖未曾将籍贯宗族告诉人，因为末底改嘱咐她不可叫人知道。
Esther had not said what family or people she came from, for Mordecai had given her orders not to do so.

末底改天天在女院前边行走，要知道以斯帖平安不平安，并后事如何。
And every day Mordecai took his walk before the square of the women's house, to see how Esther was and what would be done to her.

众女子照例先洁净身体十二个月。六个月用没药油，六个月用香料和洁身之物。满了日期，然后挨次进去见亚哈随鲁王。
Now every girl, when her turn came, had to go in to King Ahasuerus, after undergoing, for a space of twelve months, what was ordered by the law for the women (for this was the time necessary for making them clean, that is, six months with oil of myrrh and six months with sweet perfumes and such things as are needed for making women clean):

女子进去见王是这样。从女院到王宫的时候，凡她所要的都必给她。
And in this way the girl went in to the king; whatever she had a desire for was given to her to take with her from the women's house into the house of the king.

晚上进去，次日回到女子第二院，交给掌管妃嫔的太监沙甲。除非王喜爱她，再提名召她，就不再进去见王。
In the evening she went, and on the day after she came back to the second house of the women, into the keeping of Shaashgaz, one of the king's unsexed servants who had the care of the king's wives: only if the king had delight in her and sent for her by name did she go in to him again.

末底改叔叔亚比孩的女儿，就是末底改收为自己女儿的以斯帖，按次序当进去见王的时候，除了掌管女子的太监希该所派定给她的，她别无所求。凡看见以斯帖的都喜悦她。
Now when the time came for Esther, the daughter of Abihail, his father's brother, whom Mordecai had taken as his daughter, to go in to the king, she made request for nothing but what Hegai, the king's servant and keeper of the women, had given her. And Esther was looked on kindly by all who saw her.

亚哈随鲁王第七年十月，就是提别月，以斯帖被引入宫见王。
So Esther was taken in to King Ahasuerus in his house in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his rule.

王爱以斯帖过于爱众女，她在王眼前蒙宠爱比众处女更甚。王就把王后的冠冕戴在她头上，立她为王后，代替瓦实提。
And Esther was more pleasing to the king than all the women, and to his eyes she was fairer and more full of grace than all the other virgins: so he put his crown on her head and made her queen in place of Vashti.

王因以斯帖的缘故给众首领和臣仆设摆大筵席，又豁免各省的租税，并照王的厚意大颁赏赐。
Then the king gave a great feast for all his captains and his servants, even Esther's feast; and he gave orders through all the divisions of his kingdom for a day of rest from work, and gave wealth from his store.

第二次招聚处女的时候，末底改坐在朝门。
And when the virgins came together in the second house of the women, Mordecai took his seat in the doorway of the king's house.

以斯帖照着末底改所嘱咐的，还没有将籍贯宗族告诉人。因为以斯帖遵末底改的命，如抚养她的时候一样。
Esther had still said nothing of her family or her people, as Mordecai had given her orders; for Esther did what Mordecai said, as when she was living with him.

当那时候，末底改坐在朝门，王的太监中有两个守门的，辟探和提列，恼恨亚哈随鲁王，想要下手害他。
In those days, while Mordecai was seated at the king's doorway, two of the king's servants, Bigthan and Teresh, keepers of the door, being angry, were looking for a chance to make an attack on King Ahasuerus.

末底改知道了，就告诉王后以斯帖。以斯帖奉末底改的名，报告于王。
And Mordecai, having knowledge of their purpose, sent word of it to Esther the queen; and Esther gave the news to the king in Mordecai's name.

究察这事，果然是实，就把二人挂在木头上，将这事在王面前写于历史上。
And when the thing had been looked into, it was seen to be true, and the two of them were put to death by hanging on a tree: and it was put down in the records before the king.

这事以后，亚哈随鲁王抬举，亚甲族哈米大他的儿子哈曼，使他高升，叫他的爵位超过与他同事的一切臣宰。
After these things, by the order of the king, Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, was lifted up and given a position of honour and a higher place than all the other captains who were with him.

在朝门的一切臣仆都跪拜哈曼，因为王如此吩咐。惟独末底改不跪不拜。
And all the king's servants who were in the king's house went down to the earth before Haman and gave him honour: for so the king had given orders. But Mordecai did not go down before him or give him honour.

在朝门的臣仆问末底改说，你为何违背王的命令呢？
Then the king's servants who were in the king's house said to Mordecai, Why do you go against the king's order?

他们天天劝他，他还是不听，他们就告诉哈曼，要看末底改的事站得住站不住，因他已经告诉他们自己是犹大人。
Now when they had said this to him day after day and he gave no attention, they let Haman have news of it, to see if Mordecai's behaviour would be overlooked: for he had said to them that he was a Jew.

哈曼见末底改不跪不拜，他就怒气填胸。
And when Haman saw that Mordecai did not go down before him and give him honour, Haman was full of wrath.

他们已将末底改的本族告诉哈曼。他以为下手害末底改一人是小事，就要灭绝亚哈随鲁王通国所有的犹大人，就是末底改的本族。
But it was not enough for him to make an attack on Mordecai only; for they had made clear to him who Mordecai's people were; so Haman made it his purpose to put an end to all the Jews, even Mordecai's people, through all the kingdom of Ahasuerus.

亚哈随鲁王十二年正月，就是尼散月，人在哈曼面前，按日日月月掣普珥，就是掣签，要定何月何日为吉，择定了十二月，就是亚达月。
In the first month, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus, from day to day and from month to month they went on looking for a sign given by Pur (that is chance) before Haman, till the sign came out for the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month Adar.

哈曼对亚哈随鲁王说，有一种民，散居在王国各省的民中，他们的律例与万民的律例不同，也不守王的律例，所以容留他们与王无益。
And Haman said to King Ahasuerus, There is a certain nation living here and there in small groups among the people in all the divisions of your kingdom; their laws are different from those of any other nation, and they do not keep the king's laws: for this reason it is not right for the king to let them be.

王若以为美，请下旨意灭绝他们。我就捐一万他连得银子交给掌管国帑的人，纳入王的府库。
If it is the king's pleasure, let a statement ordering their destruction be put in writing: and I will give to those responsible for the king's business, ten thousand talents of silver for the king's store-house.

于是王从自己手上摘下戒指，给犹大人的仇敌亚甲族哈米大他的儿子哈曼。
And the king took his ring from his hand and gave it to Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the hater of the Jews.

王对哈曼说，这银子仍赐给你，这民也交给你，你可以随意待他们。
And the king said to Haman, The money is yours, and the people, to do with them whatever seems right to you.

正月十三日，就召了王的书记来，照着哈曼一切所吩咐的，用各省的文字，各族的方言，奉亚哈随鲁王的名写旨意，传与总督和各省的省长，并各族的首领。又用王的戒指盖印。
Then on the thirteenth day of the first month, the king's scribes were sent for, and they put in writing Haman's orders to all the king's captains and the rulers of every division of his kingdom and the chiefs of every people: for every division of the kingdom in the writing commonly used there, and to every people in the language which was theirs; it was signed in the name of King Ahasuerus and stamped with the king's ring.

交给驿卒传到王的各省，吩咐将犹大人，无论老少妇女孩子，在一日之间，十二月，就是亚达月十三日，全然剪除，杀戮灭绝，并夺他们的财为掠物。
And letters were sent by the runners into every division of the kingdom ordering the death and destruction of all Jews, young and old, little children and women, on the same day, even the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month Adar, and the taking of all their goods by force.

抄录这旨意，颁行各省，宣告各族，使他们预备等候那日。
A copy of the writing, to be made public in every part of the kingdom, was sent out to all the peoples, so that they might be ready when that day came.

驿卒奉王命急忙起行，旨意也传遍书珊城。王同哈曼坐下饮酒，书珊城的民却都慌乱。
The runners went out quickly by the king's order, and a public statement was made in Shushan: and the king and Haman took wine together: but the town of Shushan was troubled.

末底改知道所做的这一切事，就撕裂衣服，穿麻衣，蒙灰尘，在城中行走，痛哭哀号。
Now when Mordecai saw what was done, pulling off his robe, he put on haircloth, with dust on his head, and went out into the middle of the town, crying out with a loud and bitter cry.

到了朝门前停住脚步，因为穿麻衣的不可进朝门。
And he came even before the king's doorway; for no one might come inside the king's door clothed in haircloth.

王的谕旨所到的各省各处，犹大人大大悲哀，禁食哭泣哀号，穿麻衣躺在灰中的甚多。
And in every part of the kingdom, wherever the king's word and his order came, there was great sorrow among the Jews, and weeping and crying and going without food; and numbers of them were stretched on the earth covered with dust and haircloth.

王后以斯帖的宫女和太监来把这事告诉以斯帖，她甚是忧愁，就送衣服给末底改穿，要他脱下麻衣，他却不受。
And Esther's women and her servants came and gave her word of it. Then great was the grief of the queen: and she sent robes for Mordecai, so that his clothing of haircloth might be taken off; but he would not have them.

以斯帖就把王所派伺候她的一个太监，名叫哈他革召来，吩咐他去见末底改，要知道这是什么事，是什么缘故。
Then Esther sent for Hathach, one of the king's unsexed servants whom he had given her for waiting on her, and she gave him orders to go to Mordecai and see what this was and why it was.

于是哈他革出到朝门前的宽阔处见末底改。
So Hathach went out and saw Mordecai in the open square of the town before the king's doorway.

末底改将自己所遇的事，并哈曼为灭绝犹大人，应许捐入王库的银数都告诉了他。
And Mordecai gave him an account of what had taken place, and of the amount of money which Haman had said he would put into the king's store for the destruction of the Jews.

又将所抄写传遍书珊城，要灭绝犹大人的旨意交给哈他革，要给以斯帖看，又要给她说明，并嘱咐她进去见王，为本族的人在王面前恳切祈求。
And he gave him the copy of the order which had been given out in Shushan for their destruction, ordering him to let Esther see it, and to make it clear to her; and to say to her that she was to go in to the king, requesting his mercy, and making prayer for her people.

哈他革回来，将末底改的话告诉以斯帖。
And Hathach came back and gave Esther an account of what Mordecai had said.

以斯帖就吩咐哈他革去见末底改，说，
Then Esther sent Hathach to say to Mordecai:

王的一切臣仆和各省的人民，都知道有一个定例，若不蒙召，擅入内院见王的，无论男女必被治死。除非王向他伸出金杖，不得存活。现在我没有蒙召进去见王已经三十日了。
It is common knowledge among all the king's servants and the people of every part of the kingdom, that if anyone, man or woman, comes to the king in his inner room without being sent for, there is only one law for him, that he is to be put to death; only those to whom the king's rod of gold is stretched out may keep their lives: but I have not been sent for to come before the king these thirty days.

人就把以斯帖这话告诉末底改。
And they said these words to Mordecai.

末底改托人回覆以斯帖说，你莫想在王宫里强过一切犹大人，得免这祸。
Then Mordecai sent this answer back to Esther: Do not have the idea that you in the king's house will be safe from the fate of all the Jews.

此时你若闭口不言，犹大人必从别处得解脱，蒙拯救，你和你父家，必至灭亡。焉知你得了王后的位分，不是为现今的机会吗？
If at this time you say nothing, then help and salvation will come to the Jews from some other place, but you and your father's family will come to destruction: and who is to say that you have not come to the kingdom even for such a time as this?

以斯帖就吩咐人回报末底改说，
Then Esther sent them back to Mordecai with this answer:

你当去招聚书珊城所有的犹大人，为我禁食三昼三夜，不吃不喝。我和我的宫女也要这样禁食。然后我违例进去见王，我若死就死吧。
Go, get together all the Jews who are present in Shushan, and go without food for me, taking no food or drink night or day for three days: and I and my women will do the same; and so I will go in to the king, which is against the law: and if death is to be my fate, then let it come.

于是末底改照以斯帖一切所吩咐的去行。
So Mordecai went away and did everything as Esther had said.

第三日，以斯帖穿上朝服，进王宫的内院，对殿站立。王在殿里坐在宝座上，对着殿门。
Now on the third day, Esther put on her queen's robes, and took her place in the inner room of the king's house, facing the king's house: and the king was seated on his high seat in the king's house, facing the doorway of the house.

王见王后以斯帖站在院内，就施恩于她，向她伸出手中的金杖，以斯帖便向前摸杖头。
And when the king saw Esther the queen waiting in the inner room, looking kindly on her he put out the rod of gold in his hand to her. So Esther came near and put her fingers on the top of the rod.

王对她说，王后以斯帖阿，你要什么。你求什么，就是国的一半也必赐给你。
Then the king said, What is your desire, Queen Esther, and what is your request? I will give it to you, even to the half of my kingdom.

以斯帖说，王若以为美，就请王带着哈曼，今日赴我所预备的筵席。
And Esther in answer said, If it seems good to the king, let the king and Haman come today to the feast which I have made ready for him.

王说，叫哈曼速速照以斯帖的话去行。于是王带着哈曼赴以斯帖所预备的筵席。
Then the king said, Let Haman come quickly, so that what Esther has said may be done. So the king and Haman came to the feast which Esther had made ready.

在酒席筵前，王又问以斯帖说，你要什么，我必赐给你。你求什么，就是国的一半也必为你成就。
And while they were drinking wine the king said to Esther, What is your prayer? for it will be given to you and what is your request? for it will be done, even to the half of my kingdom.

以斯帖回答说，我有所要，我有所求。
Then Esther said in answer, My prayer and my request is this:

我若在王眼前蒙恩，王若愿意赐我所要的，准我所求的，就请王带着哈曼，再赴我所要预备的筵席。明日我必照王所问的说明。
If I have the king's approval, and if it is the king's pleasure to give me my prayer and do my request, let the king and Haman come to the feast which I will make ready for them, and tomorrow I will do as the king has said.

那日哈曼心中快乐，欢欢喜喜地出来。但见末底改在朝门不站起来，连身也不动，就满心恼怒末底改。
Then on that day Haman went out full of joy and glad in heart; but when he saw Mordecai in the king's doorway, and he did not get to his feet or give any sign of fear before him, Haman was full of wrath against Mordecai.

哈曼暂且忍耐回家，叫人请他朋友和他妻子细利斯来。
But controlling himself, he went to his house; and he sent for his friends and Zeresh, his wife.

哈曼将他富厚的荣耀，众多的儿女，和王抬举他使他超乎首领臣仆之上，都述说给他们听。
And he gave them an account of the glories of his wealth, and the number of children he had, and the ways in which he had been honoured by the king, and how he had put him over the captains and servants of the king.

哈曼又说，王后以斯帖预备筵席，除了我之外不许别人随王赴席。明日王后又请我随王赴席。
And Haman said further, Truly, Esther the queen let no man but myself come in to the feast which she had made ready for the king; and tomorrow again I am to be her guest with the king.

只是我见犹大人末底改坐在朝门，虽有这一切荣耀，也与我无益。
But all this is nothing to me while I see Mordecai the Jew seated by the king's doorway.

他的妻细利斯和他一切的朋友对他说，不如立一个五丈高的木架，明早求王将末底改挂在其上，然后你可以欢欢喜喜地随王赴席。哈曼以这话为美，就叫人做了木架。
Then his wife Zeresh and all his friends said to him, Let a pillar, fifty cubits high, be made ready for hanging him, and in the morning get the king to give orders for the hanging of Mordecai: then you will be able to go to the feast with the king with a glad heart. And Haman was pleased with the suggestion, and he had the pillar made.

那夜王睡不着觉，就吩咐人取历史来，念给他听。
That night the king was unable to get any sleep; and he sent for the books of the records; and while some one was reading them to the king,

正遇见书上写着说，王的太监中有两个守门的，辟探和提列，想要下手害亚哈随鲁王，末底改将这事告诉王后。
It came out that it was recorded in the book how Mordecai had given word of the designs of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's servants, keepers of the door, by whom an attack on the king had been designed.

王说，末底改行了这事，赐他什么尊荣爵位没有。伺候王的臣仆回答说，没有赐他什么。
And the king said, What honour and reward have been given to Mordecai for this? Then the servants who were waiting on the king said, Nothing has been done for him.

王说，谁在院子里。（那时哈曼正进王宫的外院，要求王将末底改挂在他所预备的木架上）
Then the king said, Who is in the outer room? Now Haman had come into the outer room to get the king's authority for the hanging of Mordecai on the pillar which he had made ready for him.

臣仆说，哈曼站在院内。王说，叫他进来。
And the king's servants said to him, See, Haman is waiting in the outer room. And the king said, Let him come in.

哈曼就进去。王问他说，王所喜悦尊荣的人，当如何待他呢？哈曼心里说，王所喜悦尊荣的，不是我是谁呢？
So Haman came in. And the king said to him, What is to be done to the man whom the king has delight in honouring? Then the thought came into Haman's mind, Whom, more than myself, would the king have pleasure in honouring?

哈曼就回答说，王所喜悦尊荣的人，
And Haman, answering the king, said, For the man whom the king has delight in honouring,

当将王常穿的朝服和戴冠的御马，
Let them take the robes which the king generally puts on, and the horse on which the king goes, and the crown which is on his head:

都交给王极尊贵的一个大臣，命他将衣服给王所喜悦尊荣的人穿上，使他骑上马，走遍城里的街市，在他面前宣告说，王所喜悦尊荣的人，就如此待他。
And let the robes and the horse be given to one of the king's most noble captains, so that they may put them on the man whom the king has delight in honouring, and let him go on horseback through the streets of the town, with men crying out before him, So let it be done to the man whom the king has delight in honouring.

王对哈曼说，你速速将这衣服和马，照你所说的，向坐在朝门的犹大人末底改去行。凡你所说的，一样不可缺。
Then the king said to Haman, Go quickly, and take the robes and the horse, as you have said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, who is seated at the king's doorway: see that you do everything as you have said.

于是哈曼将朝服给末底改穿上，使他骑上马，走遍城里的街市，在他面前宣告说，王所喜悦尊荣的人，就如此待他。
Then Haman took the robes and the horse, and dressing Mordecai in the robes, he made him go on horseback through the streets of the town, crying out before him, So let it be done to the man whom the king has delight in honouring.

末底改仍回到朝门，哈曼却忧忧闷闷地蒙着头，急忙回家去了。
And Mordecai came back to the king's doorway. But Haman went quickly back to his house, sad and with his head covered.

将所遇的一切事，详细说给他的妻细利斯，和他的众朋友听。他的智慧人，和他的妻细利斯对他说，你在末底改面前始而败落，他如果是犹大人，你必不能胜他，终必在他面前败落。
And Haman gave his wife Zeresh and all his friends an account of what had taken place. Then his wise men and his wife Zeresh said to him, If Mordecai, who is starting to get the better of you, is of the seed of the Jews, you will not be able to do anything against him, but you will certainly go down before him.

他们还与哈曼说话的时候，王的太监来催哈曼，快去赴以斯帖所预备的筵席。
While they were still talking, the king's servants came to take Haman to the feast which Esther had made ready.

王带着哈曼来赴王后以斯帖的筵席。
So the king and Haman came to take wine with Esther the queen.

这第二次在酒席筵前，王又问以斯帖说，王后以斯帖阿，你要什么，我必赐给你。你求什么，就是国的一半也必为你成就。
And the king said to Esther again on the second day, while they were drinking, What is your prayer, Queen Esther? for it will be given to you; and what is your request? for it will be done, even to the half of my kingdom.

王后以斯帖回答说，我若在王眼前蒙恩，王若以为美，我所愿的，是愿王将我的性命赐给我。我所求的，是求王将我的本族赐给我。
Then Esther the queen, answering, said, If I have your approval, O king, and if it is the king's pleasure, let my life be given to me in answer to my prayer, and my people at my request:

因我和我的本族被卖了，要剪除杀戮灭绝我们。我们若被卖为奴为婢，我也闭口不言。但王的损失，敌人万不能补足。
For we are given up, I and my people, to destruction and death and to be cut off. If we had been taken as men-servants and women-servants for a price, I would have said nothing, for our trouble is little in comparison with the king's loss.

亚哈随鲁王问王后以斯帖说，擅敢起意如此行的是谁。这人在哪里呢？
Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen, Who is he and where is he who has had this evil thought in his heart?

以斯帖说，仇人敌人就是这恶人哈曼。哈曼在王和王后面前就甚惊惶。
And Esther said, Our hater and attacker is this evil Haman. Then Haman was full of fear before the king and the queen.

王便大怒，起来离开酒席往御园去了。哈曼见王定意要加罪与他，就起来，求王后以斯帖救命。
And the king in his wrath got up from the feast and went into the garden: and Haman got to his feet to make a prayer for his life to Esther the queen: for he saw that the king's purpose was evil against him.

王从御园回到酒席之处，见哈曼伏在以斯帖所靠的榻上。王说，他竟敢在宫内，在我面前凌辱王后吗？这话一出王口，人就蒙了哈曼的脸。
Then the king came back from the garden into the room where they had been drinking; and Haman was stretched out on the seat where Esther was. Then the king said, Is he taking the queen by force before my eyes in my house? And while the words were on the king's lips, they put a cloth over Haman's face.

伺候王的一个太监名叫哈波拿，说，哈曼为那救王有功的末底改做了五丈高的木架，现今立在哈曼家里。王说，把哈曼挂在其上。
Then Harbonah, one of the unsexed servants waiting before the king, said, See, the pillar fifty cubits high, which Haman made for Mordecai, who said a good word for the king, is still in its place in Haman's house. Then the king said, Put him to death by hanging him on it.

于是人将哈曼挂在他为末底改所预备的木架上。王的忿怒这才止息。
So Haman was put to death by hanging him on the pillar he had made for Mordecai. Then the king's wrath became less.

当日，亚哈随鲁王把犹大人仇敌哈曼的家产，赐给王后以斯帖。末底改也来到王面前，因为以斯帖已经告诉王，末底改是她的亲属。
That day the king gave all the family of Haman, the hater of the Jews, to Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king, for Esther had made clear what he was to her.

王摘下自己的戒指，就是从哈曼追回的，给了末底改。以斯帖派末底改管理哈曼的家产。
And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. And Esther put Mordecai over the family of Haman.

以斯帖又俯伏在王脚前，流泪哀告，求他除掉亚甲族哈曼害犹大人的恶谋。
Then Esther again came before the king, falling down at his feet, and made request to him with weeping, that he would put a stop to the evil purposes of Haman the Agagite and the designs which he had made against the Jews.

王向以斯帖伸出金杖，以斯帖就起来，站在王前。
Then the king put out the rod of gold to Esther, and she got up before the king.

说，亚甲族哈米大他的儿子哈曼设谋传旨，要杀灭在王各省的犹大人。现今王若愿意，我若在王眼前蒙恩，王若以为美，若喜悦我，请王另下旨意，废除哈曼所传的那旨意。
And she said, If it is the king's pleasure and if I have his approval and this thing seems right to the king and I am pleasing to him, then let letters be sent giving orders against those which Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, sent out for the destruction of the Jews in all divisions of the kingdom:

我何忍见我本族的人受害？何忍见我同宗的人被灭呢？
For how is it possible for me to see the evil which is to overtake my nation? how may I see the destruction of my people?

亚哈随鲁王对王后以斯帖，和犹大人末底改说，因哈曼要下手害犹大人，我已将他的家产赐给以斯帖，人也将哈曼挂在木架上。
Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, See now, I have given Esther the family of Haman, and he has come to his death by hanging, because he made an attack on the Jews.

现在你们可以随意，奉王的名写谕旨给犹大人，用王的戒指盖印。因为奉王名所写，用王戒指盖印的谕旨，人都不能废除。
So now send a letter about the Jews, writing whatever seems good to you, in the king's name, and stamping it with the king's ring: for a writing signed in the king's name and stamped with the king's ring may not be changed.

三月，就是西弯月二十三日，将王的书记召来。按着末底改所吩咐的，用各省的文字，各族的方言，并犹大人的文字方言写谕旨。传给那从印度直到古实一百二十七省的犹大人和总督省长首领。
Then at that time, on the twenty-third day of the third month, which is the month Sivan, the king's scribes were sent for; and everything ordered by Mordecai was put in writing and sent to the Jews and the captains and the rulers and the chiefs of all the divisions of the kingdom from India to Ethiopia, a hundred and twenty-seven divisions, to every division in the writing commonly used there, and to every people in their language, and to the Jews in their writing and their language.

末底改奉亚哈随鲁王的名写谕旨，用王的戒指盖印，交给骑御马圈快马的驿卒，传到各处。
The letters were sent in the name of King Ahasuerus and stamped with his ring, and they were taken by men on horseback, going on the quick-running horses used for the king's business, the offspring of his best horses:

谕旨中，王准各省各城的犹大人在一日之间，十二月，就是亚达月十三日，聚集保护性命，剪除杀戮灭绝那要攻击犹大人的一切仇敌，和他们的妻子儿女，夺取他们的财为掠物。
In these letters the king gave authority to the Jews in every town to come together and make a fight for their lives, and to send death and destruction on the power of any people in any part of the kingdom attacking them or their children or their women, and to take their goods from them by force,


On one day in every division of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, that is, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, the month Adar.

抄录这谕旨，颁行各省，宣告各族，使犹大人预备等候那日，在仇敌身上报仇。
A copy of the writing, to be made public as an order in every division of the kingdom, was given out to all the peoples, so that the Jews might be ready when that day came to give punishment to their haters.

于是骑快马的驿卒被王命催促，急忙起行。谕旨也传遍书珊城。
So the men went out on the quick-running horses used on the king's business, wasting no time and forced on by the king's order; and the order was given out in Shushan, the king's town.

末底改穿着蓝色白色的朝服，头戴大金冠冕，又穿紫色细麻布的外袍，从王面前出来。书珊城的人民都欢呼快乐。
And Mordecai went out from before the king, dressed in king-like robes of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold and clothing of purple and the best linen: and all the town of Shushan gave loud cries of joy.

犹大人有光荣，欢喜快乐而得尊贵。
And the Jews had light and joy and honour.

王的谕旨所到的各省各城，犹大人都欢喜快乐，设摆筵宴，以那日为吉日。那国的人民，有许多因惧怕犹大人，就入了犹大籍。
And in every part of the kingdom and in every town, wherever the king's letter and his order came, the Jews were glad with great joy, and had a feast and a good day. And a great number of the people of the land became Jews: for the fear of the Jews had come on them.

十二月，乃亚达月十三日，王的谕旨将要举行，就是犹大人的仇敌盼望辖制他们的日子，犹大人反倒辖制恨他们的人。
Now on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, when the time came for the king's order to be put into effect, on the very day when the haters of the Jews had been hoping to have rule over them; though the opposite had come about, and the Jews had rule over their haters;

犹大人在亚哈随鲁王各省的城里聚集，下手击杀那要害他们的人。无人能敌挡他们，因为各族都惧怕他们。
On that day, the Jews came together in their towns through all the divisions of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, for the purpose of attacking all those who were attempting evil against them: and everyone had to give way before them, for the fear of them had come on all the peoples.

各省的首领，总督，省长，和办理王事的人，因惧怕末底改，就都帮助犹大人。
And all the chiefs and the captains and the rulers and those who did the king's business gave support to the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai had come on them.

末底改在朝中为大，名声传遍各省，日渐昌盛。
For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and word of him went out through every part of the kingdom: for the man Mordecai became greater and greater.

犹大人用刀击杀一切仇敌，任意杀灭恨他们的人。
So the Jews overcame all their attackers with the sword and with death and destruction, and did to their haters whatever they had a desire to do.

在书珊城，犹大人杀灭了五百人。
And in Shushan the Jews put to death five hundred men.

又杀巴珊大他，达分，亚斯帕他，
They put to death Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,

破拉他，亚大利雅，亚利大他，
Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,

帕玛斯他，亚利赛，亚利代，瓦耶撒他。
Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha,

这十人都是哈米大他的孙子，犹大人仇敌哈曼的儿子。犹大人却没有下手夺取财物。
The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the hater of the Jews; but they put not a hand on any of their goods.

当日，将书珊城被杀的人数呈在王前。
On that day the number of those who had been put to death in the town of Shushan was given to the king.

王对王后以斯帖说，犹大人在书珊城杀灭了五百人，又杀了哈曼的十个儿子，在王的各省不知如何呢？现在你要什么，我必赐给你。你还求什么，也必为你成就。
And the king said to Esther the queen, The Jews have put five hundred men to death in Shushan, as well as the ten sons of Haman: what then have they done in the rest of the kingdom! Now what is your prayer? for it will be given to you; what other request have you? and it will be done.

以斯帖说，王若以为美，求你准书珊的犹大人，明日也照今日的旨意行，并将哈曼十个儿子的尸首挂在木架上。
Then Esther said, If it is the king's pleasure, let authority be given to the Jews in Shushan to do tomorrow as has been done today, and let orders be given for the hanging of Haman's ten sons.

王便允准如此行。旨意传在书珊，人就把哈曼十个儿子的尸首挂起来了。
And the king said that this was to be done, and the order was given out in Shushan, and the hanging of Haman's ten sons was effected.

亚达月十四日书珊的犹大人又聚集在书珊，杀了三百人，却没有下手夺取财物。
For the Jews who were in Shushan came together again on the fourteenth day of the month Adar and put to death three hundred men in Shushan; but they put not a hand on their goods.

在王各省其余的犹大人，也都聚集保护性命，杀了恨他们的人七万五千，却没有下手夺取财物。这样，就脱离仇敌，得享平安。
And the other Jews in every division of the kingdom came together, fighting for their lives, and got salvation from their haters and put seventy-five thousand of them to death; but they did not put a hand on their goods.

亚达月十三日，行了这事。十四日安息，以这日为设筵欢乐的日子。
This they did on the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same month they took their rest, and made it a day of feasting and joy.

但书珊的犹大人，这十三日，十四日聚集杀戮仇敌。十五日安息，以这日为设筵欢乐的日子。
But the Jews in Shushan came together on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth day of the month; and on the fifteenth day they took their rest, and made it a day of feasting and joy.

所以住无城墙乡村的犹大人，如今都以亚达月十四日为设筵欢乐的吉日，彼此馈送礼物。
So the Jews of the country places living in unwalled towns make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of feasting and joy and a good day, a day for sending offerings one to another.

末底改记录这事，写信与亚哈随鲁王各省远近所有的犹大人，
And Mordecai sent letters to all the Jews in every division of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, near and far,

嘱咐他们每年守亚达月十四，十五两日。
Ordering them to keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar and the fifteenth day of the same month, every year,

以这月的两日为犹大人脱离仇敌得平安，转忧为喜，转悲为乐的吉日。在这两日设筵欢乐，彼此馈送礼物，周济穷人。
As days on which the Jews had rest from their haters, and the month which for them was turned from sorrow to joy, and from weeping to a good day: and that they were to keep them as days of feasting and joy, of sending offerings to one another and good things to the poor.

于是，犹大人按着末底改所写与他们的信，应承照初次所守的守为永例。
And the Jews gave their word to go on as they had been doing and as Mordecai had given them orders in writing;

是因犹大人的仇敌，亚甲族哈米大他的儿子哈曼，设谋杀害犹大人，掣普珥，就是掣签，为要杀尽灭绝他们。
Because Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the hater of all the Jews, had made designs for their destruction, attempting to get a decision by Pur (that is, chance) with a view to putting an end to them and cutting them off;

这事报告于王，王便降旨使哈曼谋害犹大人的恶事，归到他自己的头上，并吩咐把他和他的众子都挂在木架上。
But when the business was put before the king, he gave orders by letters that the evil design which he had made against the Jews was to be turned against himself; and that he and his sons were to be put to death by hanging.

照着普珥的名字，犹大人就称这两日为普珥日。他们因这信上的话，又因所看见所遇见的事，
So these days were named Purim, after the name of Pur. And so, because of the words of this letter, and of what they had seen in connection with this business, and what had come to them,

就应承自己与后裔，并归附他们的人，每年按时必守这两日，永远不废。
The Jews made a rule and gave an undertaking, causing their seed and all those who were joined to them to do the same, so that it might be in force for ever, that they would keep those two days, as ordered in the letter, at the fixed time every year;

各省各城，家家户户，世世代代纪念遵守这两日，使这普珥日在犹大人中不可废掉，在他们后裔中也不可忘记。
And that those days were to be kept in memory through every generation and every family, in every division of the kingdom and every town, that there might never be a time when these days of Purim would not be kept among the Jews, or when the memory of them would go from the minds of their seed.

亚比孩的女儿王后以斯帖，和犹大人末底改以全权写第二封信，坚嘱犹大人守这普珥日。
Then Esther the queen, daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, sent a second letter giving the force of their authority to the order about the Purim.

用和平诚实话，写信给亚哈随鲁王国中，一百二十七省所有的犹大人，
And he sent letters to all the Jews in the hundred and twenty-seven divisions of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with true words of peace,

劝他们按时守这普珥日，禁食呼求，是照犹大人末底改，和王后以斯帖，所嘱咐的。也照犹大人为自己与后裔所应承的。
Giving the force of law to these days of Purim at their fixed times, as they had been ordered by Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen, and in keeping with the rules they had made for themselves and their seed, in connection with their time of going without food and their cry for help.

以斯帖命定守普珥日，这事也记录在书上。
The order given by Esther gave the force of law to the rules about the Purim; and it was recorded in the book.

亚哈随鲁王使旱地，和海岛的人民都进贡。
And King Ahasuerus put a tax on the land and on the islands of the sea.

他以权柄能力所行的，并他抬举末底改使他高升的事，岂不都写在玛代，和波斯王的历史上吗？
And all his acts of power and his great strength and the full story of the high place which the king gave Mordecai, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Media and Persia?

犹大人末底改作亚哈随鲁王的宰相，在犹大人中为大，得他众弟兄的喜悦，为本族的人求好处，向他们说和平的话。
For Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews and respected by the body of his countrymen; working for the good of his people, and saying words of peace to all his seed.

 which the king gave Mordecai, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Media and Persia?

犹大人末底改作亚哈随鲁王的宰相，在犹大人中为大，得他众弟兄的喜悦，为本族的人求好处，向他们说和平的话。
For Mordecai the Jew was second only to King Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews and respected by the body of his countrymen; working for the good of his people, and saying words of peace to all his seed.

