当三十年四月初五日，以西结（原文作我）在迦巴鲁河边被掳的人中，天就开了，得见神的异象。
Now it came about in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day of the month, while I was by the river Chebar among those who had been made prisoners, that the heavens were made open and I saw visions of God.

正是约雅斤王被掳去第五年四月初五日，
On the fifth day of the month, in the fifth year after King Jehoiachin had been made a prisoner,

在迦勒底人之地，迦巴鲁河边，耶和华的话特特临到布西的儿子祭司以西结。耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在他身上。
The word of the Lord came to me, Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldaeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was on me there.

我观看，见狂风从北方刮来，随着有一朵包括闪烁火的大云，周围有光辉。从其中的火内发出好像光耀的精金。
And, looking, I saw a storm-wind coming out of the north, a great cloud with flames of fire coming after one another, and a bright light shining round about it and in the heart of it was something coloured like electrum.

又从其中显出四个活物的形像来。他们的形状是这样，有人的形像，
And in the heart of it were the forms of four living beings. And this was what they were like; they had the form of a man.

各有四个脸面，四个翅膀。
And every one had four faces, and every one of them had four wings.

他们的腿是直的，脚掌好像牛犊之蹄，都灿烂如光明的铜。
And their feet were straight feet; and the under sides of their feet were like the feet of oxen; and they were shining like polished brass.

在四面的翅膀以下有人的手。这四个活物的脸和翅膀乃是这样，
And they had the hands of a man under their wings; the four of them had faces on their four sides.

翅膀彼此相接，行走并不转身，俱各直往前行。
They went without turning, every one went straight forward.

至于脸的形像，前面各有人的脸，右面各有狮子的脸，左面各有牛的脸，后面各有鹰的脸。
As for the form of their faces, they had the face of a man, and the four of them had the face of a lion on the right side, and the four of them had the face of an ox on the left side, and the four of them had the face of an eagle.

各展开上边的两个翅膀相接，各以下边的两个翅膀遮体。
And their wings were separate at the top; two of the wings of every one were joined one to another, and two were covering their bodies.

他们俱各直往前行。灵往哪里去，他们就往那里去，行走并不转身。
Every one of them went straight forward; wherever the spirit was to go they went; they went on without turning.

至于四活物的形像，就如烧着火炭的形状，又如火把的形状。火在四活物中间上去下来，这火有光辉，从火中发出闪电。
And between the living beings it was like burning coals of fire, as if flames were going one after the other between the living beings; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went thunder-flames.

这活物往来奔走，好像电光一闪。
And the living beings went out and came back as quickly as a thunder-flame.

我正观看活物的时候，见活物的脸旁各有一轮在地上。
Now while I was looking at the four living beings, I saw one wheel on the earth, by the side of the living beings, for the four of them.

轮的形状和颜色（原文作作法）好像水苍玉。四轮都是一个样式，形状和作法好像轮中套轮。
The form of the wheels and their work was like a beryl; the four of them had the same form and design, and they were like a wheel inside a wheel.

轮行走的时候，向四方都能直行，并不掉转。
The four of them went straight forward without turning to one side.

至于轮辋，高而可畏。四个轮辋周围满有眼睛。
And I saw that they had edges, and their edges, even of the four, were full of eyes round about.

活物行走，轮也在旁边行走。活物从地上升，轮也都上升。
And when the living beings went on, the wheels went by their side; and when the living beings were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

灵往哪里去，活物就往那里去。活物上升，轮也在活物旁边上升，因为活物的灵在轮中。
Wherever the spirit was to go they went; and the wheels were lifted up by their side: for the spirit of the living beings was in the wheels.

那些行走，这些也行走。那些站住，这些也站住。那些从地上升，轮也在旁边上升，因为活物的灵在轮中。
When these went on, the others went; and when these came to rest, the others came to rest; and when these were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up by their side: for the spirit of the living beings was in the wheels.

活物的头以上有穹苍的形像，看着像可畏的水晶，铺张在活物的头以上。
And over the heads of the living beings there was the form of an arch, looking like ice, stretched out over their heads on high.

穹苍以下，活物的翅膀直张，彼此相对。每活物有两个翅膀遮体。
Under the arch their wings were straight, one stretched out to another: every one had two wings covering their bodies on this side and two covering their bodies on that side.

活物行走的时候，我听见翅膀的响声，像大水的声音，像全能者的声音，也像军队哄嚷的声音。活物站住的时候，便将翅膀垂下。
And when they went, the sound of their wings was like the sound of great waters to my ears, like the voice of the Ruler of all, a sound like the rushing of an army: when they came to rest they let down their wings.

在他们头以上的穹苍之上有声音。他们站住的时候，便将翅膀垂下。
And there was a voice from the top of the arch which was over their heads: when they came to rest they let down their wings.

在他们头以上的穹苍之上有宝座的形像，仿佛蓝宝石。在宝座形像以上有仿佛人的形状。
And on the top of the arch which was over their heads was the form of a king's seat, like a sapphire stone; and on the form of the seat was the form of a man seated on it on high.

我见从他腰以上有仿佛光耀的精金，周围都有火的形状，又见从他腰以下有仿佛火的形状，周围也有光辉。
And I saw it coloured like electrum, with the look of fire in it and round it, going up from what seemed to be the middle of his body; and going down from what seemed to be the middle of his body I saw what was like fire, and there was a bright light shining round him.

下雨的日子，云中虹的形状怎样，周围光辉的形状也是怎样。这就是耶和华荣耀的形像。我一看见就俯伏在地，又听见一位说话的声音。
Like the bow in the cloud on a day of rain, so was the light shining round him. And this is what the glory of the Lord was like. And when I saw it I went down on my face, and the voice of one talking came to my ears.

他对我说，人子阿，你站起来，我要和你说话。
And he said to me, Son of man, get up on your feet, so that I may say words to you.

他对我说话的时候，灵就进入我里面，使我站起来，我便听见那位对我说话的声音。
And at his words the spirit came into me and put me on my feet; and his voice came to my ears.

他对我说，人子阿，我差你往悖逆的国民以色列人那里去。他们是悖逆我的，他们和他们的列祖违背我，直到今日。
And he said to me, Son of man, I am sending you to the children of Israel, to an uncontrolled nation which has gone against me: they and their fathers have been sinners against me even to this very day.

这众子面无羞耻，心里刚硬。我差你往他们那里去，你要对他们说，主耶和华如此说。
And the children are hard and stiff-hearted; I am sending you to them: and you are to say to them, These are the words of the Lord.

他们或听，或不听，（他们是悖逆之家），必知道在他们中间有了先知。
And they, if they give ear to you or if they do not give ear (for they are an uncontrolled people), will see that there has been a prophet among them.

人子阿，虽有荆棘和蒺藜在你那里，你又住在蝎子中间，总不要怕他们，也不要怕他们的话。他们虽是悖逆之家，还不要怕他们的话，也不要因他们的脸色惊惶。
And you, son of man, have no fear of them or of their words, even if sharp thorns are round you and you are living among scorpions: have no fear of their words and do not be overcome by their looks, for they are an uncontrolled people.

他们或听，或不听，你只管将我的话告诉他们。他们是极其悖逆的。
And you are to give them my words, if they give ear to you or if they do not: for they are uncontrolled.

人子阿，要听我对你所说的话，不要悖逆像那悖逆之家，你要开口吃我所赐给你的。
But you, son of man, give ear to what I say to you, and do not be uncontrolled like that uncontrolled people: let your mouth be open and take what I give you.

我观看，见有一只手向我伸出来，手中有一书卷。
And looking, I saw a hand stretched out to me, and I saw the roll of a book in it;

他将书卷在我面前展开，内外都写着字，其上所写的有哀号，叹息，悲痛的话。
And he put it open before me, and it had writing on the front and on the back; words of grief and sorrow and trouble were recorded in it.

他对我说，人子阿，要吃你所得的，要吃这书卷，好去对以色列家讲说。
And he said to me, Son of man, take this roll for your food, and go and say my words to the children of Israel.

于是我开口，他就使我吃这书卷，
And, on my opening my mouth, he made me take the roll as food.

又对我说，人子阿，要吃我所赐给你的这书卷，充满你的肚腹。我就吃了，口中觉得其甜如蜜。
And he said to me, Son of man, let your stomach make a meal of it and let your inside be full of this roll which I am giving you. Then I took it, and it was sweet as honey in my mouth.

他对我说，人子阿，你往以色列家那里去，将我的话对他们讲说。
And he said to me, Son of man, go now to the children of Israel, and say my words to them.

你奉差遣不是往那说话深奥，言语难懂的民那里去，乃是往以色列家去。
For you are not sent to a people whose talk is strange and whose language is hard, but to the children of Israel;

不是往那说话深奥，言语难懂的多国去，他们的话语是你不懂得的。我若差你往他们那里去，他们必听从你。
Not to a number of peoples whose talk is strange and whose language is hard and whose words are not clear to you. Truly, if I sent you to them they would give ear to you.

以色列家却不肯听从你，因为他们不肯听从我。原来以色列全家是额坚心硬的人。
But the children of Israel will not give ear to you; for they have no mind to give ear to me: for all the children of Israel have a hard brow and a stiff heart.

看哪，我使你的脸硬过他们的脸，使你的额硬过他们的额。
See, I have made your face hard against their faces, and your brow hard against their brows.

我使你的额像金钢钻，比火石更硬。他们虽是悖逆之家，你不要怕他们，也不要因他们的脸色惊惶。
Like a diamond harder than rock I have made your brow: have no fear of them and do not be overcome by their looks, for they are an uncontrolled people.

他又对我说，人子阿，我对你所说的一切话，要心里领会，耳中听闻。
Then he said to me, Son of man, take into your heart all my words which I am about to say to you, and let your ears be open to them.

你往你本国被掳的子民那里去，他们或听，或不听，你要对他们讲说，告诉他们这是主耶和华说的。
And go now to those who have been taken away as prisoners, to the children of your people, and say to them, This is what the Lord has said; if they give ear or if they do not.

那时，灵将我举起，我就听见在我身后有震动轰轰的声音，说，从耶和华的所在显出来的荣耀是该称颂的。
Then I was lifted up by the wind, and at my back the sound of a great rushing came to my ears when the glory of the Lord was lifted up from his place.

我又听见那活物翅膀相碰，与活物旁边轮子旋转震动轰轰的响声。
And there was the sound of the wings of the living beings touching one another, and the sound of the wheels at their side, the sound of a great rushing.

于是灵将我举起，带我而去。我心中甚苦，灵性忿激，并且耶和华的灵（原文作手）在我身上大有能力。
And the wind, lifting me up, took me away: and I went in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of the Lord was strong on me.

我就来到提勒亚毕，住在迦巴鲁河边被掳的人那里，到他们所住的地方，在他们中间忧忧闷闷地坐了七日。
Then I came to those who had been taken away as prisoners, who were at Telabib by the river Chebar, and I was seated among them full of wonder for seven days.

过了七日，耶和华的话临到我说，
And at the end of seven days, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，我立你作以色列家守望的人，所以你要听我口中的话，替我警戒他们。
Son of man, I have made you a watchman for the children of Israel: so give ear to the word of my mouth, and give them word from me of their danger.

我何时指着恶人说，他必要死。你若不警戒他，也不劝戒他，使他离开恶行，拯救他的性命，这恶人必死在罪孽之中。我却要向你讨他丧命的罪（原文作血）。
When I say to the evil-doer, Death will certainly be your fate; and you give him no word of it and say nothing to make clear to the evil-doer the danger of his evil way, so that he may be safe; that same evil man will come to death in his evil-doing; but I will make you responsible for his blood.

倘若你警戒恶人，他仍不转离罪恶，也不离开恶行，他必死在罪孽之中，你却救自己脱离了罪。
But if you give the evil-doer word of his danger, and he is not turned from his sin or from his evil way, death will overtake him in his evil-doing; but your life will be safe.

再者，义人何时离义而犯罪，我将绊脚石放在他面前，他就必死。因你没有警戒他，他必死在罪中，他素来所行的义不被记念。我却要向你讨他丧命的罪（原文作血）。
Again, when an upright man, turning away from his righteousness, does evil, and I put a cause of falling in his way, death will overtake him: because you have given him no word of his danger, death will overtake him in his evil-doing, and there will be no memory of the upright acts which he has done; but I will make you responsible for his blood.

倘若你警戒义人，使他不犯罪，他就不犯罪。他因受警戒就必存活，你也救自己脱离了罪。
But if you say to the upright man that he is not to do evil, he will certainly keep his life because he took note of your word; and your life will be safe.

耶和华的灵（原文作手）在那里降在我身上。他对我说，你起来往平原去，我要在那里和你说话。
And the hand of the Lord was on me there; and he said, Get up and go out into the valley and there I will have talk with you.

于是我起来往平原去，不料，耶和华的荣耀正如我在迦巴鲁河边所见的一样，停在那里，我就俯伏于地。
Then I got up and went out into the valley; and I saw the glory of the Lord resting there as I had seen it by the river Chebar; and I went down on my face.

灵就进入我里面，使我站起来。耶和华对我说，你进房屋去，将门关上。
Then the spirit came into me and put me on my feet; and he had talk with me and said to me, Go and keep yourself shut up inside your house.

人子阿，人必用绳索捆绑你，你就不能出去在他们中间来往。
But see, O son of man, I will put bands on you, prisoning you in them, and you will not go out among them:

我必使你的舌头贴住上膛，以致你哑口，不能作责备他们的人。他们原是悖逆之家。
And I will make your tongue fixed to the roof of your mouth, so that you have no voice and may not make protests to them: for they are an uncontrolled people.

但我对你说话的时候，必使你开口，你就要对他们说，主耶和华如此说。听的可以听，不听的任他不听，因为他们是悖逆之家。
But when I have talk with you I will make your mouth open, and you are to say to them, This is what the Lord has said: Let the hearer give ear; and as for him who will not, let him keep his ears shut: for they are an uncontrolled people.

人子阿，你要拿一块砖，摆在你面前，将一座耶路撒冷城画在其上，
And you, son of man, take a back and put it before you and on it make a picture of a town, even Jerusalem.

又围困这城，造台筑垒，安营攻击，在四围安设撞锤攻城，
And make an attack on it, shutting it in, building strong places against it, and making high an earthwork against it; and put up tents against it, placing engines all round it for smashing down its walls.

又要拿个铁鏊，放在你和城的中间，作为铁墙。你要对面攻击这城，使城被困。这样，好作以色列家的预兆。
And take a flat iron plate, and put it for a wall of iron between you and the town: and let your face be turned to it, and it will be shut in and you will make an attack on it. This will be a sign to the children of Israel.

你要向左侧卧，承当以色列家的罪孽。要按你向左侧卧的日数，担当他们的罪孽。
Then, stretching yourself out on your left side, take the sin of the children of Israel on yourself: for as long as you are stretched out, so long will the sin of the children of Israel be on you.

因为我已将他们作孽的年数定为你向左侧卧的日数，就是三百九十日，你要这样担当以色列家的罪孽。
For I have had the years of their sin measured for you by a number of days, even three hundred and ninety days: and you will take on yourself the sin of the children of Israel.

再者，你满了这些日子，还要向右侧卧，担当犹大家的罪孽。我给你定规侧卧四十日，一日顶一年。
And when these days are ended, turning on your right side, you are to take on yourself the sin of the children of Judah: forty days, a day for a year, I have had it fixed for you.

你要露出膀臂，面向被困的耶路撒冷，说预言攻击这城。
And let your face be turned to where Jerusalem is shut in, with your arm uncovered, and be a prophet against it.

我用绳索捆绑你，使你不能辗转，直等你满了困城的日子。
And see, I will put bands on you; and you will be stretched out without turning from one side to the other till the days of your attack are ended.

你要取小麦，大麦，豆子，红豆，小米，粗麦，装在一个器皿中，用以为自己作饼。要按你侧卧的三百九十日吃这饼。
And take for yourself wheat and barley and different sorts of grain, and put them in one vessel and make bread for yourself from them; all the days when you are stretched on your side it will be your food.

你所吃的要按分两吃，每日二十舍客勒，按时而吃。
And you are to take your food by weight, twenty shekels a day: you are to take it at regular times.

你喝水也要按制子，每日喝一欣六分之一，按时而喝。
And you are to take water by measure, the sixth part of a hin: you are to take it at regular times.

你吃这饼像吃大麦饼一样，要用人粪在众人眼前烧烤。
And let your food be barley cakes, cooking it before their eyes with the waste which comes out of a man.

耶和华说，以色列人在我所赶他们到的各国中，也必这样吃不洁净的食物。
And the Lord said, Even so the children of Israel will have unclean bread for their food among the nations where I am driving them.

我说，哎。主耶和华阿，我素来未曾被玷污，从幼年到如今没有吃过自死的，或被野兽撕裂的，那可憎的肉也未曾入我的口。
Then I said, Ah, Lord! see, my soul has never been unclean, and I have never taken as my food anything which has come to a natural death or has been broken by beasts, from the time when I was young even till now; no disgusting flesh has ever come into my mouth.

于是他对我说，看哪，我给你牛粪代替人粪，你要将你的饼烤在其上。
Then he said to me, See, I have given you cow's waste in place of man's waste, and you will make your bread ready on it.

他又对我说，人子阿，我必在耶路撒冷折断他们的杖，就是断绝他们的粮。他们吃饼要按分两，忧虑而吃。喝水也要按制子，惊惶而喝。
And he said to me, Son of man, see, I will take away from Jerusalem her necessary bread: they will take their bread by weight and with care, measuring out their drinking-water with fear and wonder:

使他们缺粮缺水，彼此惊惶，因自己的罪孽消灭。
So that they may be in need of bread and water and be wondering at one another, wasting away in their sin.

人子阿，你要拿一把快刀，当作剃头刀，用这刀剃你的头发和你的胡须，用天平将须发平分。
And you, son of man, take a sharp sword, using it like a haircutter's blade, and making it go over your head and the hair of your chin: and take scales for separating the hair by weight.

围困城的日子满了，你要将三分之一在城中用火焚烧，将三分之一在城的四围用刀砍碎，将三分之一任风吹散。我也要拔刀追赶。
You are to have a third part burned with fire inside the town, when the days of the attack are ended; and a third part you are to take and give blows with the sword round about it; and give a third part for the wind to take away, and let loose a sword after them.

你要从其中取几根包在衣襟里，
And take from them a small number of hairs, folding them in your skirts.

再从这几根中取些扔在火中焚烧，从里面必有火出来烧入以色列全家。
And again take some of these and put them in the fire, burning them up in the fire; and say to all the children of Israel,

主耶和华如此说，这就是耶路撒冷。我曾将她安置在列邦之中。列国都在她的四围。
This is what the Lord has said: This is Jerusalem: I have put her among the nations, and countries are round her on every side;

她行恶，违背我的典章，过于列国。干犯我的律例，过于四围的列邦，因为她弃掉我的典章。至于我的律例，她并没有遵行。
And she has gone against my orders by doing evil more than the nations, and against my rules more than the countries round her: for they have given up my orders, and as for my rules, they have not gone in the way of them.

所以主耶和华如此说，因为你们纷争过于四围的列国，也不遵行我的律例，不谨守我的典章，并以遵从四围列国的恶规尚不满意，
For this cause the Lord has said: Because you have been more uncontrolled than the nations round about you, and have not been guided by my rules or kept my orders, but have kept the orders of the nations round about you;

所以主耶和华如此说，看哪，我与你反对，必在列国的眼前，在你中间，施行审判。
For this cause the Lord has said: See, I, even I, am against you; and I will be judging among you before the eyes of the nations.

并且因你一切可憎的事，我要在你中间行我所未曾行的，以后我也不再照着行。
And I will do in you what I have not done and will not do again, because of all your disgusting ways.

在你中间父亲要吃儿子，儿子要吃父亲。我必向你施行审判，我必将你所剩下的分散四方（方原文作风）。
For this cause fathers will take their sons for food among you, and sons will make a meal of their fathers; and I will be judge among you, and all the rest of you I will send away to every wind.

主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，因你用一切可憎的物，可厌的事玷污了我的圣所，故此，我定要使你人数减少，我眼必不顾惜你，也不可怜你。
For this cause, by my life, says the Lord, because you have made my holy place unclean with all your hated things and all your disgusting ways, you will become disgusting to me; my eye will have no mercy and I will have no pity.

你的民三分之一必遭瘟疫而死，在你中间必因饥荒消灭。三分之一必在你四围倒在刀下。我必将三分之一分散四方（方原文作风），并要拔刀追赶他们。
A third of you will come to death from disease, wasting away among you through need of food; a third will be put to the sword round about you; and a third I will send away to every wind, letting loose a sword after them.

我要这样成就怒中所定的。我向他们发的忿怒止息了，自己就得着安慰。我在他们身上成就怒中所定的那时，他们就知道我耶和华所说的是出于热心。
So my wrath will be complete and my passion will come to rest on them; and they will be certain that I the Lord have given the word of decision, when my wrath against them is complete.

并且我必使你在四围的列国中，在经过的众人眼前，成了荒凉和羞辱。
And I will make you a waste and a name of shame among the nations round about you, in the eyes of everyone who goes by.

这样，我必以怒气和忿怒，并烈怒的责备，向你施行审判。那时，你就在四围的列国中成为羞辱，讥刺，警戒，惊骇。这是我耶和华说的。
And you will be a name of shame and a cause of bitter words, an example and a wonder to the nations round about you, when I give effect to my judging among you in wrath and in passion and in burning protests: I the Lord have said it:

那时，我要将灭人，使人饥荒的恶箭，就是射去灭人的，射在你们身上，并要加增你们的饥荒，断绝你们所倚靠的粮食。
When I send on you the evil arrows of disease, causing destruction, which I will send to put an end to you; and, further, I will take away your necessary food.

又要使饥荒和恶兽到你那里，叫你丧子，瘟疫和流血的事也必盛行在你那里。我也要使刀剑临到你。这是我耶和华说的。
And I will send on you need of food and evil beasts, and they will be a cause of loss to you; and disease and violent death will go through you; and I will send the sword on you: I the Lord have said it.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向以色列的众山说预言，
Son of man, let your face be turned to the mountains of Israel, and be a prophet to them, and say,

说，以色列的众山哪，要听主耶和华的话。主耶和华对大山，小冈，水沟，山谷如此说，我必使刀剑临到你们，也必毁灭你们的丘坛。
You mountains of Israel, give ear to the words of the Lord: this is what the Lord has said to the mountains and the hills, to the waterways and the valleys: See, I, even I, am sending on you a sword for the destruction of your high places.

你们的祭坛必然荒凉，你们的日像必被打碎。我要使你们被杀的人倒在你们的偶像面前。
And your altars will be made waste, and your sun-images will be broken: and I will have your dead men placed before your images.

我也要将以色列人的尸首放在他们的偶像面前，将你们的骸骨抛散在你们祭坛的四围。
And I will put the dead bodies of the children of Israel in front of their images, sending your bones in all directions about your altars.

在你们一切的住处，城邑要变为荒场，丘坛必然凄凉，使你们的祭坛荒废，将你们的偶像打碎。你们的日像被砍倒，你们的工作被毁灭。
In all your living-places the towns will become broken walls, and the high places made waste; so that your altars may be broken down and made waste, and your images broken and ended, and so that your sun-images may be cut down and your works rubbed out.

被杀的人必倒在你们中间，你们就知道我是耶和华。
And the dead will be falling down among you, and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

你们分散在各国的时候，我必在列邦中使你们有剩下脱离刀剑的人。
But still, I will keep a small band safe from the sword among the nations, when you are sent wandering among the countries.

那脱离刀剑的人必在所掳到的各国中记念我，为他们心中何等伤破，是因他们起淫心，远离我，眼对偶像行邪淫。他们因行一切可憎的恶事，必厌恶自己。
And those of you who are kept safe will have me in mind among the nations where they have been taken away as prisoners, how I sent punishment on their hearts which were untrue to me, and on their eyes which were turned to their false gods: and they will be full of hate for themselves because of the evil things which they have done in all their disgusting ways.

他们必知道我是耶和华。我说要使这灾祸临到他们身上，并非空话。
And they will be certain that I am the Lord: not for nothing did I say that I would do this evil to them.

主耶和华如此说，你当拍手顿足，说，哀哉。以色列家行这一切可憎的恶事，他们必倒在刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫之下。
This is what the Lord has said: Give blows with your hand, stamping with your foot, and say, O sorrow! because of all the evil and disgusting ways of the children of Israel: for death will overtake them by the sword and through need of food and by disease.

在远处的，必遭瘟疫而死。在近处的，必倒在刀剑之下。那存留被围困的，必因饥荒而死。我必这样在他们身上成就我怒中所定的。
He who is far away will come to his death by disease; he who is near will be put to the sword; he who is shut up will come to his death through need of food; and I will give full effect to my passion against them.

他们被杀的人，倒在他们祭坛四围的偶像中，就是各高冈，各山顶，各青翠树下，各茂密的橡树下，乃是他们献馨香的祭牲给一切偶像的地方。那时，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord, when their dead men are stretched among their images round about their altars on every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and under every branching tree, and under every thick oak-tree, the places where they made sweet smells to all their images.

我必伸手攻击他们，使他们的地从旷野到第伯拉他一切住处极其荒凉，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And my hand will be stretched out against them, making the land waste and unpeopled, from the waste land to Riblah, through all their living-places: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，主耶和华对以色列地如此说，结局到了，结局到了地的四境。
And you, son of man, say, This is what the Lord has said to the land of Israel: An end has come, the end has come on the four quarters of the land.

现在你的结局已经临到，我必使我的怒气归与你，也必按你的行为审判你，照你一切可憎的事刑罚你。
Now the end has come on you, and I will send my wrath on you, judging you for your ways, I will send punishment on you for all your disgusting acts.

我眼必不顾惜你，也不可怜你，却要按你所行的报应你，照你中间可憎的事刑罚你。你就知道我是耶和华。
My eye will not have mercy on you, and I will have no pity: but I will send the punishment of your ways on you, and your disgusting works will be among you: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，有一灾，独有一灾。看哪，临近了。
This is what the Lord has said: An evil, even one evil; see, it is coming.

结局来了，结局来了，向你兴起。看哪，来到了。
An end has come, the end has come; see, it is coming on you.

境内的居民哪，所定的灾临到你，时候到了，日子近了，乃是哄嚷并非在山上欢呼的日子。
The crowning time has come on you, O people of the land: the time has come, the day is near; the day will not be slow in coming, it will not keep back.

我快要将我的忿怒倾在你身上，向你成就我怒中所定的，按你的行为审判你，照你一切可憎的事刑罚你。
Now, in a little time, I will let loose my passion on you, and give full effect to my wrath against you, judging you for your ways, and sending punishment on you for all your disgusting works.

我眼必不顾惜你，也不可怜你，必按你所行的报应你，照你中间可憎的事刑罚你。你就知道击打你的是我耶和华。
My eye will not have mercy, and I will have no pity: I will send on you the punishment of your ways, and your disgusting works will be among you; and you will see that I am the Lord who gives punishment.

看哪，看哪，日子快到了，所定的灾已经发出。杖已经开花，骄傲已经发芽。
See, the day; see, it is coming: the crowning time has gone out; the twisted way is flowering, pride has put out buds.

强暴兴起，成了罚恶的杖。以色列人，或是他们的群众，或是他们的财宝，无一存留，他们中间也没有得尊荣的。
Violent behaviour has been lifted up into a rod of evil; it will not be slow in coming, it will not keep back.

时候到了，日子近了，买主不可欢喜，卖主不可愁烦，因为烈怒已经临到他们众人身上。
The time has come, the day is near: let not him who gives a price for goods be glad, or him who gets the price have sorrow:

卖主虽然存活，却不能归回再得所卖的，因为这异象关乎他们众人。谁都不得归回，也没有人在他的罪孽中坚立自己。
For the trader will not go back to the things for which he had his price, even while he is still living:

他们已经吹角，预备齐全，却无一人出战，因为我的烈怒临到他们众人身上。
And he who has given a price for goods will not get them, for my wrath is on all of them.

在外有刀剑，在内有瘟疫，饥荒。在田野的，必遭刀剑而死。在城中的，必有饥荒，瘟疫吞灭他。
Outside is the sword, and inside disease and need of food: he who is in the open country will be put to the sword; he who is in the town will come to his end through need of food and disease.

其中所逃脱的就必逃脱，各人因自己的罪孽在山上发出悲声，好像谷中的鸽子哀鸣。
And those of them who get away safely will go and be in the secret places like the doves of the valleys, all of them will come to death, every one in his sin.

手都发软，膝弱如水。
All hands will be feeble and all knees without strength, like water.

要用麻布束腰，被战兢所盖。各人脸上羞愧，头上光秃。
And they will put haircloth round them, and deep fear will be covering them; and shame will be on all faces, and the hair gone from all their heads.

他们要将银子抛在街上，金子看如污秽之物。当耶和华发怒的日子，他们的金银不能救他们，不能使心里知足，也不能使肚腹饱满，因为这金银作了他们罪孽的绊脚石。
They will put out their silver into the streets, and their gold will be as an unclean thing; their silver and their gold will not be able to keep them safe in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they will not get their desire or have food for their need: because it has been the cause of their falling into sin.

论到耶和华妆饰华美的殿，他建立得威严，他们却在其中制造可憎可厌的偶像，所以这殿我使他们看如污秽之物。
As for their beautiful ornament, they had put it on high, and had made the images of their disgusting and hated things in it: for this cause I have made it an unclean thing to them.

我必将这殿交付外邦人为掠物，交付地上的恶人为掳物。他们也必亵渎这殿。
And I will give it into the hands of men from strange lands who will take it by force, and to the evil-doers of the earth to have for themselves; and they will make it unholy.

我必转脸不顾以色列人，他们亵渎我隐密之所，强盗也必进去亵渎。
And my face will be turned away from them, and they will make my secret place unholy: violent men will go into it and make it unholy.

要制造锁链。因为这地遍满流血的罪，城邑充满强暴的事，
Make the chain: for the land is full of crimes of blood, and the town is full of violent acts.

所以我必使列国中最恶的人来占据他们的房屋。我必使强暴人的骄傲止息，他们的圣所都要被亵渎。
For this reason I will send the worst of the nations and they will take their houses for themselves: I will make the pride of their strength come to an end; and their holy places will be made unclean.

毁灭临近了，他们要求平安，却无平安可得。
Shaking fear is coming; and they will be looking for peace, and there will be no peace.

灾害加上灾害，风声接连风声。他们必向先知求异象，但祭司讲的律法，长老设的谋略都必断绝。
Destruction will come on destruction, and one story after another; and the vision of the prophet will be shamed, and knowledge of the law will come to an end among the priests, and wisdom among the old.

君要悲哀，王要披凄凉为衣，国民的手都发颤。我必照他们的行为待他们，按他们应得的审判他们，他们就知道我是耶和华。
The king will give himself up to sorrow, and the ruler will be clothed with wonder, and the hands of the people of the land will be troubled: I will give them punishment for their ways, judging them as it is right for them to be judged; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

第六年六月初五日，我坐在家中。犹大的众长老坐在我面前。在那里主耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在我身上。
Now in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, when I was in my house and the responsible men of Judah were seated before me, the hand of the Lord came on me there.

我观看，见有形像仿佛火的形状，从他腰以下的形状有火，从他腰以上有光辉的形状，仿佛光耀的精金。
And looking, I saw a form like fire; from the middle of his body and down there was fire: and up from the middle of his body a sort of shining, like electrum.

他伸出仿佛一只手的样式，抓住我的一绺头发，灵就将我举到天地中间，在神的异象中，带我到耶路撒冷朝北的内院门口，在那里有触动主怒偶像的坐位，就是惹动忌邪的。
And he put out the form of a hand and took me by the hair of my head; and the wind, lifting me up between the earth and the heaven, took me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the way into the inner door facing to the north; where was the seat of the image of envy.

谁知，在那里有以色列神的荣耀，形状与我在平原所见的一样。
And I saw the glory of the Lord there, as in the vision which I saw in the valley.

神对我说，人子阿，你举目向北观看。我就举目向北观看，见祭坛门的北边在门口有这惹忌邪的偶像。
Then he said to me, Son of man, now let your eyes be lifted up in the direction of the north; and on looking in the direction of the north, to the north of the doorway of the altar, I saw this image of envy by the way in.

又对我说，人子阿，以色列家所行的，就是在此行这大可憎的事，使我远离我的圣所，你看见了吗？你还要看见另有大可憎的事。
And he said to me, Son of man, do you see what they are doing? even the very disgusting things which the children of Israel are doing here, causing me to go far away from my holy place? but you will see other most disgusting things.

他领我到院门口。我观看，见墙上有个窟窿。
And he took me to the door of the open place; and looking, I saw a hole in the wall.

他对我说，人子阿，你要挖墙。我一挖墙，见有一门。
And he said to me, Son of man, make a hole in the wall: and after making a hole in the wall I saw a door.

他说，你进去，看他们在这里所行可憎的恶事。
And he said to me, Go in and see the evil and disgusting things which they are doing here.

我进去一看，谁知，在四面墙上画着各样爬物和可憎的走兽，并以色列家一切的偶像。
So I went in and saw; and there every sort of living thing which goes flat on the earth, and unclean beasts, and all the images of the children of Israel, were pictured round about on the wall.

在这些像前有以色列家的七十个长老站立，沙番的儿子雅撒尼亚也站在其中。各人手拿香炉，烟云的香气上腾。
And before them seventy of the responsible men of the children of Israel had taken their places, every man with a vessel for burning perfumes in his hand, and in the middle of them was Jaazaniah, the son of Shaphan; and a cloud of smoke went up from the burning perfume.

他对我说，人子阿，以色列家的长老暗中在各人画像屋里所行的，你看见了吗？他们常说，耶和华看不见我们。耶和华已经离弃这地。
And he said to me, Son of man, have you seen what the responsible men of the children of Israel do in the dark, every man in his room of pictured images? for they say, The Lord does not see us; the Lord has gone away from the land.

他又说，你还要看见他们另外行大可憎的事。
Then he said to me, You will see even more disgusting things which they do.

他领我到耶和华殿外院朝北的门口。谁知，在那里有妇女坐着，为搭模斯哭泣。
Then he took me to the door of the way into the Lord's house looking to the north; and there women were seated weeping for Tammuz.

他对我说，人子阿，你看见了吗？你还要看见比这更可憎的事。
Then he said to me, Have you seen this, O son of man? you will see even more disgusting things than these.

他又领我到耶和华殿的内院。谁知，在耶和华的殿门口，廊子和祭坛中间，约有二十五个人背向耶和华的殿，面向东方拜日头。
And he took me into the inner square of the Lord's house, and at the door of the Temple of the Lord, between the covered way and the altar, there were about twenty-five men with their backs turned to the Temple of the Lord and their faces turned to the east; and they were worshipping the sun, turning to the east.

他对我说，人子阿，你看见了吗？犹大家在此行这可憎的事还算为小吗？他们在这地遍行强暴，再三惹我发怒，他们手拿枝条举向鼻前。
Then he said to me, Have you seen this, O son of man? is it a small thing to the children of Judah that they do the disgusting things which they are doing here? for they have made the land full of violent behaviour, making me angry again and again: and see, they put the branch to my nose.

因此，我也要以忿怒行事，我眼必不顾惜，也不可怜他们。他们虽向我耳中大声呼求，我还是不听。
For this reason I will let loose my wrath: my eye will not have mercy, and I will have no pity.

他向我耳中大声喊叫说，要使那监管这城的人手中各拿灭命的兵器前来。
Then crying out in my hearing in a loud voice, he said, Let the overseers of the town come near, every man armed.

忽然有六个人从朝北的上门而来，各人手拿杀人的兵器。内中有一人身穿细麻衣，腰间带着墨盒子。他们进来，站在铜祭坛旁。
And six men came from the way of the higher doorway looking to the north, every man with his axe in his hand: and one man among them was clothed in linen, with a writer's inkpot at his side. And they went in and took their places by the brass altar.

以色列神的荣耀本在基路伯上，现今从那里升到殿的门槛。神将那身穿细麻衣，腰间带着墨盒子的人召来。
And the glory of the God of Israel had gone up from the winged ones on which it was resting, to the doorstep of the house. And crying out to the man clothed in linen who had the writer's inkpot at his side,

耶和华对他说，你去走遍耶路撒冷全城，那些因城中所行可憎之事叹息哀哭的人，画记号在额上。
The Lord said to him, Go through the town, through the middle of Jerusalem, and put a mark on the brows of the men who are sorrowing and crying for all the disgusting things which are done in it.

我耳中听见他对其余的人说，要跟随他走遍全城，以行击杀。你们的眼不要顾惜，也不要可怜他们。
And to these he said in my hearing, Go through the town after him using your axes: do not let your eyes have mercy, and have no pity:

要将年老的，年少的，并处女，婴孩，和妇女，从圣所起全都杀尽，只是凡有记号的人不要挨近他。于是他们从殿前的长老杀起。
Give up to destruction old men and young men and virgins, little children and women: but do not come near any man who has the mark on him: and make a start at my holy place. So they made a start with the old men who were before the house.

他对他们说，要污秽这殿，使院中充满被杀的人。你们出去吧。他们就出去，在城中击杀。
And he said to them, Make the house unclean, make the open places full of dead: go forward and send destruction on the town.

他们击杀的时候，我被留下，我就俯伏在地，说，哎。主耶和华阿，你将忿怒倾在耶路撒冷，岂要将以色列所剩下的人都灭绝吗？
Now while they were doing so, and I was untouched, I went down on my face, and crying out, I said, Ah, Lord! will you give all the rest of Israel to destruction in letting loose your wrath on Jerusalem?

他对我说，以色列家和犹大家的罪孽极其重大。遍地有流血的事，满城有冤屈，因为他们说，耶和华已经离弃这地，他看不见我们。
Then he said to me, The sin of the children of Israel and Judah is very, very great, and the land is full of blood and the town full of evil ways: for they say, The Lord has gone away from the land, and the Lord does not see.

故此，我眼必不顾惜，也不可怜他们，要照他们所行的报应在他们头上。
And as for me, my eye will not have mercy, and I will have no pity, but I will send the punishment of their ways on their heads.

那穿细麻衣，腰间带着墨盒子的人将这事回覆说，我已经照你所吩咐的行了。
Then the man clothed in linen, who had the inkpot at his side, came back and said, I have done what you gave me orders to do.

我观看，见基路伯头上的穹苍之中，显出蓝宝石的形状，仿佛宝座的形像。
Then looking, I saw that on the arch which was over the head of the winged ones there was seen over them what seemed like a sapphire stone, having the form of a king's seat.

主对那穿细麻衣的人说，你进去，在旋转的轮内基路伯以下，从基路伯中间将火炭取满两手，撒在城上。我就见他进去。
And he said to the man clothed in linen, Go in between the wheels, under the winged ones, and get your two hands full of burning coals from between the winged ones and send them in a shower over the town. And he went in before my eyes.

那人进去的时候，基路伯站在殿的右边，云彩充满了内院。
Now the winged ones were stationed on the right side of the house when the man went in; and the inner square was full of the cloud.

耶和华的荣耀从基路伯那里上升，停在门槛以上。殿内满了云彩，院宇也被耶和华荣耀的光辉充满。
And the glory of the Lord went up from the winged ones and came to rest over the doorstep of the house; and the house was full of the cloud and the open square was full of the shining of the Lord's glory.

基路伯翅膀的响声听到外院，好像全能神说话的声音。
And the sound of the wings of the winged ones was clear even in the outer square, like the voice of the Ruler of all.

他吩咐那穿细麻衣的人说，要从旋转的轮内基路伯中间取火。那人就进去站在一个轮子旁边。
And when he gave orders to the man clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the winged ones, then he went in and took his place at the side of a wheel.

有一个基路伯从基路伯中伸手到基路伯中间的火那里，取些放在那穿细麻衣的人两手中，那人就拿出去了。
And stretching out his hand to the fire which was between the winged ones, he took some of it and went out.

在基路伯翅膀之下，显出有人手的样式。
And I saw the form of a man's hands among the winged ones under their wings.

我又观看，见基路伯旁边有四个轮子。这基路伯旁有一个轮子，那基路伯旁有一个轮子，每基路伯都是如此。轮子的颜色（原文作形状）仿佛水苍玉。
And looking, I saw four wheels by the side of the winged ones, one wheel by the side of a winged one and another wheel by the side of another: and the wheels were like the colour of a beryl stone to the eye.

至于四轮的形状，都是一个样式，仿佛轮中套轮。
In form the four of them were all the same, they seemed like a wheel inside a wheel.

轮行走的时候，向四方都能直行，并不掉转。头向何方，他们也随向何方，行走的时候并不掉转。
When they were moving, they went on their four sides without turning; they went after the head in the direction in which it was looking; they went without turning.

他们全身，连背带手和翅膀，并轮周围都满了眼睛。这四个基路伯的轮子都是如此。
And the edges of the four wheels were full of eyes round about.

至于这些轮子，我耳中听见说是旋转的。
As for the wheels, they were named in my hearing, the circling wheels.

基路伯各有四脸，第一是基路伯的脸，第二是人的脸，第三是狮子的脸，第四是鹰的脸。
And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a winged one, and the second was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

基路伯升上去了。这是我在迦巴鲁河边所见的活物。
And the winged ones went up on high: this is the living being which I saw by the river Chebar.

基路伯行走，轮也在旁边行走。基路伯展开翅膀，离地上升，轮也不转离他们旁边。
And when the winged ones went, the wheels went by their side: and when their wings were lifted to take them up from the earth, the wheels were not turned from their side.

那些站住，这些也站住。那些上升，这些也一同上升，因为活物的灵在轮中。
When they were at rest in their place, these were at rest; when they were lifted up, these went up with them: for the spirit of life was in them.

耶和华的荣耀从殿的门槛那里出去，停在基路伯以上。
Then the glory of the Lord went out from the doorstep of the house, and came to rest over the winged ones.

基路伯出去的时候，就展开翅膀，在我眼前离地上升。轮也在他们的旁边，都停在耶和华殿的东门口。在他们以上有以色列神的荣耀。
And the winged ones, lifting up their wings, went up from the earth before my eyes, with the wheels by their side: and they came to rest at the east doorway of the Lord's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them on high.

这是我在迦巴鲁河边所见，以色列神荣耀以下的活物，我就知道他们是基路伯。
This is the living being which I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and it was clear to me that they were the winged ones.

各有四个脸面，四个翅膀，翅膀以下有人手的样式。
Every one had four faces and every one had four wings; and hands like a man's hands were under their wings.

至于他们脸的模样，并身体的形像，是我从前在迦巴鲁河边所看见的。他们俱各直往前行。
As for the form of their faces, they were the faces whose form I saw by the river Chebar; when they went, every one of them went straight forward.

灵将我举起，带到耶和华殿向东的东门。谁知，在门口有二十五个人，我见其中有民间的首领押朔的儿子雅撒尼亚和比拿雅的儿子毗拉提。
And the wind, lifting me up, took me to the east doorway of the Lord's house, looking to the east: and at the door I saw twenty-five men; and among them I saw Jaazaniah, the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, rulers of the people.

耶和华对我说，人子阿，这就是图谋罪孽的人，在这城中给人设恶谋。
Then he said to me, Son of man, these are the men who are designing evil, who are teaching evil ways in this town:

他们说，盖房屋的时候尚未临近。这城是锅，我们是肉。
Who say, This is not the time for building houses: this town is the cooking-pot and we are the flesh.

人子阿，因此你当说预言，说预言攻击他们。
For this cause be a prophet against them, be a prophet, O son of man.

耶和华的灵降在我身上，对我说，你当说，耶和华如此说，以色列家阿，你们口中所说的，心里所想的，我都知道。
And the spirit of the Lord came on me, and he said to me, Say, These are the words of the Lord: This is what you have said, O children of Israel; what comes into your mind is clear to me.

你们在这城中杀人增多，使被杀的人充满街道。
You have made great the number of your dead in this town, you have made its streets full of dead men.

所以主耶和华如此说，你们杀在城中的人就是肉，这城就是锅。你们却要从其中被带出去。
For this reason the Lord has said: Your dead whom you have put down in its streets, they are the flesh, and this town is the cooking-pot: but I will make you come out from inside it.

你们怕刀剑，我必使刀剑临到你们。这是主耶和华说的。
You have been fearing the sword, and I will send the sword on you, says the Lord.

我必从这城中带出你们去，交在外邦人的手中，且要在你们中间施行审判。
I will make you come out from inside the town and will give you up into the hands of men from other lands, and will be judge among you.

你们必倒在刀下。我必在以色列的境界审判你们，你们就知道我是耶和华。
You will come to your death by the sword; and I will be your judge in the land of Israel; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

这城必不作你们的锅，你们也不作其中的肉。我必在以色列的境界审判你们，
This town will not be your cooking-pot, and you will not be the flesh inside it; I will be your judge at the limit of the land of Israel;

你们就知道我是耶和华。因为你们没有遵行我的律例，也没有顺从我的典章，却随从你们四围列国的恶规。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord: for you have not been guided by my rules or given effect to my orders, but you have been living by the orders of the nations round about you.

我正说预言的时候，比拿雅的儿子毗拉提死了。于是我俯伏在地，大声呼叫说，哎。主耶和华阿，你要将以色列剩下的人灭绝净尽吗？
Now while I was saying these things, death came to Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah. Then falling down on my face and crying out with a loud voice, I said, Ah, Lord! will you put an end to all the rest of Israel?

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，耶路撒冷的居民对你的弟兄，你的本族，你的亲属，以色列全家，就是对大众说，你们远离耶和华吧。这地是赐给我们为业的。
Son of man, your countrymen, your relations, and all the children of Israel, all of them, are those to whom the people of Jerusalem have said, Go far from the Lord; this land is given to us for a heritage:

所以你当说，耶和华如此说，我虽将以色列全家远远迁移到列国中，将他们分散在列邦内，我还要在他们所到的列邦，暂作他们的圣所。
For this reason say, This is what the Lord has said: Though I have had them moved far off among the nations, and though I have sent them wandering among the countries, still I have been a safe place for them for a little time in the countries where they have come.

你当说，主耶和华如此说，我必从万民中招聚你们，从分散的列国内聚集你们，又要将以色列地赐给你们。
Then say, This is what the Lord has said: I will get you together from the peoples, and make you come out of the countries where you have been sent in flight, and I will give you the land of Israel.

他们必到那里，也必从其中除掉一切可憎可厌的物。
And they will come there, and take away all the hated and disgusting things from it.

我要使他们有合一的心，也要将新灵放在他们里面，又从他们肉体中除掉石心，赐给他们肉心，
And I will give them a new heart, and I will put a new spirit in them; and I will take the heart of stone out of their flesh and give them a heart of flesh:

使他们顺从我的律例，谨守遵行我的典章。他们要作我的子民，我要作他们的神。
So that they may be guided by my rules and keep my orders and do them: and they will be to me a people, and I will be to them a God.

至于那些心中随从可憎可厌之物的，我必照他们所行的报应在他们头上。这是主耶和华说的。
But as for those whose heart goes after their hated and disgusting things, I will send on their heads the punishment of their ways, says the Lord.

于是，基路伯展开翅膀，轮子都在他们旁边。在他们以上有以色列神的荣耀。
Then the wings of the winged ones were lifted up, and the wheels were by their side; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them on high.

耶和华的荣耀从城中上升，停在城东的那座山上。
And the glory of the Lord went up from inside the town, and came to rest on the mountain on the east side of the town.

灵将我举起，在异象中借着神的灵将我带进迦勒底地，到被掳的人那里。我所见的异象就离我上升去了。
And the wind, lifting me up, took me in the visions of God into Chaldaea, to those who had been taken away as prisoners. So the vision which I had seen went away from me.

我便将耶和华所指示我的一切事都说给被掳的人听。
Then I gave an account to those who had been taken prisoners of all the things which the Lord had made me see.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你住在悖逆的家中。他们有眼睛看不见，有耳朵听不见，因为他们是悖逆之家。
Son of man, you are living among an uncontrolled people, who have eyes to see but see not, and ears for hearing but they do not give ear; for they are an uncontrolled people.

所以人子阿，你要预备掳去使用的物件，在白日当他们眼前从你所住的地方移到别处去。他们虽是悖逆之家，或者可以揣摩思想。
And you, O son of man, by day, before their eyes, get ready the vessels of one who is taken away, and go away from your place to another place before their eyes: it may be that they will see, though they are an uncontrolled people.

你要在白日当他们眼前带出你的物件去，好像预备掳去使用的物件。到了晚上，你要在他们眼前亲自出去，像被掳的人出去一样。
By day, before their eyes, take out your vessels like those of one who is taken away: and go out in the evening before their eyes, like those who are taken away as prisoners.

你要在他们眼前挖通了墙，从其中将物件带出去。
Make a hole in the wall, before their eyes, and go out through it.

到天黑时，你要当他们眼前搭在肩头上带出去，并要蒙住脸看不见地，因为我立你作以色列家的预兆。
And before their eyes, take your goods on your back and go out in the dark; go with your face covered: for I have made you a sign to the children of Israel.

我就照着所吩咐的去行，白日带出我的物件，好像预备掳去使用的物件。到了晚上，我用手挖通了墙。天黑的时候，就当他们眼前搭在肩头上带出去。
And I did as I was ordered: I took out my vessels by day, like those of one who is taken away, and in the evening I made a hole through the wall with a tent-pin; and in the dark I went out, taking my things on my back before their eyes.

次日早晨，耶和华的话临到我说，
And in the morning the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，以色列家，就是那悖逆之家，岂不是问你说，你作什么呢？
Son of man, has not Israel, the uncontrolled people, said to you, What are you doing?

你要对他们说，主耶和华如此说，这是关乎耶路撒冷的君王和他周围以色列全家的预表（原文作担子）。
You are to say to them, This is what the Lord has said: This word has to do with the ruler in Jerusalem and all the children of Israel in it.

你要说，我作你们的预兆，我怎样行，他们所遭遇的也必怎样，他们必被掳去。
Say, I am your sign: as I have done, so will it be done to them: they will go away as prisoners.

他们中间的君王也必在天黑的时候将物件搭在肩头上带出去。他们要挖通了墙，从其中带出去。他必蒙住脸，眼看不见地。
And the ruler who is among them will take his goods on his back in the dark and go out: he will make a hole in the wall through which to go out: he will have his face covered so that he may not be seen.

我必将我的网撒在他身上，他必在我的网罗中缠住。我必带他到迦勒底人之地的巴比伦。他虽死在那里，却看不见那地。
And my net will be stretched out on him, and he will be taken in my cords: and I will take him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldaeans; but he will not see it, and there death will come to him.

周围一切帮助他的和他所有的军队，我必分散四方（方原文作风），也要拔刀追赶他们。
And all his helpers round about him and all his armies I will send in flight to every wind; and I will let loose a sword after them.

我将他们四散在列国，分散在列邦的时候，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I send them in flight among the nations, driving them out through the countries.

我却要留下他们几个人得免刀剑，饥荒，瘟疫，使他们在所到的各国中述说他们一切可憎的事，人就知道我是耶和华。
But a small number of them I will keep from the sword, from the need of food, and from disease, so that they may make clear all their disgusting ways among the nations where they come; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你吃饭必胆战，喝水必惶惶忧虑。
Son of man, take your food with shaking fear, and your water with trouble and care;

你要对这地的百姓说，主耶和华论耶路撒冷和以色列地的居民如此说，他们吃饭必忧虑，喝水必惊惶。因其中居住的众人所行强暴的事，这地必然荒废，一无所存。
And say to the people of the land, This is what the Lord has said about the people of Jerusalem and the land of Israel: They will take their food with care and their drink with wonder, so that all the wealth of their land may be taken from it because of the violent ways of the people living in it.

有居民的城邑必变为荒场，地也必变为荒废。你们就知道我是耶和华。
And the peopled towns will be made waste, and the land will become a wonder; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，在你们以色列地怎么有这俗语，说日子迟延，一切异象都落了空呢？
Son of man, what is this saying which you have about the land of Israel, The time is long and every vision comes to nothing?

你要告诉他们说，主耶和华如此说，我必使这俗语止息，以色列中不再用这俗语。你却要对他们说，日子临近，一切的异象必都应验。
For this cause say to them, This is what the Lord has said: I have made this saying come to an end, and it will no longer be used as a common saying in Israel; but say to them, The days are near, and the effect of every vision.

从此，在以色列家中必不再有虚假的异象和奉承的占卜。
For there will be no more false visions or smooth use of secret arts in Israel.

我耶和华说话，所说的必定成就，不再耽延。你们这悖逆之家，我所说的话必趁你们在世的日子成就。这是主耶和华说的。
For I am the Lord; I will say the word and what I say I will do; it will not be put off: for in your days, O uncontrolled people, I will say the word and do it, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Again the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，以色列家的人说，他所见的异象是关乎后来许多的日子，所说的预言是指着极远的时候。
Son of man, see, the children of Israel say, The vision which he sees is for the days which are a long way off, and his words are of times still far away.

所以你要对他们说，主耶和华如此说，我的话没有一句再耽延的，我所说的必定成就。这是主耶和华说的。
Say to them then, This is what the Lord has said: Not one of my words will be put off any longer, but what I say I will do, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要说预言攻击以色列中说预言的先知，对那些本己心发预言的说，你们当听耶和华的话。
Son of man, be a prophet against the prophets of Israel, and say to those prophets whose words are the invention of their hearts, Give ear to the word of the Lord;

主耶和华如此说，愚顽的先知有祸了，他们随从自己的心意，却一无所见。
This is what the Lord has said: A curse on the foolish prophets who go after the spirit which is in them and have seen nothing!

以色列阿，你的先知好像荒场中的狐狸，
O Israel, your prophets have been like jackals in the waste places.

没有上去堵挡破口，也没有为以色列家重修墙垣，使他们当耶和华的日子在阵上站立得住。
You have not gone up into the broken places or made up the wall for the children of Israel to take your place in the fight in the day of the Lord.

这些人所见的是虚假，是谎诈的占卜。他们说是耶和华说的，其实耶和华并没有差遣他们，他们倒使人指望那话必然立定。
They have seen visions without substance and made use of secret arts, who say, The Lord has said; and the Lord has not sent them: hoping that the word would have effect.

你们岂不是见了虚假的异象吗？岂不是说了谎诈的占卜吗？你们说，这是耶和华说的，其实我没有说。
Have you not seen a vision without substance and have you not falsely made use of secret arts, when you say, The Lord has said; though I have said nothing?

所以主耶和华如此说，因你们说的是虚假，见的是谎诈，我就与你们反对。这是主耶和华说的。
So this is what the Lord has said: Because your words are without substance and your visions are false, see, I am against you, says the Lord.

我的手必攻击那见虚假异象，用谎诈占卜的先知，他们必不列在我百姓的会中，不录在以色列家的册上，也不进入以色列地。你们就知道我是主耶和华。
And my hand will be against the prophets who see visions without substance and who make false use of secret arts: they will not be in the secret of my people, and they will not be recorded in the list of the children of Israel, and they will not come into the land of Israel; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord.

因为他们诱惑我的百姓，说，平安。其实没有平安，就像有人立起墙壁，他们倒用未泡透的灰抹上。
Because, even because they have been guiding my people into error, saying, Peace; when there is no peace; and in the building of a division wall they put whitewash on it:

所以你要对那些抹上未泡透灰的人说，墙要倒塌，必有暴雨漫过。大冰雹阿，你们要降下，狂风也要吹裂这墙。
Say to those who put whitewash on it, There will be an overflowing shower; and you, O ice-drops, will come raining down; and it will be broken in two by the storm-wind.

这墙倒塌之后，人岂不问你们说，你们抹上未泡透的灰在哪里呢？
And when the wall has come down, will they not say to you, Where is the whitewash which you put on it?

所以主耶和华如此说，我要发怒，使狂风吹裂这墙，在怒中使暴雨漫过，又发怒降下大冰雹，毁灭这墙。
For this reason, the Lord has said: I will have it broken in two by a storm-wind in my passion; and there will be an overflowing shower in my wrath, and you, O ice-drops, will come raining angrily down.

我要这样拆毁你们那未泡透灰所抹的墙，拆平到地，以致根基露出，墙必倒塌，你们也必在其中灭亡。你们就知道我是耶和华。
So I will let the wall, which you were covering with whitewash, be broken down; I will have it levelled to the earth so that its base is uncovered: it will come down, and destruction will come on you with it; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord.

我要这样向墙和用未泡透灰抹墙的人成就我怒中所定的，并要对你们说，墙和抹墙的人都没有了。
So I will let loose my passion on the wall in full measure, and on those who put whitewash on it; and I will say to you, Where is the wall, and where are those who put whitewash on it?

这抹墙的就是以色列的先知，他们指着耶路撒冷说预言，为这城见了平安的异象，其实没有平安。这是主耶和华说的。
Even the prophets of Israel who say words to Jerusalem, who see visions of peace for her when there is no peace, says the Lord.

人子阿，你要面向本民中，从己心发预言的女子说预言，攻击她们，
And you, son of man, let your face be turned against the daughters of your people, who are acting the part of prophets at their pleasure; be a prophet against them, and say,

说主耶和华如此说，这些妇女有祸了。她们为众人的膀臂缝靠枕，给高矮之人作下垂的头巾，为要猎取人的性命。难道你们要猎取我百姓的性命，为利己将人救活吗？
This is what the Lord has said: A curse is on the women who are stitching bands on all arms and putting veils on the heads of those of every size, so that they may go after souls! Will you go after the souls of my people and keep yourselves safe from death?

你们为两把大麦，为几块饼，在我民中亵渎我，对肯听谎言的民说谎，杀死不该死的人，救活不该活的人。
And you have put me to shame among my people for a little barley and some bits of bread, sending death on souls for whom there is no cause of death, and keeping those souls living who have no right to life, by the false words you say to my people who give ear to what is false.

所以主耶和华如此说，看哪，我与你们的靠枕反对，就是你们用以猎取人，使人的性命如鸟飞的。我要将靠枕从你们的膀臂上扯去，释放你们猎取如鸟飞的人。
For this cause the Lord has said: See, I am against your bands with which you go after souls, and I will violently take them off their arms; and I will let loose the souls, even the souls whom you go after freely.

我也必撕裂你们下垂的头巾，救我百姓脱离你们的手，不再被猎取，落在你们手中。你们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will have your veils violently parted in two, and will make my people free from your hands, and they will no longer be in your power for you to go after them; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

我不使义人伤心，你们却以谎话使他伤心，又坚固恶人的手，使他不回头离开恶道得以救活。
Because with your false words you have given pain to the heart of the upright man when I had not made him sad; in order to make strong the hands of the evil-doer so that he may not be turned from his evil way and get life:

你们就不再见虚假的异象，也不再行占卜的事。我必救我的百姓脱离你们的手。你们就知道我是耶和华。
For this cause you will see no more foolish visions or make false use of secret arts: and I will make my people free from your power; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

有几个以色列长老到我这里来，坐在我面前。
Then certain of the responsible men of Israel came to me and took their seats before me.

耶和华的话就临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，这些人已将他们的假神接到心里，把陷于罪的绊脚石放在面前，我岂能丝毫被他们求问吗？
Son of man, these men have taken their false gods into their hearts and put before their faces the sin which is the cause of their fall: am I to give ear when they come to me for directions?

所以你要告诉他们，主耶和华如此说，以色列家的人中，凡将他的假神接到心里，把陷于罪的绊脚石放在面前，又就了先知来的，我耶和华在他所求的事上，必按他众多的假神回答他（或作必按他拜许多假神的罪报应他），
For this cause say to them, These are the words of the Lord: Every man of Israel who has taken his false god into his heart, and put before his face the sin which is the cause of his fall, and comes to the prophet; I the Lord will give him an answer by myself in agreement with the number of his false gods;

好在以色列家的心事上捉住他们，因为他们都借着假神与我生疏。
So as to take the children of Israel in the thoughts of their hearts, because they have become strange to me through their false gods.

所以你要告诉以色列家说，主耶和华如此说，回头吧。离开你们的偶像，转脸莫从你们一切可憎的事。
For this cause say to the children of Israel, These are the words of the Lord: Come back and give up your false gods and let your faces be turned from your disgusting things.

因为以色列家的人，或在以色列中寄居的外人，凡与我隔绝，将他的假神接到心里，把陷于罪的绊脚石放在面前，又就了先知来要为自己的事求问我的，我耶和华必亲自回答他。
When any one of the men of Israel, or of those from other lands who are living in Israel, who has become strange to me, and takes his false gods into his heart, and puts before his face the sin which is the cause of his fall, comes to the prophet to get directions from me; I the Lord will give him an answer by myself:

我必向那人变脸，使他作了警戒，笑谈，令人惊骇，并且我要将他从我民中剪除。你们就知道我是耶和华。
And my face will be turned against that man, and I will make him a sign and a common saying, cutting him off from among my people; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

先知若被迷惑说一句预言，是我耶和华任那先知受迷惑，我也必向他伸手，将他从我民以色列中除灭。
And if the prophet, tricked by deceit, says anything, it is I the Lord by whom he has been tricked, and I will put out my hand against him, and he will be cut off from among my people Israel.

他们必担当自己的罪孽。先知的罪孽和求问之人的罪孽都是一样，
And the punishment of their sin will be on them: the sin of the prophet will be the same as the sin of him who goes to him for directions;

好使以色列家不再走迷离开我，不再因各样的罪过玷污自己，只要作我的子民，我作他们的神。这是主耶和华说的。
So that the children of Israel may no longer go wandering away from me, or make themselves unclean with all their wrongdoing; but they will be my people, and I will be their God, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，若有一国犯罪干犯我，我也向他伸手折断他们的杖，就是断绝他们的粮，使饥荒临到那地，将人与牲畜从其中剪除。
Son of man, when a land, sinning against me, does wrong, and my hand is stretched out against it, and the support of its bread is broken, and I make it short of food, cutting off man and beast from it:

其中虽有挪亚，但以理，约伯这三人，他们只能因他们的义救自己的性命。这是主耶和华说的。
Even if these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, only themselves would they keep safe by their righteousness, says the Lord.

我若使恶兽经过糟践那地，使地荒凉，以致因这些兽，人都不得经过。
Or if I send evil beasts through the land causing destruction and making it waste, so that no man may go through because of the beasts:

虽有这三人在其中，主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，他们连儿带女都不能得救，只能自己得救，那地仍然荒凉。
Even if these three men were in it, by my life, says the Lord, they would not keep safe their sons or daughters, but only themselves, and the land would be made waste.

或者我使刀剑临到那地，说，刀剑哪，要经过那地，以致我将人与牲畜从其中剪除。
Or if I send a sword against that land, and say, Sword, go through the land, cutting off from it man and beast:

虽有这三人在其中，主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，他们连儿带女都不能得救，只能自己得救。
Even if these three men were in it, by my life, says the Lord, they would not keep safe their sons or daughters, but only themselves.

或者我叫瘟疫流行那地，使我灭命（原文作带血）的忿怒倾在其上，好将人与牲畜从其中剪除。
Or if I send disease into that land, letting loose my wrath on it in blood, cutting off from it man and beast:

虽有挪亚，但以理，约伯在其中，主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，他们连儿带女都不能救，只能因他们的义救自己的性命。
Even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, by my life, says the Lord, they would not keep son or daughter safe; only themselves would they keep safe through their righteousness.

主耶和华如此说，我将这四样大灾就是刀剑，饥荒，恶兽，瘟疫降在耶路撒冷，将人与牲畜从其中剪除，岂不更重吗？
For this is what the Lord has said: How much more when I send my four bitter punishments on Jerusalem, the sword and need of food and evil beasts and disease, cutting off from it man and beast?

然而其中必有剩下的人，他们连儿带女必带到你们这里来，你们看见他们所行所为的，要因我降给耶路撒冷的一切灾祸，便得了安慰。
But truly, there will still be a small band who will be safe, even sons and daughters: and they will come out to you, and you will see their ways and their doings: and you will be comforted about the evil which I have sent on Jerusalem, even about everything I have sent on it.

你们看见他们所行所为的，得了安慰，就知道我在耶路撒冷中所行的并非无故。这是主耶和华说的。
They will give you comfort when you see their ways and their doings: and you will be certain that not for nothing have I done all the things I have done in it, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，葡萄树比别样树有什么强处。葡萄枝比众树枝有什么好处。
Son of man, what is the vine-tree more than any branching tree which is among the trees of the woods?

其上可以取木料作什么工用，可以取来作钉子挂什么器皿吗？
Will its wood be used for any work? do men make of it a pin for hanging any vessel on?

看哪，已经抛在火中当作柴烧，火既烧了两头，中间也被烧了，还有益于工用吗？
See, it is put into the fire for burning: the fire has made a meal of its two ends and the middle part of it is burned; is it good for any work?

完全的时候尚且不合乎什么工用，何况被火烧坏，还能合乎什么工用吗？
Truly, before it was cut down, it was not used for any purpose: how much less, when the fire has made a meal of it and it is burned, will it be made into anything?

所以，主耶和华如此说，众树以内的葡萄树，我怎样使它在火中当柴，也必照样待耶路撒冷的居民。
For this cause the Lord has said: Like the vine-tree among the trees of the woods which I have given to the fire for burning, so will I give the people of Jerusalem.

我必向他们变脸。他们虽从火中出来，火却要烧灭他们。我向他们变脸的时候，你们就知道我是耶和华。
And my face will be turned against them; and though they have come out of the fire they will be burned up by it; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord when my face is turned against them.

我必使地土荒凉，因为他们行事干犯我。这是主耶和华说的。
And I will make the land a waste because they have done evil, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要使耶路撒冷知道她那些可憎的事，
Son of man, make clear to Jerusalem her disgusting ways,

说主耶和华对耶路撒冷如此说，你根本，你出世，是在迦南地。你父亲是亚摩利人，你母亲是赫人。
And say, This is what the Lord has said to Jerusalem: Your start and your birth was from the land of the Canaanite; an Amorite was your father and your mother was a Hittite.

论到你出世的景况，在你初生的日子没有为你断脐带，也没有用水洗你，使你洁净，丝毫没有撒盐在你身上，也没有用布裹你。
As for your birth, on the day of your birth your cord was not cut and you were not washed in water to make you clean; you were not salted or folded in linen bands.

谁的眼也不可怜你，为你作一件这样的事怜恤你。但你初生的日子扔在田野，是因你被厌恶。
No eye had pity on you to do any of these things to you or to be kind to you; but you were put out into the open country, because your life was hated at the time of your birth.

我从你旁边经过，见你滚在血中，就对你说，你虽在血中，仍可存活。你虽在血中，仍可存活。
And when I went past you and saw you stretched out in your blood, I said to you, Though you are stretched out in your blood, have life;

我使你生长好像田间所长的，你就渐渐长大，以至极其俊美，两乳成形，头发长成，你却仍然赤身露体。
And be increased in number like the buds of the field; and you were increased and became great, and you came to the time of love: your breasts were formed and your hair was long; but you were uncovered and without clothing.

我从你旁边经过，看见你的时候正动爱情，便用衣襟搭在你身上，遮盖你的赤体。又向你起誓，与你结盟，你就归于我。这是主耶和华说的。
Now when I went past you, looking at you, I saw that your time was the time of love; and I put my skirts over you, covering your unclothed body: and I gave you my oath and made an agreement with you, says the Lord, and you became mine.

那时我用水洗你，洗净你身上的血，又用油抹你。
Then I had you washed with water, washing away all your blood and rubbing you with oil.

我也使你身穿绣花衣服，脚穿海狗皮鞋，并用细麻布给你束腰，用丝绸为衣披在你身上，
And I had you clothed with needlework, and put leather shoes on your feet, folding fair linen about you and covering you with silk.

又用妆饰打扮你，将镯子戴在你手上，将金链戴在你项上。
And I made you fair with ornaments and put jewels on your hands and a chain on your neck.

我也将环子戴在你鼻子上，将耳环戴在你耳朵上，将华冠戴在你头上。
And I put a ring in your nose and ear-rings in your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.

这样，你就有金银的妆饰，穿的是细麻衣和丝绸，并绣花衣。吃的是细面，蜂蜜，并油。你也极其美貌，发达到王后的尊荣。
So you were made beautiful with gold and silver; and your clothing was of the best linen and silk and needlework; your food was the best meal and honey and oil: and you were very beautiful.

你美貌的名声传在列邦中，你十分美貌，是因我加在你身上的威荣。这是主耶和华说的。
You were so beautiful that the story of you went out into all nations; you were completely beautiful because of my glory which I had put on you, says the Lord.

只是你仗着自己的美貌，又因你的名声就行邪淫。你纵情淫乱，使过路的任意而行。
But you put your faith in the fact that you were beautiful, acting like a loose woman because you were widely talked of, and offering your cheap love to everyone who went by, whoever it might be.

你用衣服为自己在高处结彩，在其上行邪淫。这样的事将来必没有，也必不再行了。
And you took your robes and made high places for yourself ornamented with every colour, acting like a loose woman on them, without shame or fear.

你又将我所给你那华美的金银，宝器为自己制造人像，与他行邪淫。
And you took the fair jewels, my silver and gold which I had given to you, and made for yourself male images, acting like a loose woman with them;

又用你的绣花衣服给他披上，并将我的膏油和香料摆在他跟前。
And you took your robes of needlework for their clothing, and put my oil and my perfume before them.

又将我赐给你的食物，就是我赐给你吃的细面，油，和蜂蜜，都摆在他跟前为馨香的供物。这是主耶和华说的。
And my bread which I gave you, the best meal and oil and honey which I gave you for your food, you put it before them for a sweet smell, says the Lord.

并且你将给我所生的儿女焚献给他。
And you took your sons and your daughters whom I had by you, offering even these to them to be their food. Was your loose behaviour so small a thing,

你行淫乱岂是小事，竟将我的儿女杀了，使他们经火归与他吗？
That you put my children to death and gave them up to go through the fire to them?

你行这一切可憎和淫乱的事，并未追念你幼年赤身露体滚在血中的日子。
And in all your disgusting and false behaviour you had no memory of your early days, when you were uncovered and without clothing, stretched out in your blood.

你行这一切恶事之后（主耶和华说，你有祸了。有祸了。）
And it came about, after all your evil-doing, says the Lord,

又为自己建造圆顶花楼，在各街上作了高台。
That you made for yourself an arched room in every open place.

你在一切市口上建造高台，使你的美貌变为可憎的，又与一切过路的多行淫乱。
You put up your high places at the top of every street, and made the grace of your form a disgusting thing, opening your feet to everyone who went by, increasing your loose ways.

你也和你邻邦放纵情欲的埃及人行淫，加增你的淫乱，惹我发怒。
And you went with the Egyptians, your neighbours, great of flesh; increasing your loose ways, moving me to wrath.

因此我伸手攻击你，减少你应用的粮食，又将你交给恨你的非利士众女（众女是城邑的意思本章下同），使她们任意待你。她们见你的淫行，为你羞耻。
Now, then, my hand is stretched out against you, cutting down your fixed amount, and I have given you up to the desire of your haters, the daughters of the Philistines who are shamed by your loose ways.

你因贪色无厌，又与亚述人行淫，与他们行淫之后，仍不满意，
And you went with the Assyrians, because of your desire which was without measure; you were acting like a loose woman with them, and still you had not enough.

并且多行淫乱，直到那贸易之地，就是迦勒底，你仍不满意。
And you went on in your loose ways, even as far as the land of Chaldaea, and still you had not enough.

主耶和华说，你行这一切事，都是不知羞耻妓女所行的，可见你的心是何等懦弱。
How feeble is your heart, says the Lord, seeing that you do all these things, the work of a loose and overruling woman;

因你在一切市口上建造圆顶花楼，在各街上作了高台，你却藐视赏赐，不像妓女。
For you have made your arched room at the top of every street, and your high place in every open place; though you were not like a loose woman in getting together your payment.

哎。你这行淫的妻阿，宁肯接外人，不接丈夫。
The untrue wife who takes strange lovers in place of her husband!

凡妓女是得人赠送，你反倒赠送你所爱的人，贿赂他们从四围来与你行淫。
They give payment to all loose women: but you give rewards to your lovers, offering them payment so that they may come to you on every side for your cheap love.

你行淫与别的妇女相反，因为不是人从你行淫。你既赠送人，人并不赠送你。所以你与别的妇女相反。
And in your loose behaviour you are different from other women, for no one goes after you to make love to you: and because you give payment and no payment is given to you, in this you are different from them.

你这妓女阿，要听耶和华的话。
For this cause, O loose woman, give ear to the voice of the Lord:

主耶和华如此说，因你的污秽倾泄了，你与你所爱的行淫露出下体，又因你拜一切可憎的偶像，流儿女的血献给他，
This is what the Lord has said: Because your unclean behaviour was let loose and your body uncovered in your loose ways with your lovers and with your disgusting images, and for the blood of your children which you gave to them;

我就要将你一切相欢相爱的和你一切所恨的都聚集来，从四围攻击你。又将你的下体露出，使他们看尽了。
For this cause I will get together all your lovers with whom you have taken your pleasure, and all those to whom you have given your love, with all those who were hated by you; I will even make them come together against you on every side, and I will have you uncovered before them so that they may see your shame.

我也要审判你，好像官长审判淫妇和流人血的妇女一样。我因忿怒忌恨，使流血的罪归到你身上。
And you will be judged by me as women are judged who have been untrue to their husbands and have taken life; and I will let loose against you passion and bitter feeling.

我又要将你交在他们手中。他们必拆毁你的圆顶花楼，毁坏你的高台，剥去你的衣服，夺取你的华美宝器，留下你赤身露体。
I will give you into their hands, and your arched room will be overturned and your high places broken down; they will take your clothing off you and take away your fair jewels: and when they have done, you will be uncovered and shamed.

他们也必带多人来攻击你，用石头打死你，用刀剑刺透你，
And they will get together a meeting against you, stoning you with stones and wounding you with their swords.

用火焚烧你的房屋，在许多妇人眼前向你施行审判。我必使你不再行淫，也不再赠送与人。
And they will have you burned with fire, sending punishments on you before the eyes of great numbers of women; and I will put an end to your loose ways, and you will no longer give payment.

这样，我就止息向你发的忿怒，我的忌恨也要离开你，我要安静不再恼怒。
And the heat of my wrath against you will have an end, and my bitter feeling will be turned away from you, and I will be quiet and will be angry no longer.

因你不追念你幼年的日子，在这一切的事上向我发烈怒，所以我必照你所行的报应在你头上，你就不再贪淫，行那一切可憎的事。这是主耶和华说的。
Because you have not kept in mind the days when you were young, but have been troubling me with all these things; for this reason I will make the punishment of your ways come on your head, says the Lord, because you have done this evil thing in addition to all your disgusting acts.

凡说俗语的必用俗语攻击你，说，母亲怎样，女儿也怎样。
See, in every common saying about you it will be said, As the mother is, so is her daughter.

你正是你母亲的女儿，厌弃丈夫和儿女。你正是你姐妹的姐妹，厌弃丈夫和儿女。你母亲是赫人，你父亲是亚摩利人。
You are the daughter of your mother whose soul is turned in disgust from her husband and her children; and you are the sister of your sisters who were turned in disgust from their husbands and their children: your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite.

你的姐姐是撒玛利亚，她和她的众女住在你左边。你的妹妹是所多玛，她和她的众女住在你右边。
Your older sister is Samaria, living at your left hand, she and her daughters: and your younger sister, living at your right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

你没有效法她们的行为，也没有照她们可憎的事去作，你以那为小事，你一切所行的倒比她们更坏。
Still you have not gone in their ways or done the disgusting things which they have done; but, as if that was only a little thing, you have gone deeper in evil than they in all your ways.

主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，你妹妹所多玛与她的众女尚未行你和你众女所行的事。
By my life, says the Lord, Sodom your sister never did, she or her daughters, what you and your daughters have done.

看哪，你妹妹所多玛的罪孽是这样，她和她的众女都心骄气傲，粮食饱足，大享安逸，并没有扶助困苦和穷乏人的手。
Truly, this was the sin of your sister Sodom: pride, a full measure of food, and the comforts of wealth in peace, were seen in her and her daughters, and she gave no help to the poor or to those in need.

她们狂傲，在我面前行可憎的事，我看见便将她们除掉。
They were full of pride and did what was disgusting to me: and so I took them away as you have seen.

撒玛利亚没有犯你一半的罪，你行可憎的事比她更多，使你的姐妹因你所行一切可憎的事，倒显为义。
And Samaria has not done half your sins; but you have made the number of your disgusting acts greater than theirs, making your sisters seem more upright than you by all the disgusting things which you have done.

你既断定你姐妹为义（为义或作当受羞辱），就要担当自己的羞辱。因你所犯的罪比她们更为可憎，她们就比你更显为义。你既使你的姐妹显为义，你就要抱愧担当自己的羞辱。
And you yourself will be put to shame, in that you have given the decision for your sisters; through your sins, which are more disgusting than theirs, they are more upright than you: truly, you will be shamed and made low, for you have made your sisters seem upright.

我必叫她们被掳的归回，就是叫所多玛和她的众女，撒玛利亚和她的众女，并你们中间被掳的，都要归回，
And I will let their fate be changed, the fate of Sodom and her daughters, and the fate of Samaria and her daughters, and your fate with theirs.

好使你担当自己的羞辱，并因你一切所行的使她们得安慰，你就抱愧。
So that you will be shamed and made low because of all you have done, when I have mercy on you.

你的妹妹所多玛和她的众女必归回原位。撒玛利亚和她的众女，你和你的众女，也必归回原位。
And your sisters, Sodom and her daughters, will go back to their first condition, and Samaria and her daughters will go back to their first condition, and you and your daughters will go back to your first condition.

在你骄傲的日子，你的恶行没有显露以先，你的口就不提你的妹妹所多玛。那受了凌辱的亚兰众女和亚兰四围非利士的众女都恨恶你，藐视你。
Was not your sister Sodom an oath in your mouth in the day of your pride,


Before your shame was uncovered? Now you have become like her a word of shame to the daughters of Edom and all who are round about you, the daughters of the Philistines who put shame on you round about.

耶和华说，你贪淫和可憎的事，你已经担当了。
The reward of your evil designs and your disgusting ways has come on you, says the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，你这轻看誓言，背弃盟约的，我必照你所行的待你。
For this is what the Lord has said: I will do to you as you have done, you who, putting the oath on one side, have let the agreement be broken.

然而我要追念在你幼年时与你所立的约，也要与你立定永约。
But still I will keep in mind the agreement made with you in the days when you were young, and I will make with you an eternal agreement.

你接待你姐姐和你妹妹的时候，你要追念你所行的，自觉惭愧。并且我要将她们赐你为女儿，却不是按着前约。
Then at the memory of your ways you will be overcome with shame, when I take your sisters, the older and the younger, and give them to you for daughters, but not by your agreement.

我要坚定与你所立的约（你就知道我是耶和华），
And I will make my agreement with you; and you will be certain that I am the Lord:

好使你在我赦免你一切所行的时候，心里追念，自觉抱愧，又因你的羞辱就不再开口。这是主耶和华说的。
So that, at the memory of these things, you may be at a loss, never opening your mouth because of your shame; when you have my forgiveness for all you have done, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要向以色列家出谜语，设比喻，
Son of man, give out a dark saying, and make a comparison for the children of Israel,

说主耶和华如此说，有一大鹰，翅膀大，翎毛长，羽毛丰满，彩色俱备，来到利巴嫩，将香柏树梢拧去，
And say, This is what the Lord has said: A great eagle with great wings, full of long feathers of different colours, came to Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar:

就是折去香柏树尽尖的嫩枝，叼到贸易之地，放在买卖城中。
Biting off the highest of its young branches, he took it to the land of Canaan, and put it in a town of traders.

又将以色列地的枝子栽于肥田里，插在大水旁，如插柳树，
And he took some of the seed of the land, planting it in fertile earth, placing it by great waters; he put it in like a willow-tree.

就渐渐生长，成为蔓延矮小的葡萄树。其枝转向那鹰，其根在鹰以下，于是成了葡萄树，生出枝子，发出小枝。
And its growth went on and it became a vine, low and widely stretching, whose branches were turned to him and its roots were under him: so it became a vine, putting out branches and young leaves.

又有一大鹰，翅膀大，羽毛多。这葡萄树从栽种的畦中向这鹰弯过根来，发出枝子，好得它的浇灌。
And there was another eagle with great wings and thick feathers: and now this vine, pushing out its roots to him, sent out its branches in his direction from the bed where it was planted, so that he might give it water.

这树栽于肥田多水的旁边，好生枝子，结果子，成为佳美的葡萄树。
He had it planted in a good field by great waters so that it might put out branches and have fruit and be a strong vine.

你要说，主耶和华如此说，这葡萄树岂能发旺呢？鹰岂不拔出它的根来，芟除它的果子，使它枯干，使它发的嫩叶都枯干了吗？也不用大力和多民，就拔出它的根来。
Say, This is what the Lord has said: Will it do well? will he not have its roots pulled up and its branches cut off, so that all its young leaves may become dry and it may be pulled up by its roots?

葡萄树虽然栽种，岂能发旺呢？一经东风，岂不全然枯干吗？必在生长的畦中枯干了。
And if it is planted will it do well? will it not become quite dry at the touch of the east wind, drying up in the bed where it was planted?

耶和华的话临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你对那悖逆之家说，你们不知道这些事是什么意思吗？你要告诉他们说，巴比伦王曾到耶路撒冷，将其中的君王和首领带到巴比伦自己那里去。
Say now to this uncontrolled people, Are these things not clear to you? Say to them, See, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took its king and its rulers away with him to Babylon;

从以色列的宗室中取一人与他立约，使他发誓，并将国中有势力的人掳去，
And he took one of the sons of the king and made an agreement with him; and he put him under an oath, and took away the great men of the land:

使国低微不能自强，惟因守盟约得以存立。
So that the kingdom might be made low with no power of lifting itself up, but might keep his agreement to be his servants.

他却背叛巴比伦王，打发使者往埃及去，要他们给他马匹和多民。他岂能亨通呢？行这样事的人岂能逃脱呢？他背约岂能逃脱呢？
But he went against his authority in sending representatives to Egypt to get from them horses and a great army. Will he do well? will he be safe who does such things? if the agreement is broken will he be safe?

他轻看向王所起的誓，背弃王与他所立的约。主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，他定要死在立他作王，巴比伦王的京都。
By my life, says the Lord, truly in the place of the king who made him king, whose oath he put on one side and let his agreement with him be broken, even in Babylon he will come to his death.

敌人筑垒造台，与他打仗的时候，为要剪除多人，法老虽领大军队和大群众，还是不能帮助他。
And Pharaoh with his strong army and great forces will be no help to him in the war, when they put up earthworks and make strong walls for the cutting off of lives:

他轻看誓言，背弃盟约，已经投降，却又作这一切的事，他必不能逃脱。
For he put his oath on one side in letting the agreement be broken; and though he had given his hand to it, he did all these things; he will not get away safe.

所以主耶和华如此说，我指着我的永生起誓，他既轻看指我所起的誓，背弃指我所立的约，我必要使这罪归在他头上。
And so the Lord has said, By my life, truly, for my oath which he put on one side, and my agreement which has been broken, I will send punishment on his head.

我必将我的网撒在他身上，他必在我的网罗中缠住。我必带他到巴比伦，并要在那里因他干犯我的罪刑罚他。
My net will be stretched out over him, and he will be taken in my cords, and I will send him to Babylon, and there I will be his judge for the wrong which he has done against me.

他的一切军队，凡逃跑的，都必倒在刀下。所剩下的，也必分散四方（方原文作风）。你们就知道说这话的是我耶和华。
All his best fighting-men will be put to the sword, and the rest will be sent away to every wind: and you will be certain that I the Lord have said it.

主耶和华如此说，我要将香柏树梢拧去栽上，就是从尽尖的嫩枝中折一嫩枝，栽于极高的山上。
This is what the Lord has said: Further, I will take the highest top of the cedar and put it in the earth; cutting off from the highest of his young branches a soft one, I will have it planted on a high and great mountain;

在以色列高处的山栽上。它就生枝子，结果子，成为佳美的香柏树，各类飞鸟都必宿在其下，就是宿在枝子的荫下。
It will be planted on the high mountain of Israel: it will put out branches and have fruit and be a fair cedar: under it all birds of every sort will make their living-place, resting in the shade of its branches.

田野的树木都必知道我耶和华使高树矮小，矮树高大。青树枯干，枯树发旺。我耶和华如此说，也如此行了。
And it will be clear to all the trees of the field that I the Lord have made low the high tree and made high the low tree, drying up the green tree and making the dry tree full of growth; I the Lord have said it and have done it.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
The word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

你们在以色列地怎么用这俗语说父亲吃了酸葡萄，儿子的牙酸倒了呢？
Why do you make use of this saying about the land of Israel, The fathers have been tasting bitter grapes and the children's teeth are on edge?

主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，你们在以色列中，必不再有用这俗语的因由。
By my life, says the Lord, you will no longer have this saying in Israel.

看哪，世人都是属我的。为父的怎样属我，为子的也照样属我。犯罪的，他必死亡。
See, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so the soul of the son is mine: death will be the fate of the sinner's soul.

人若是公义，且行正直与合理的事，
But if a man is upright, living rightly and doing righteousness,

未曾在山上吃过祭偶像之物，未曾仰望以色列家的偶像，未曾玷污邻舍的妻，未曾在妇人的经期内亲近她，
And has not taken flesh with the blood for food, or given worship to the images of the children of Israel; if he has not had connection with his neighbour's wife, or come near to a woman at the time when she is unclean;

未曾亏负人，乃将欠债之人的当头还给他。未曾抢夺人的物件，却将食物给饥饿的人吃，将衣服给赤身的人穿。
And has done no wrong to any, but has given back to the debtor what is his, and has taken no one's goods by force, and has given food to him who was in need of it, and clothing to him who was without it;

未曾向借钱的弟兄取利，也未曾向借粮的弟兄多要，缩手不作罪孽，在两人之间，按至理判断。
And has not given his money out at interest or taken great profits, and, turning his hand from evil-doing, has kept faith between man and man,

遵行我的律例，谨守我的典章，按诚实行事这人是公义的，必定存活。这是主耶和华说的。
And has been guided by my rules and has kept my laws and done them: he is upright, life will certainly be his, says the Lord.

他若生一个儿子，作强盗，是流人血的，不行以上所说之善，反行其中之恶，乃在山上吃过祭偶像之物，并玷污邻舍的妻，
If he has a son who is a thief, a taker of life, who does any of these things,


Who has taken flesh with the blood as food, and has had connection with his neighbour's wife,

亏负困苦和穷乏的人，抢夺人的物，未曾将当头还给人，仰望偶像，并行可憎的事，
Has done wrong to the poor and to him who is in need, and taken property by force, and has not given back to one in his debt what is his, and has given worship to images and has done disgusting things,

向借钱的弟兄取利，向借粮的弟兄多要这人岂能存活呢？他必不能存活。他行这一切可憎的事，必要死亡，他的罪必归到他身上（罪原文作血）。
And has given out his money at interest and taken great profits: he will certainly not go on living: he has done all these disgusting things: death will certainly be his fate; his blood will be on him.

他若生一个儿子，见父亲所犯的一切罪便惧怕（有古卷作思量），不照样去作。
Now if he has a son who sees all his father's sins which he has done, and in fear does not do the same:

未曾在山上吃过祭偶像之物，未曾仰望以色列家的偶像，未曾玷污邻舍的妻，
Who has not taken the flesh with the blood for food, or given worship to the images of the children of Israel, and has not had connection with his neighbour's wife,

未曾亏负人，未曾取人的当头，未曾抢夺人的物件，却将食物给饥饿的人吃，将衣服给赤身的人穿，
Or done wrong to any, or taken anything from one in his debt, or taken goods by force, but has given food to him who was in need of it, and clothing to him who was without it;

缩手不害贫穷人，未曾向借钱的弟兄取利，也未曾向借粮的弟兄多要。他顺从我的典章，遵行我的律例，就不因父亲的罪孽死亡，定要存活。
Who has kept his hand from evil-doing and has not taken interest or great profits, who has done my orders and been guided by my rules: he will certainly not be put to death for the evil-doing of his father; life will certainly be his.

至于他父亲。因为欺人太甚，抢夺弟兄，在本国的民中行不善，他必因自己的罪孽死亡。
As for his father, because he was cruel, took goods by force, and did what is not good among his people, truly, death will overtake him in his evil-doing.

你们还说，儿子为何不担当父亲的罪孽呢？儿子行正直与合理的事，谨守遵行我的一切律例，他必定存活。
But you say, Why does not the son undergo punishment for the evil-doing of the father? When the son has done what is ordered and right, and has kept my rules and done them, life will certainly be his.

惟有犯罪的，他必死亡。儿子必不担当父亲的罪孽，父亲也不担当儿子的罪孽。义人的善果必归自己，恶人的恶报也必归自己。
The soul which does sin will be put to death: the son will not be made responsible for the evil-doing of the father, or the father for the evil-doing of the son; the righteousness of the upright will be on himself, and the evil-doing of the evil-doer on himself.

恶人若回头离开所作的一切罪恶，谨守我一切的律例，行正直与合理的事，他必定存活，不致死亡。
But if the evil-doer, turning away from all the sins which he has done, keeps my rules and does what is ordered and right, life will certainly be his; death will not be his fate.

他所犯的一切罪过都不被记念，因所行的义，他必存活。
Not one of the sins which he has done will be kept in memory against him: in the righteousness which he has done he will have life.

主耶和华说，恶人死亡，岂是我喜悦的吗？不是喜悦他回头离开所行的道存活吗？
Have I any pleasure in the death of the evil-doer? says the Lord: am I not pleased if he is turned from his way so that he may have life?

义人若转离义行而作罪孽，照着恶人所行一切可憎的事而行，他岂能存活吗？他所行的一切义都不被记念。他必因所犯的罪，所行的恶死亡。
But when the upright man, turning away from his righteousness, does evil, like all the disgusting things which the evil man does, will he have life? Not one of his upright acts will be kept in memory: in the wrong which he has done and in his sin death will overtake him.

你们还说，主的道不公平。以色列家阿，你们当听，我的道岂不公平吗？你们的道岂不是不公平吗？
But you say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Give ear, now, O children of Israel; is my way not equal? are not your ways unequal?

义人若转离义行而作罪孽死亡，他是因所作的罪孽死亡。
When the upright man, turning away from his righteousness, does evil, death will overtake him; in the evil which he has done death will overtake him.

再者，恶人若回头离开所行的恶，行正直与合理的事，他必将性命救活了。
Again, when the evil-doer, turning away from the evil he has done, does what is ordered and right, he will have life for his soul.

因为他思量，回头离开所犯的一切罪过，必定存活，不致死亡。
Because he had fear and was turned away from all the wrong which he had done, life will certainly be his, death will not be his fate.

以色列家还说，主的道不公平。以色列家阿，我的道岂不公平吗？你们的道岂不是不公平吗？
But still the children of Israel say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O children of Israel, are my ways not equal? are not your ways unequal?

所以主耶和华说，以色列家阿，我必按你们各人所行的审判你们。你们当回头离开所犯的一切罪过。这样，罪孽必不使你们败亡。
For this cause I will be your judge, O children of Israel, judging every man by his ways, says the Lord. Come back and be turned from all your sins; so that they may not be the cause of your falling into evil.

你们要将所犯的一切罪过尽行抛弃，自作一个新心和新灵。以色列家阿，你们何必死亡呢？
Put away all your evil-doing in which you have done sin; and make for yourselves a new heart and a new spirit: why are you desiring death, O children of Israel?

主耶和华说，我不喜悦那死人之死，所以你们当回头而存活。
For I have no pleasure in the death of him on whom death comes, says the Lord: be turned back then, and have life.

你当为以色列的王作起哀歌，
Take up now a song of grief for the ruler of Israel, and say,

说，你的母亲是什么呢？是个母狮子，蹲伏在狮子中间，在少壮狮子中养育小狮子。
What was your mother? Like a she-lion among lions, stretched out among the young lions she gave food to her little ones.

在它小狮子中养大一个，成了少壮狮子，学会抓食而吃人。
And one of her little ones came to growth under her care, and became a young lion, learning to go after beasts for his food; and he took men for his meat.

列国听见了就把它捉在他们的坑中，用钩子拉到埃及地去。
And the nations had news of him; he was taken in the hole they had made: and, pulling him with hooks, they took him into the land of Egypt.

母狮见自己等候失了指望，就从它小狮子中又将一个养为少壮狮子。
Now when she saw that her hope was made foolish and gone, she took another of her little ones and made him into a young lion.

它在众狮子中走来走去，成了少壮狮子，学会抓食而吃人。
And he went up and down among the lions and became a young lion, learning to go after beasts for his food; and he took men for his meat.

它知道列国的宫殿，又使他们的城邑变为荒场。因它咆哮的声音，遍地和其中所有的就都荒废。
And he sent destruction on their widows and made waste their towns; and the land and everything in it became waste because of the loud sound of his voice.

于是四围邦国各省的人来攻击它，将网撒在它身上，捉在他们的坑中。
Then the nations came against him from the kingdoms round about: their net was stretched over him and he was taken in the hole they had made.

他们用钩子钩住它，将它放在笼中，带到巴比伦王那里，将它放入坚固之所，使它的声音在以色列山上不再听见。
They made him a prisoner with hooks, and took him to the king of Babylon; they put him in the strong place so that his voice might be sounding no longer on the mountains of Israel.

你的母亲先前如葡萄树，极其茂盛（原文作在你血中），栽于水旁。因为水多，就多结果子，满生枝子。
Your mother was in comparison like a vine, planted by the waters: she was fertile and full of branches because of the great waters.

生出坚固的枝干，可作掌权者的杖。这枝干高举在茂密的枝中，而且它生长高大，枝子繁多，远远可见。
And she had a strong rod for a rod of authority for the rulers, and it became tall among the clouds and it was seen lifted up among the number of its branches.

但这葡萄树因忿怒被拔出摔在地上。东风吹干其上的果子，坚固的枝干折断枯干，被火烧毁了。
But she was uprooted in burning wrath, and made low on the earth; the east wind came, drying her up, and her branches were broken off; her strong rod became dry, the fire made a meal of it.

如今栽于旷野干旱无水之地。
And now she is planted in the waste land, in a dry and unwatered country.

火也从它枝干中发出，烧灭果子，以致没有坚固的枝干可作掌权者的杖。这是哀歌，也必用以作哀歌。
And fire has gone out from her rod, causing the destruction of her branches, so that there is no strong rod in her to be the ruler's rod of authority. This is a song of grief, and it was for a song of grief.

第七年五月初十日，有以色列的几个长老来求问耶和华，坐在我面前。
Now it came about in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that certain of the responsible men of Israel came to get directions from the Lord and were seated before me.

耶和华的话临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要告诉以色列的长老说，主耶和华如此说，你们来是求问我吗？主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我必不被你们求问。
Son of man, say to the responsible men of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: Have you come to get directions from me? By my life, says the Lord, you will get no directions from me.

人子阿，你要审问审问他们吗？你当使他们知道他们列祖那些可憎的事，
Will you be their judge, O son of man, will you be their judge? make clear to them the disgusting ways of their fathers,

对他们说，主耶和华如此说，当日我拣选以色列，向雅各家的后裔起誓，在埃及地将自己向他们显现，说，我是耶和华你们的神。
And say to them, This is what the Lord has said: In the day when I took Israel for myself, when I made an oath to the seed of the family of Jacob, and I gave them knowledge of myself in the land of Egypt, saying to them with an oath, I am the Lord your God;

那日我向他们起誓，必领他们出埃及地，到我为他们察看的流奶与蜜之地。那地在万国中是有荣耀的。
In that day I gave my oath to take them out of the land of Egypt into a land which I had been searching out for them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands:

我对他们说，你们各人要抛弃眼所喜爱那可憎之物，不可因埃及的偶像玷污自己。我是耶和华你们的神。
And I said to them, Let every man among you put away the disgusting things to which his eyes are turned, and do not make yourselves unclean with the images of Egypt; I am the Lord your God.

他们却悖逆我，不肯听从我，不抛弃他们眼所喜爱那可憎之物，不离弃埃及的偶像。我就说，我要将我的忿怒倾在他们身上，在埃及地向他们成就我怒中所定的。
But they would not be controlled by me, and did not give ear to me; they did not put away the disgusting things to which their eyes were turned, or give up the images of Egypt: then I said I would let loose my passion on them to give full effect to my wrath against them in the land of Egypt.

我却为我名的缘故没有这样行，免得我名在他们所住的列国人眼前被亵渎。我领他们出埃及地，在这列国人的眼前将自己向他们显现。
And I was acting for the honour of my name, so that it might not be made unclean before the eyes of the nations among whom they were, and before whose eyes I gave them knowledge of myself, by taking them out of the land of Egypt.

这样，我就使他们出埃及地，领他们到旷野，
So I made them go out of the land of Egypt and took them into the waste land.

将我的律例赐给他们，将我的典章指示他们。人若遵行就必因此活着。
And I gave them my rules and made clear to them my orders, which, if a man keeps them, will be life to him.

又将我的安息日赐给他们，好在我与他们中间为证据，使他们知道我耶和华是叫他们成为圣的。
And further, I gave them my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, so that it might be clear that I, who make them holy, am the Lord.

以色列家却在旷野悖逆我，不顺从我的律例，厌弃我的典章（人若遵行就必因此活着），大大干犯我的安息日。我就说，要在旷野将我的忿怒倾在他们身上，灭绝他们。
But the children of Israel would not be controlled by me in the waste land: they were not guided by my rules, and they were turned away from my orders, which, if a man does them, will be life to him; and they had no respect for my Sabbaths: then I said that I would let loose my passion on them in the waste land, and put an end to them.

我却为我名的缘故，没有这样行，免得我的名在我领他们出埃及的列国人眼前被亵渎。
And I was acting for the honour of my name, so that it might not be made unclean in the eyes of the nations, before whose eyes I had taken them out.

并且我在旷野向他们起誓，必不领他们进入我所赐给他们流奶与蜜之地，那地在万国中是有荣耀的。
And further, I gave my oath to them in the waste land, that I would not take them into the land which I had given them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands;

因为他们厌弃我的典章，不顺从我的律例，干犯我的安息日，他们的心随从自己的偶像。
Because they were turned away from my orders, and were not guided by my rules, and had no respect for my Sabbaths: for their hearts went after their images.

虽然如此，我眼仍顾惜他们，不毁灭他们，不在旷野将他们灭绝净尽。
But still my eye had pity on them and I kept them from destruction and did not put an end to them completely in the waste land.

我在旷野对他们的儿女说，不要遵行你们父亲的律例，不要谨守他们的恶规，也不要因他们的偶像玷污自己。
And I said to their children in the waste land, Do not be guided by the rules of your fathers or keep their orders or make yourselves unclean with their images:

我是耶和华你们的神，你们要顺从我的律例，谨守遵行我的典章，
I am the Lord your God; be guided by my rules and keep my orders and do them:

且以我的安息日为圣。这日在我与你们中间为证据，使你们知道我是耶和华你们的神。
And keep my Sabbaths holy; and they will be a sign between me and you so that it may be clear to you that I am the Lord your God.

只是他们的儿女悖逆我，不顺从我的律例，也不谨守遵行我的典章（人若遵行就必因此活着），干犯我的安息日。我就说，要将我的忿怒倾在他们身上，在旷野向他们成就我怒中所定的。
But the children would not be controlled by me; they were not guided by my rules, and they did not keep and do my orders, which, if a man does them, will be life to him; and they had no respect for my Sabbaths: then I said I would let loose my passion on them to give full effect to my wrath against them in the waste land.

虽然如此，我却为我名的缘故缩手没有这样行，免得我的名在我领他们出埃及的列国人眼前被亵渎。
And I was acting for the honour of my name, so that it might not be made unclean in the eyes of the nations, before whose eyes I had taken them out.

并且我在旷野向他们起誓，必将他们分散在列国，四散在列邦。
Further, I gave my oath to them in the waste land that I would send them wandering among the nations, driving them out among the countries;

因为他们不遵行我的典章，竟厌弃我的律例，干犯我的安息日，眼目仰望他们父亲的偶像。
Because they had not done my orders, but had been turned away from my rules, and had not given respect to my Sabbaths, and their eyes were turned to the images of their fathers.

我也任他们遵行不美的律例，谨守不能使人活着的恶规。
And further, I gave them rules which were not good and orders in which there was no life for them;

因他们将一切头生的经火，我就任凭他们在这供献的事上玷污自己，好叫他们凄凉，使他们知道我是耶和华。
I made them unclean in the offerings they gave, causing them to make every first child go through the fire, so that I might put an end to them.

人子阿，你要告诉以色列家说，主耶和华如此说，你们的列祖在得罪我的事上亵渎我。
For this cause, son of man, say to the children of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: In this your fathers have further put shame on my name by doing wrong against me.

因为我领他们到了我起誓应许赐给他们的地，他们看见各高山，各茂密树，就在那里献祭，奉上惹我发怒的供物，也在那里焚烧馨香的祭牲，并浇上奠祭。
For when I had taken them into the land which I made an oath to give to them, then they saw every high hill and every branching tree and made their offerings there, moving me to wrath by their offerings; and there the sweet smell of their offerings went up and their drink offerings were drained out.

我就对他们说，你们所上的那高处叫什么呢？那高处的名字叫巴麻直到今日。
Then I said to them, What is this high place where you go to no purpose? And it is named Bamah to this day.

所以你要对以色列家说，主耶和华如此说，你们仍照你们列祖所行的玷污自己吗？仍照他们可憎的事行邪淫吗？
For this cause say to the children of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: Are you making yourselves unclean as your fathers did? are you being untrue to me by going after their disgusting works?

你们奉上供物使你们儿子经火的时候，仍将一切偶像玷污自己，直到今日吗？以色列家阿，我岂被你们求问吗？主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我必不被你们求问。
And when you give your offerings, causing your sons to go through the fire, you make yourselves unclean with all your images to this day; and will you come to me for directions, O children of Israel? By my life, says the Lord, you will get no direction from me.

你们说，我们要像外邦人和列国的宗族一样，去事奉木头与石头。你们所起的这心意万不能成就。
And that which comes into your minds will never take place; when you say, We will be like the nations, like the families of the countries, servants of wood and stone;

主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我总要作王，用大能的手和伸出来的膀臂，并倾出来的忿怒，治理你们。
By my life, says the Lord, truly, with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with burning wrath let loose, I will be King over you:

我必用大能的手和伸出来的膀臂，并倾出来的忿怒，将你们从万民中领出来，从分散的列国内聚集你们。
And I will take you out from the peoples and get you together out of the countries where you are wandering, with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with burning wrath let loose:

我必带你们到外邦人的旷野，在那里当面刑罚你们。
And I will take you into the waste land of the peoples, and there I will take up the cause with you face to face.

我怎样在埃及地的旷野刑罚你们的列祖，也必照样刑罚你们。这是主耶和华说的。
As I took up the cause with your fathers in the waste land of the land of Egypt, so will I take up the cause with you says the Lord.

我必使你们从杖下经过，使你们被约拘束。
And I will make you go under the rod and will make you small in number:

我必从你们中间除净叛逆和得罪我的人，将他们从所寄居的地方领出来，他们却不得入以色列地。你们就知道我是耶和华。
Clearing out from among you all those who are uncontrolled and who are sinning against me; I will take them out of the land where they are living, but they will not come into the land of Israel: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

以色列家阿，至于你们，主耶和华如此说，从此以后若不听从我，就任凭你们去事奉偶像，只是不可再因你们的供物和偶像亵渎我的圣名。
As for you, O children of Israel, the Lord has said: Let every man completely put away his images and give ear to me: and let my holy name no longer be shamed by your offerings and your images.

主耶和华说，在我的圣山，就是以色列高处的山，所有以色列的全家都要事奉我。我要在那里悦纳你们，向你们要供物和初熟的土产，并一切的圣物。
For in my holy mountain, in the high mountain of Israel, says the Lord, there all the children of Israel, all of them, will be my servants in the land; there I will take pleasure in them, and there I will be worshipped with your offerings and the first-fruits of the things you give, and with all your holy things.

我从万民中领你们出来，从分散的列国内聚集你们，那时我必悦纳你们好像馨香之祭，要在外邦人眼前在你们身上显为圣。
I will take pleasure in you as in a sweet smell, when I take you out from the peoples and get you together from the countries where you have been sent in flight; and I will make myself holy in you before the eyes of the nations.

我领你们进入以色列地，就是我起誓应许赐给你们列祖之地，那时你们就知道我是耶和华。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord, when I take you into the land of Israel, into the country which I made an oath to give to your fathers.

你们在那里要追念玷污自己的行动作为，又要因所作的一切恶事厌恶自己。
And there, at the memory of your ways and of all the things you did to make yourselves unclean, you will have bitter hate for yourselves because of all the evil things you have done.

主耶和华说，以色列家阿，我为我名的缘故，不照着你们的恶行和你们的坏事待你们。你们就知道我是耶和华。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord, when I take you in hand for the honour of my name, and not for your evil ways or your unclean doings, O children of Israel, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向南方，向南滴下预言攻击南方田野的树林。
Son of man, let your face be turned to the south, let your words be dropped to the south, and be a prophet against the woodland of the South;

对南方的树林说，要听耶和华的话。主耶和华如此说，我必使火在你中间着起，烧灭你中间的一切青树和枯树，猛烈的火焰必不熄灭。从南到北，人的脸面都被烧焦。
And say to the woodland of the South, Give ear to the words of the Lord: this is what the Lord has said: See, I will have a fire lighted in you, for the destruction of every green tree in you and every dry tree: the flaming flame will not be put out, and all faces from the south to the north will be burned by it.

凡有血气的都必知道是我耶和华使火着起，这火必不熄灭。
And all flesh will see that I the Lord have had it lighted: it will not be put out.

于是我说，哎。主耶和华阿，人都指着我说，他岂不是说比喻的吗？
Then I said, Ah, Lord! they say of me, Is he not a maker of stories?

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向耶路撒冷和圣所滴下预言，攻击以色列地。
Son of man, let your face be turned to Jerusalem, let your words be dropped in the direction of her holy place, and be a prophet against the land of Israel;

对以色列地说，耶和华如此说，我与你为敌，并要拔刀出鞘，从你中间将义人和恶人一并剪除。
And say to the land of Israel, These are the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, and I will take my sword out of its cover, cutting off from you the upright and the evil.

我既要从你中间剪除义人和恶人，所以我的刀要出鞘，自南至北攻击一切有血气的。
Because I am going to have the upright and the evil cut off from you, for this cause my sword will go out from its cover against all flesh from the south to the north:

一切有血气的就知道我耶和华已经拔刀出鞘，必不再入鞘。
And all flesh will see that I the Lord have taken my sword out of its cover: and it will never go back.

人子阿，你要叹息，在他们眼前弯着腰，苦苦地叹息。
Make sounds of grief, son of man; with body bent and a bitter heart make sounds of grief before their eyes.

他们问你说，为何叹息呢？你就说，因为有风声，灾祸要来。人心都必消化，手都发软，精神衰败，膝弱如水。看哪，这灾祸临近，必然成就。这是主耶和华说的。
And when they say to you, Why are you making sounds of grief? then say, Because of the news, for it is coming: and every heart will become soft, and all hands will be feeble, and every spirit will be burning low, and all knees will be turned to water: see, it is coming and it will be done, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要预言。耶和华吩咐我如此说，有刀，有刀，是磨快擦亮的。
Son of man, say as a prophet, These are the words of the Lord: Say, A sword, a sword which has been made sharp and polished:

磨快为要行杀戮，擦亮为要像闪电。我们岂可快乐吗？罚我子的杖藐视各树。
It has been made sharp to give death; it is polished so that it may be like a thunder-flame: ...

这刀已经交给人擦亮，为要应手使用。这刀已经磨快擦亮，好交在行杀戮的人手中。
And I have given it to the polisher so that it may be taken in the hand: he has made the sword sharp, he has had it polished, to put it into the hand of him who gives death.

人子阿，你要呼喊哀号，因为这刀临到我的百姓和以色列一切的首领。他们和我的百姓都交在刀下，所以你要拍腿叹息。
Give loud cries and make sounds of grief, O son of man: for it has come on my people, it has come on all the rulers of Israel: fear of the sword has come on my people: for this cause give signs of grief.

有试验的事。若那藐视的杖归于无有，怎么样呢？这是主耶和华说的。
...

人子阿，你要拍掌预言。我耶和华要使这刀，就是致死伤的刀，一连三次加倍刺人，进入他们的内屋，使大人受死伤的就是这刀。
So then, son of man, be a prophet, and put your hands together with a loud sound, and give two blows with the sword, and even three; it is the sword of those who are wounded, even the sword of the wounded; the great sword which goes round about them.

我设立这恐吓人的刀，攻击他们的一切城门，使他们的心消化，加增他们跌倒的事。哎。这刀造得像闪电，磨得尖利，要行杀戮。
In order that hearts may become soft, and the number of those who are falling may be increased, I have sent death by the sword against all their doors: you are made like a flame, you are polished for death.

刀阿，你归在右边，摆在左边。你面向哪方，就向那方杀戮。
Be pointed to the right, to the left, wherever your edge is ordered.

我也要拍掌，并要使我的忿怒止息。这是我耶和华说的。
And I will put my hands together with a loud sound, and I will let my wrath have rest: I the Lord have said it.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

人子阿，你要定出两条路，好使巴比伦王的刀来。这两条路必从一地分出来，又要在通城的路口上画出一只手来。
And you, son of man, have two ways marked out, so that the sword of the king of Babylon may come; let the two of them come out of one land: and let there be a pillar at the top of the road:

你要定出一条路，使刀来到亚扪人的拉巴。又要定出一条路，使刀来到犹大的坚固城耶路撒冷。
Put a pillar at the top of the road for the sword to come to Rabbah in the land of the children of Ammon, and to Judah and to Jerusalem in the middle of her.

因为巴比伦王站在岔路那里，在两条路口上要占卜。他摇签（原文作箭）求问神像，察看牺牲的肝。
For the king of Babylon took his place at the parting of the ways, at the top of the two roads, to make use of secret arts: shaking the arrows this way and that, he put questions to the images of his gods, he took note of the inner parts of dead beasts.

在右手中拿着为耶路撒冷占卜的签，使他安设撞城锤，张口叫杀，扬声呐喊，筑垒造台，以撞城锤，攻打城门。
At his right hand was the fate of Jerusalem, to give orders for destruction, to send up the war-cry, to put engines of war against the doors, lifting up earthworks, building walls.

据那些曾起誓的犹大人看来，这是虚假的占卜。但巴比伦王要使他们想起罪孽，以致将他们捉住。
And this answer given by secret arts will seem false to those who have given their oaths and have let them be broken: but he will keep the memory of evil-doing so that they may be taken.

主耶和华如此说，因你们的过犯显露，使你们的罪孽被记念，以致你们的罪恶在行为上都彰显出来。又因你们被记念，就被捉住。
For this cause the Lord has said: Because you have made your evil-doing come to mind by the uncovering of your wrongdoing, causing your sins to be seen in all your evil-doings; because you have come to mind, you will be taken in them.

你这受死伤行恶的以色列王阿，罪孽的尽头到了，受报的日子已到。
And you, O evil one, wounded to death, O ruler of Israel, whose day has come in the time of the last punishment;

主耶和华如此说，当除掉冠，摘下冕，景况必不再像先前。要使卑者升为高，使高者降为卑。
This is what the Lord has said: Take away the holy head-dress, take off the crown: this will not be again: let that which is low be lifted up, and that which is high be made low.

我要将这国倾覆，倾覆，而又倾覆。这国也必不再有，直等到那应得的人来到，我就赐给他。
I will let it be overturned, overturned, overturned: this will not be again till he comes whose right it is; and I will give it to him.

人子阿，要发预言说，主耶和华论到亚扪人和他们的凌辱，吩咐我如此说，有刀，有拔出来的刀，已经擦亮，为行杀戮，使他像闪电以行吞灭。
And you, son of man, say as a prophet, This is what the Lord has said about the children of Ammon and about their shame: Say, A sword, even a sword let loose, polished for death, to make it shining so that it may be like a flame:

人为你见虚假的异象，行谎诈的占卜，使你倒在受死伤之恶人的颈项上。他们罪孽到了尽头，受报的日子已到。
Your vision is to no purpose, your use of secret arts gives a false answer, to put it on the necks of evil-doers who are wounded to death, whose day has come, in the time of the last punishment.

你将刀收入鞘吧。在你受造之处，生长之地，我必刑罚你。
Go back into your cover. In the place where you were made, in the land from which you were taken, I will be your judge.

我必将我的恼恨倒在你身上，将我烈怒的火喷在你身上。又将你交在善于杀灭的畜类人手中。
And I will let loose my burning passion on you, breathing out on you the fire of my wrath: and I will give you up into the hands of men like beasts, trained to destruction.

你必当柴被火焚烧，你的血必流在国中，你必不再被记念，因为这是我耶和华说的。
You will be food for the fire; your blood will be drained out in the land; there will be no more memory of you: for I the Lord have said it.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要审问审问这流人血的城吗？当使她知道她一切可憎的事。
And you, son of man, will you be a judge, will you be a judge of the town of blood? then make clear to her all her disgusting ways.

你要说，主耶和华如此说，哎。这城有流人血的事在其中，叫她受报的日期来到，又作偶像玷污自己，陷害自己。
And you are to say, This is what the Lord has said: A town causing blood to be drained out in her streets so that her time may come, and making images in her to make her unclean!

你因流了人的血，就为有罪。你作了偶像，就玷污自己，使你受报之日临近，报应之年来到。所以我叫你受列国的凌辱和列邦的讥诮。
You are responsible for the blood drained out by you, and you are unclean through the images which you have made; and you have made your day come near, and the time of your judging has come; for this cause I have made you a name of shame to the nations and a cause of laughing to all countries.

你这名臭，多乱的城阿，那些离你近，离你远的都必讥诮你。
Those who are near and those who are far from you will make sport of you; your name is unclean, you are full of sounds of fear.

看哪，以色列的首领各逞其能，在你中间流人之血。
See, the rulers of Israel, every one in his family, have been causing death in you.

在你中间有轻慢父母的，有欺压寄居的，有亏负孤儿寡妇的。
In you they have had no respect for father and mother; in you they have been cruel to the man from a strange land; in you they have done wrong to the child without a father and to the widow.

你藐视了我的圣物，干犯了我的安息日。
You have made little of my holy things, and have made my Sabbaths unclean.

在你中间有谗谤人，流人血的。有在山上吃过祭偶像之物的，有行淫乱的。
In you there are men who say evil of others, causing death; in you they have taken the flesh with the blood for food; in your streets they have put evil designs into effect.

在你中间有露继母下体羞辱父亲的，有玷辱月经不洁净之妇人的。
In you they have let the shame of their fathers be seen; in you they have done wrong to a woman at the time when she was unclean.

这人与邻舍的妻行可憎的事。那人贪淫玷污儿妇。还有玷辱同父之姐妹的。
And in you one man has done what was disgusting with his neighbour's wife; and another has made his daughter-in-law unclean; and another has done wrong to his sister, his father's daughter.

在你中间有为流人血受贿赂的。有向借钱的弟兄取利，向借粮的弟兄多要的。且因贪得无餍，欺压邻舍夺取财物，竟忘了我。这是主耶和华说的。
In you they have taken rewards as the price of blood; you have taken interest and great profits, and you have taken away your neighbours' goods by force, and have not kept me in mind, says the Lord.

看哪，我因你所得不义之财和你中间所流的血，就拍掌叹息。
See, then, I have made my hands come together in wrath against your taking of goods by force and against the blood which has been flowing in you.

到了我惩罚你的日子，你的心还能忍受吗？你的手还能有力吗？我耶和华说了这话，就必照着行。
Will your heart be high or your hands strong in the days when I take you in hand? I the Lord have said it and will do it.

我必将你分散在列国，四散在列邦。我也必从你中间除掉你的污秽。
And I will send you in flight among the nations and wandering among the countries; and I will completely take away out of you everything which is unclean.

你必在列国人的眼前因自己所行的被亵渎，你就知道我是耶和华。
And you will be made low before the eyes of the nations; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，以色列家在我看为渣滓。他们都是炉中的铜，锡，铁，铅，都是银渣滓。
Son of man, the children of Israel have become like the poorest sort of waste metal to me: they are all silver and brass and tin and iron and lead mixed with waste.

所以主耶和华如此说，因你们都成为渣滓，我必聚集你们在耶路撒冷中。
For this cause the Lord has said: Because you have all become waste metal, see, I will get you together inside Jerusalem.

人怎样将银，铜，铁，铅，锡聚在炉中，吹火熔化。照样，我也要发怒气和忿怒，将你们聚集放在城中，熔化你们。
As they put silver and brass and iron and lead and tin together inside the oven, heating up the fire on it to make it soft; so will I get you together in my wrath and in my passion, and, heating the fire with my breath, will make you soft.

我必聚集你们，把我烈怒的火吹在你们身上，你们就在其中熔化。
Yes, I will take you, breathing on you the fire of my wrath, and you will become soft in it.

银子怎样熔化在炉中，你们也必照样熔化在城中，你们就知道我耶和华是将忿怒倒在你们身上了。
As silver becomes soft in the oven, so you will become soft in it; and you will be certain that I the Lord have let loose my passion on you.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要对这地说，你是未得洁净之地，在恼恨的日子也没有雨下在你以上。
Son of man, say to her, You are a land on which no rain or thunderstorm has come in the day of wrath.

其中的先知同谋背叛，如咆哮的狮子抓撕掠物。他们吞灭人民，抢夺财宝，使这地多有寡妇。
Her rulers in her are like a loud-voiced lion violently taking his food; they have made a meal of souls; they have taken wealth and valued property; they have made great the number of widows in her.

其中的祭司强解我的律法，亵渎我的圣物，不分别圣的和俗的，也不使人分辨洁净的和不洁净的，又遮眼不顾我的安息日。我也在他们中间被亵慢。
Her priests have been acting violently against my law; they have made my holy things unclean: they have made no division between what is holy and what is common, and they have not made it clear that the unclean is different from the clean, and their eyes have been shut to my Sabbaths, and I am not honoured among them.

其中的首领仿佛豺狼抓撕掠物，杀人流血，伤害人命，要得不义之财。
Her rulers in her are like wolves violently taking their food; putting men to death and causing the destruction of souls, so that they may get their profit.

其中的先知为百姓用未泡透的灰抹墙，就是为他们见虚假的异象，用谎诈的占卜，说，主耶和华如此说，其实耶和华没有说。
And her prophets have been using whitewash, seeing foolish visions and making false use of secret arts, saying, This is what the Lord has said, when the Lord has said nothing.

国内众民一味地欺压，惯行抢夺，亏负困苦穷乏的，背理欺压寄居的。
The people of the land have been acting cruelly, taking men's goods by force; they have been hard on the poor and those in need, and have done wrong to the man from a strange land.

我在他们中间寻找一人重修墙垣，在我面前为这国站在破口防堵，使我不灭绝这国，却找不着一个。
And I was looking for a man among them who would make up the wall and take his station in the broken place before me for the land, so that I might not send destruction on it: but there was no one.

所以我将恼恨倒在他们身上，用烈怒的火灭了他们，照他们所行的报应在他们头上。这是主耶和华说的。
And I let loose my passion on them, and have put an end to them in the fire of my wrath: I have made the punishment of their ways come on their heads, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
The word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

人子阿，有两个女子，是一母所生，
Son of man, there were two women, daughters of one mother:

她们在埃及行邪淫，在幼年时行邪淫。她们在那里作处女的时候，有人拥抱她们的怀，抚摸她们的乳。
They were acting like loose women in Egypt; when they were young their behaviour was loose: there their breasts were crushed, even the points of their young breasts were crushed.

她们的名字，姐姐名叫阿荷拉，妹妹名叫阿荷利巴。她们都归于我，生了儿女。论到她们的名字，阿荷拉就是撒玛利亚，阿荷利巴就是耶路撒冷。
Their names were Oholah, the older, and Oholibah, her sister: and they became mine, and gave birth to sons and daughters. As for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem, Oholibah.

阿荷拉归我之后行邪淫，贪恋所爱的人，就是她的邻邦亚述人。
And Oholah was untrue to me when she was mine; she was full of desire for her lovers, even for the Assyrians, her neighbours,

这些人都穿蓝衣，作省长，副省长，都骑着马，是可爱的少年人。
Who were clothed in blue, captains and rulers, all of them young men to be desired, horsemen seated on horses.

阿荷拉就与亚述人中最美的男子放纵淫行，她因所恋爱之人的一切偶像，玷污自己。
And she gave her unclean love to them, all of them the noblest men of Assyria: and she made herself unclean with the images of all who were desired by her.

自从在埃及的时候，她就没有离开淫乱，因为她年幼作处女的时候，埃及人与她行淫，抚摸她的乳，纵欲与她行淫。
And she has not given up her loose ways from the time when she was in Egypt; for when she was young they were her lovers, and by them her young breasts were crushed, and they let loose on her their unclean desire.

因此，我将她交在她所爱的人手中，就是她所恋爱的亚述人手中。
For this cause I gave her up into the hands of her lovers, into the hands of the Assyrians on whom her desire was fixed.

他们就露了她的下体，掳掠她的儿女，用刀杀了她，使她在妇女中留下臭名，因他们向她施行审判。
By these her shame was uncovered: they took her sons and daughters and put her to death with the sword: and she became a cause of wonder to women; for they gave her the punishment which was right.

她妹妹阿荷利巴虽然看见了，却还贪恋，比她姐姐更丑。行淫乱比她姐姐更多。
And her sister Oholibah saw this, but her desire was even more unmeasured, and her loose behaviour was worse than that of her sister.

她贪恋邻邦的亚述人，就是穿极华美的衣服，骑着马的省长，副省长，都是可爱的少年人。
She was full of desire for the Assyrians, captains and rulers, her neighbours, clothed in blue, horsemen going on horses, all of them young men to be desired.

我看见她被玷污了，她姐妹二人同行一路。
And I saw that she had become unclean; the two of them went the same way.

阿荷利巴又加增淫行，因她看见人像画在墙上，就是用丹色所画迦勒底人的像，
And her loose behaviour became worse; for she saw men pictured on a wall, pictures of the Chaldaeans painted in bright red,

腰间系着带子，头上有下垂的裹头巾，都是军长的形状，仿照巴比伦人的形像。他们的故土就是迦勒底。
With bands round their bodies and with head-dresses hanging round their heads, all of them looking like rulers, like the Babylonians, the land of whose birth is Chaldaea.

阿荷利巴一看见就贪恋他们，打发使者往迦勒底去见他们。
And when she saw them she was full of desire for them, and sent servants to them in Chaldaea.

巴比伦人就来登她爱情的床，与她行淫玷污她。她被玷污，随后心里与他们生疏。
And the Babylonians came to her, into the bed of love, and made her unclean with their loose desire, and she became unclean with them, and her soul was turned from them.

这样，她显露淫行，又显露下体。我心就与她生疏，像先前与她姐姐生疏一样。
So her loose behaviour was clearly seen and her shame uncovered: then my soul was turned from her as it had been turned from her sister.

她还加增她的淫行，追念她幼年在埃及地行邪淫的日子，
But still she went on the more with her loose behaviour, keeping in mind the early days when she had been a loose woman in the land of Egypt.

贪恋情人身壮精足，如驴如马。
And she was full of desire for her lovers, whose flesh is like the flesh of asses and whose seed is like the seed of horses.

这样，你就想起你幼年的淫行。那时，埃及人拥抱你的怀，抚摸你的乳。
And she made the memory of the loose ways of her early years come back to mind, when her young breasts were crushed by the Egyptians.

阿荷利巴阿，主耶和华如此说，我必激动你先爱而后生疏的人来攻击你。我必使他们来，在你四围攻击你。
For this cause, O Oholibah, this is what the Lord has said: See, I will make your lovers come up against you, even those from whom your soul is turned away in disgust; and I will make them come up against you on every side;

所来的就是巴比伦人，迦勒底的众人，比割人，书亚人，哥亚人，同着他们的还有亚述众人，乃是作省长，副省长，作军长有名声的，都骑着马，是可爱的少年人。
The Babylonians and all the Chaldaeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: young men to be desired, captains and rulers all of them, and chiefs, her neighbours, all of them on horseback.

他们必带兵器，战车，辎重车，率领大众来攻击你。他们要拿大小盾牌，顶盔摆阵，在你四围攻击你。我要将审判的事交给他们，他们必按着自己的条例审判你。
And they will come against you from the north on horseback, with war-carriages and a great band of peoples; they will put themselves in order against you with breastplate and body-cover and metal head-dress round about you: and I will make them your judges, and they will give their decision against you as seems right to them.

我必以忌恨攻击你。他们必以忿怒办你。他们必割去你的鼻子和耳朵。你遗留（或作余剩下同）的人必倒在刀下。他们必掳去你的儿女。你所遗留的必被火焚烧。
And my bitter feeling will be working against you, and they will take you in hand with passion; they will take away your nose and your ears, and the rest of you will be put to the sword: they will take your sons and daughters, and the rest of you will be burned up in the fire.

他们必剥去你的衣服，夺取你华美的宝器。
And they will take all your clothing off you and take away your ornaments.

这样，我必使你的淫行和你从埃及地染来的淫乱止息了，使你不再仰望亚述，也不再追念埃及。
So I will put an end to your evil ways and your loose behaviour which came from the land of Egypt: and your eyes will never be lifted up to them again, and you will have no more memory of Egypt.

主耶和华如此说，我必将你交在你所恨恶的人手中，就是你心与他生疏的人手中。
For this is what the Lord has said: See, I will give you up into the hands of those who are hated by you, into the hands of those from whom your soul is turned away in disgust:

他们必以恨恶办你，夺取你一切劳碌得来的，留下你赤身露体。你淫乱的下体，连你的淫行，带你的淫乱，都被显露。
And they will take you in hand with hate, and take away all the fruit of your work, and let you be unveiled and without clothing: and the shame of your loose behaviour will be uncovered, your evil designs and your loose ways.

人必向你行这些事。因为你随从外邦人行邪淫，被他们的偶像玷污了。
They will do these things to you because you have been untrue to me, and have gone after the nations, and have become unclean with their images.

你走了你姐姐所走的路，所以我必将她的杯交在你手中。
You have gone in the way of your sister; and I will give her cup into your hand.

主耶和华如此说，你必喝你姐姐所喝的杯。那杯又深又广，盛得甚多，使你被人嗤笑讥刺。
This is what the Lord has said: You will take a drink from your sister's cup, which is deep and wide: you will be laughed at and looked down on, more than you are able to undergo.

你必酩酊大醉，满有愁苦，喝干你姐姐撒玛利亚的杯，就是令人惊骇凄凉的杯。
You will be broken and full of sorrow, with the cup of wonder and destruction, with the cup of your sister Samaria.

你必喝这杯，以致喝尽。杯破又龈杯片，撕裂自己的乳。因为这事我曾说过。这是主耶和华说的。
And after drinking it and draining it out, you will take the last drops of it to the end, pulling off your breasts: for I have said it, says the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，因你忘记我，将我丢在背后，所以你要担当你淫行和淫乱的报应。
So this is what the Lord has said: Because you have not kept me in your memory, and because your back has been turned to me, you will even undergo the punishment of your evil designs and your loose ways.

耶和华又对我说，人子阿，你要审问阿荷拉与阿荷利巴吗？当指出她们所行可憎的事。
Then the Lord said to me: Son of man, will you be the judge of Oholibah? then make clear to her the disgusting things she has done.

她们行淫，手中有杀人的血，又与偶像行淫，并使她们为我所生的儿女经火烧给偶像。
For she has been false to me, and blood is on her hands, and with her images she has been untrue; and more than this, she made her sons, whom she had by me, go through the fire to them to be burned up.

此外，她们还有向我所行的，就是同日玷污我的圣所，干犯我的安息日。
Further, this is what she has done to me: she has made my holy place unclean and has made my Sabbaths unclean.

她们杀了儿女献与偶像，当天又入我的圣所，将圣所亵渎了。她们在我殿中所行的乃是如此。
For when she had made an offering of her children to her images, she came into my holy place to make it unclean; see, this is what she has done inside my house.

况且你们二妇打发使者去请远方人。使者到他们那里，他们就来了。你们为他们沐浴己身，粉饰眼目，佩戴妆饰，
And she even sent for men to come from far away, to whom a servant was sent, and they came: for whom she was washing her body and painting her eyes and making herself fair with ornaments.

坐在华美的床上，前面摆设桌案，将我的香料膏油摆在其上。
And she took her seat on a great bed, with a table put ready before it on which she put my perfume and my oil.

在那里有群众安逸欢乐的声音，并有粗俗的人和酒徒从旷野同来，把镯子戴在二妇的手上，把华冠戴在她们的头上。
... and they put jewels on her hands and beautiful crowns on her head.

我论这行淫衰老的妇人说，现在人还要与她行淫，她也要与人行淫。
Then I said ... now she will go on with her loose ways.

人与阿荷拉，并阿荷利巴二淫妇苟合，好像与妓女苟合。
And they went in to her, as men go to a loose woman: so they went in to Oholibah, the loose woman.

必有义人，照审判淫妇和流人血的妇人之例，审判她们。因为她们是淫妇，手中有杀人的血。
And upright men will be her judges, judging her as false wives and women who take lives are judged; because she has been untrue to me and blood is on her hands.

主耶和华如此说，我必使多人来攻击她们，使她们抛来抛去，被人抢夺。
For this is what the Lord has said: I will make a great meeting of the people come together against her, and will send on her shaking fear and take everything from her.

这些人必用石头打死她们，用刀剑杀害她们，又杀戮她们的儿女，用火焚烧她们的房屋。
And the meeting, after stoning her with stones, will put an end to her with their swords; they will put her sons and daughters to death and have her house burned up with fire.

这样，我必使淫行从境内止息，好叫一切妇人都受警戒，不效法你们的淫行。
And I will put an end to evil in all the land, teaching all women not to do as you have done.

人必照着你们的淫行报应你们。你们要担当拜偶像的罪，就知道我是主耶和华。
And I will send on you the punishment of your evil ways, and you will be rewarded for your sins with your images: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

第九年十月初十日，耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, saying,

人子阿，今日正是巴比伦王就近耶路撒冷的日子，你要将这日记下，
Son of man, put down in writing this very day: The king of Babylon let loose the weight of his attack against Jerusalem on this very day.

要向这悖逆之家设比喻说，主耶和华如此说，将锅放在火上，放好了，就倒水在其中。
And make a comparison for this uncontrolled people, and say to them, This is what the Lord has said: Put on the cooking-pot, put it on the fire and put water in it:

将肉块，就是一切肥美的肉块，腿，和肩都聚在其中，拿美好的骨头把锅装满。
And get the bits together, the fat tail, every good part, the leg and the top part of it: make it full of the best bones.

取羊群中最好的，将柴堆在锅下，使锅开滚，好把骨头煮在其中。
Take the best of the flock, put much wood under it: see that its bits are boiling well; let the bones be cooked inside it.

主耶和华如此说，祸哉。这流人血的城，就是长锈的锅。其中的锈未曾除掉，须要将肉块从其中一一取出来，不必为它拈阄。
For this is what the Lord has said: A curse is on the town of blood, the cooking-pot which is unclean inside, which has never been made clean! take out its bits; its fate is still to come on it.

城中所流的血倒在净光的磐石上，不倒在地上，用土掩盖。
For her blood is in her; she has put it on the open rock not draining it on to the earth so that it might be covered with dust;

这城中所流的血倒在净光的磐石上，不得掩盖，乃是出于我，为要发忿怒施行报应。
In order that it might make wrath come up to give punishment, she has put her blood on the open rock, so that it may not be covered.

所以主耶和华如此说，祸哉。这流人血的城，我也必大堆火柴，
For this cause the Lord has said: A curse is on the town of blood! and I will make great the burning mass.

添上木柴，使火着旺，将肉煮烂，把汤熬浓，使骨头烤焦。
Put on much wood, heating up the fire, boiling the flesh well, and making the soup thick, and let the bones be burned.

把锅倒空坐在炭火上，使锅烧热，使铜烧红，熔化其中的污秽，除净其上的锈。
And I will put her on the coals so that she may be heated and her brass burned, so that what is unclean in her may become soft and her waste be completely taken away.

这锅劳碌疲乏，所长的大锈仍未除掉。这锈就是用火也不能除掉。
I have made myself tired to no purpose: still all the waste which is in her has not come out, it has an evil smell.

在你污秽中有淫行，我洁净你，你却不洁净。你的污秽再不能洁净，直等我向你发的忿怒止息。
As for your unclean purpose: because I have been attempting to make you clean, but you have not been made clean from it, you will not be made clean till I have let loose my passion on you in full measure.

我耶和华说过的必定成就，必照话而行，必不返回，必不顾惜，也不后悔。人必照你的举动行为审判你。这是主耶和华说的。
I the Lord have said the word and I will do it; I will not go back or have mercy, and my purpose will not be changed; in the measure of your ways and of your evil doings you will be judged, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，我要将你眼目所喜爱的忽然取去，你却不可悲哀哭泣，也不可流泪，
Son of man, see, I am taking away the desire of your eyes by disease: but let there be no sorrow or weeping or drops running from your eyes.

只可叹息，不可出声，不可办理丧事。头上仍勒裹头巾，脚上仍穿鞋，不可蒙着嘴唇，也不可吃吊丧的食物。
Let there be no sound of sorrow; make no weeping for your dead, put on your head-dress and your shoes on your feet, let not your lips be covered, and do not take the food of those in grief.

于是我将这事早晨告诉百姓，晚上我的妻就死了。次日早晨我便遵命而行。
So in the morning I was teaching the people and in the evening death took my wife; and in the morning I did what I had been ordered to do.

百姓问我说，你这样行与我们有什么关系，你不告诉我们吗？
And the people said to me, Will you not make clear to us the sense of these things; is it for us you do them?

我回答他们，耶和华的话临到我说，
Then I said to them, The word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你告诉以色列家，主耶和华如此说，我必使我的圣所，就是你们势力所夸耀，眼里所喜爱，心中所爱惜的被亵渎，并且你们所遗留的儿女必倒在刀下。
Say to the people of Israel, The Lord has said, See, I will make my holy place unclean, the pride of your strength, the pleasure of your eyes, and the desire of your soul; and your sons and daughters, who did not come with you here, will be put to the sword.

那时，你们必行我仆人所行的，不蒙着嘴唇，也不吃吊丧的食物。
And you will do as I have done, not covering your lips or taking the food of those in grief.

你们仍要头上勒裹头巾，脚上穿鞋。不可悲哀哭泣。你们必因自己的罪孽相对叹息，渐渐消灭。
And your head-dresses will be on your heads and your shoes on your feet: there will be no sorrow or weeping; but you will be wasting away in the punishment of your evil-doing, and you will be looking at one another in wonder.

以西结必这样为你们作预兆。凡他所行的，你们也必照样行。那事来到，你们就知道我是主耶和华。
And Ezekiel will be a sign to you; everything he has done you will do: when this takes place, you will be certain that I am the Lord.

人子阿，我除掉他们所倚靠，所欢喜的荣耀，并眼中所喜爱，心里所重看的儿女。
And as for you, son of man, your mouth will be shut in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that on which their hearts are fixed, and their sons and daughters.

那日逃脱的人岂不来到你这里，使你耳闻这事吗？
In that day, one who has got away safe will come to you to give you news of it.

你必向逃脱的人开口说话，不再哑口。你必这样为他们作预兆，他们就知道我是耶和华。
In that day your mouth will be open to him who has got away safe, and you will say words to him and your lips will no longer be shut: so you will be a sign to them and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向亚扪人说预言，攻击他们，
Son of man, let your face be turned to the children of Ammon, and be a prophet against them:

说，你们当听主耶和华的话。主耶和华如此说，我的圣所被亵渎，以色列地变荒凉，犹大家被掳掠。那时，你便因这些事说，阿哈。
And say to the children of Ammon, Give ear to the word of the Lord; this is what the Lord has said: Because you said, Aha! against my holy place when it was made unclean, and against the land of Israel when it was made waste, and against the people of Judah when they were taken away as prisoners;

所以我必将你的地交给东方人为业。他们必在你的地上安营居住，吃你的果子，喝你的奶。
For this cause I will give you up to the children of the east for their heritage, and they will put their tent-circles in you and make their houses in you; they will take your fruit for their food and your milk for their drink.

我必使拉巴为骆驼场，使亚扪人的地为羊群躺卧之处，你们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will make Rabbah a place for housing camels, and the children of Ammon a resting-place for flocks: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，因你拍手顿足，以满心的恨恶向以色列地欢喜，
For the Lord has said, Because you have made sounds of joy with your hands, stamping your feet, and have been glad, putting shame with all your soul on the land of Israel;

所以我伸手攻击你，将你交给列国作为掳物。我必从万民中剪除你，使你从万国中败亡。我必除灭你，你就知道我是耶和华。
For this cause my hand has been stretched out against you, and I will give up your goods to be taken by the nations; I will have you cut off from the peoples and will put an end to you among the countries: I will give you up to destruction; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，因摩押和西珥人说，看哪，犹大家与列国无异，
This is what the Lord has said: Because Moab and Seir are saying, See, the people of Judah are like all the nations;

所以我要破开摩押边界上的城邑，就是摩押人看为本国之荣耀的伯耶西末，巴力免，基列亭，
For this cause, I will let the side of Moab be uncovered, and his towns on every side, the glory of the land, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon and as far as Kiriathaim.

好使东方人来攻击亚扪人。我必将亚扪人之地交给他们为业，使亚扪人在列国中不再被记念。
To the children of the east I have given her for a heritage, as well as the children of Ammon, so that there may be no memory of her among the nations:

我必向摩押施行审判，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will be the judge of Moab; and they will see that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，因为以东报仇雪恨，攻击犹大家，向他们报仇，大大有罪，
This is what the Lord has said: Because Edom has taken his payment from the people of Judah, and has done great wrong in taking payment from them;

所以主耶和华如此说，我必伸手攻击以东，剪除人与牲畜，使以东从提幔起，人必倒在刀下，地要变为荒凉，直到底但。
The Lord has said, My hand will be stretched out against Edom, cutting off from it man and beast: and I will make it waste, from Teman even as far as Dedan they will be put to the sword.

我必借我民以色列的手报复以东。以色列民必照我的怒气，按我的忿怒在以东施报，以东人就知道是我施报。这是主耶和华说的。
I will take payment from Edom because of my people Israel; and I will take Edom in hand in my wrath and in my passion: and they will have experience of my reward, says the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，因非利士人向犹大人报仇，就是以恨恶的心报仇雪恨，永怀仇恨，要毁灭他们，
This is what the Lord has said: Because the Philistines have taken payment, with the purpose of causing shame and destruction with unending hate;

所以主耶和华如此说，我必伸手攻击非利士人，剪除基利提人，灭绝沿海剩下的居民。
The Lord has said, See, my hand will be stretched out against the Philistines, cutting off the Cherethites and sending destruction on the rest of the sea-land.

我向他们大施报应，发怒斥责他们。我报复他们的时候，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will take great payment from them with acts of wrath; and they will be certain that I am the Lord when I send my punishment on them.

第十一年十一月初一日，耶和华的话临到我说，
Now in the eleventh year, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，因推罗向耶路撒冷说，阿哈，那作众民之门的已经破坏，向我开放。她既变为荒场，我必丰盛。
Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she who was the doorway of the peoples is broken; she is turned over to them; she who was full is made waste;

所以，主耶和华如此说，推罗阿，我必与你为敌，使许多国民上来攻击你，如同海使波浪涌上来一样。
For this cause the Lord has said, See, I am against you, O Tyre, and will send up a number of nations against you as the sea sends up its waves.

他们必破坏推罗的墙垣，拆毁她的城楼。我也要刮净尘土，使她成为净光的磐石。
And they will give the walls of Tyre to destruction and have its towers broken: and I will take even her dust away from her, and make her an uncovered rock

她必在海中作晒网的地方，也必成为列国的掳物。这是主耶和华说的。
She will be a place for the stretching out of nets in the middle of the sea; for I have said it, says the Lord: and her goods will be given over to the nations.

属推罗城邑的居民（城邑的居民原文作田间的众女八节同）必被刀剑杀灭，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And her daughters in the open country will be put to the sword: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，我必使诸王之王的巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒率领马匹车辆，马兵，军队，和许多人民从北方来攻击你推罗。
For this is what the Lord has said: See, I will send up from the north Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, king of kings, against Tyre, with horses and war-carriages and with an army and great numbers of people.

他必用刀剑杀灭属你城邑的居民，也必造台筑垒举盾牌攻击你。
He will put to the sword your daughters in the open country: he will make strong walls against you and put up an earthwork against you, arming himself for war against you.

他必安设撞城锤攻破你的墙垣，用铁器拆毁你的城楼。
He will put up his engines of war against your walls, and your towers will be broken down by his axes.

因他的马匹众多，尘土扬起遮蔽你。他进入你的城门，好像人进入已有破口之城。那时，你的墙垣必因骑马的和战车，辎重车的响声震动。
Because of the number of his horses you will be covered with their dust: your walls will be shaking at the noise of the horsemen and of the wheels and of the war-carriages, when he comes through your doorways, as into a town which has been broken open.

他的马蹄必践踏你一切的街道，他必用刀杀戮你的居民。你坚固的柱子（或作柱像）必倒在地上。
Your streets will be stamped down by the feet of his horses: he will put your people to the sword, and will send down the pillars of your strength to the earth.

人必以你的财宝为掳物，以你的货财为掠物，破坏你的墙垣，拆毁你华美的房屋，将你的石头，木头，尘土都抛在水中。
They will take by force all your wealth and go off with the goods with which you do trade: they will have your walls broken down and all the houses of your desire given up to destruction: they will put your stones and your wood and your dust deep in the water.

我必使你唱歌的声音止息，人也不再听见你弹琴的声音。
I will put an end to the noise of your songs, and the sound of your instruments of music will be gone for ever.

我必使你成为净光的磐石，作晒网的地方。你不得再被建造，因为这是主耶和华说的。
I will make you an uncovered rock: you will be a place for the stretching out of nets; there will be no building you up again: for I the Lord have said it, says the Lord.

主耶和华对推罗如此说，在你中间行杀戮，受伤之人唉哼的时候，因你倾倒的响声，海岛岂不都震动吗？
This is what the Lord has said to Tyre: Will not the sea-lands be shaking at the sound of your fall, when the wounded give cries of pain, when men are put to the sword in you?

那时靠海的君王必都下位，除去朝服，脱下花衣，披上战兢，坐在地上，时刻发抖，为你惊骇。
Then all the rulers of the sea will come down from their high seats, and put away their robes and take off their clothing of needlework: they will put on the clothing of grief, they will take their seats on the earth, shaking with fear every minute and overcome with wonder at you.

他们必为你作起哀歌说，你这有名之城，素为航海之人居住，在海上为最坚固的。平日你和居民使一切住在那里的人无不惊恐。现在何竟毁灭了。
And they will send up a song of grief for you, and say to you, What destruction has come on you, how are you cut off from the sea, the noted town, which was strong in the sea, she and her people, causing the fear of them to come on all the dry land!

如今在你这倾覆的日子，海岛都必战兢。海中的群岛见你归于无有就都惊惶。
Now the sea-lands will be shaking in the day of your fall; and all the ships on the sea will be overcome with fear at your going.

主耶和华如此说，推罗阿，我使你变为荒凉，如无人居住的城邑。又使深水漫过你，大水淹没你。
For this is what the Lord has said: I will make you a waste town, like the towns which are unpeopled; when I make the deep come upon you, covering you with great waters.

那时，我要叫你下入阴府，与古时的人一同在地的深处，久已荒凉之地居住，使你不再有居民。我也要在活人之地显荣耀（我也云云或作在活人之地不再有荣耀）。
Then I will make you go down with those who go down into the underworld, to the people of the past, causing your living-place to be in the deepest parts of the earth, in places long unpeopled, with those who go down into the deep, so that there will be no one living in you; and you will have no glory in the land of the living.

我必叫你令人惊恐，不再存留于世。人虽寻找你，却永寻不见。这是主耶和华说的。
I will make you a thing of fear, and you will come to an end: even if you are looked for, you will not be seen again for ever, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
The word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

人子阿，要为推罗作起哀歌，
And you, son of man, make a song of grief for Tyre;

说，你居住海口，是众民的商埠。你的交易通到许多的海岛。主耶和华如此说，推罗阿，你曾说，我是全然美丽的。
And say to Tyre, O you who are seated at the doorway of the sea, trading for the peoples with the great sea-lands, these are the words of the Lord: You, O Tyre, have said, I am a ship completely beautiful.

你的境界在海中，造你的使你全然美丽。
Your builders have made your outlines in the heart of the seas, they have made you completely beautiful.

他们用示尼珥的松树作你的一切板，用利巴嫩的香柏树作桅杆，
They have made all your boards of fir-trees from Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make the supports for your sails.

用巴珊的橡树作你的桨，用象牙镶嵌基提海岛的黄杨木为坐板（坐板或作舱板）。
Of oak-trees from Bashan they have made your driving blades; they have made your floors of ivory and boxwood from the sea-lands of Kittim.

你的篷帆是用埃及绣花细麻布作的，可以作你的大旗。你的凉棚是用以利沙岛的蓝色，紫色布作的。
The best linen with needlework from Egypt was your sail, stretched out to be a flag for you; blue and purple from the sea-lands of Elishah gave you shade.

西顿和亚发的居民作你荡桨的。推罗阿，你中间的智慧人作掌舵的。
The people of Zidon and Arvad were your boatmen; the wise men of Zemer were in you; they were guiding your ships;

迦巴勒的老者和聪明人都在你中间作补缝的。一切泛海的船只和水手都在你中间经营交易的事。
The responsible men of Gebal and its wise men were in you, making your boards watertight: all the ships of the sea with their seamen were in you trading in your goods.

波斯人，路德人，弗人在你军营中作战士。他们在你中间悬挂盾牌和头盔，彰显你的尊荣。
Cush and Lud and Put were in your army, your men of war, hanging up their body-covers and head-dresses of war in you: they gave you your glory.

亚发人和你的军队都在你四围的墙上，你的望楼也有勇士。他们悬挂盾牌，成全你的美丽。
The men of Arvad in your army were on your walls, and were watchmen in your towers, hanging up their arms on your walls round about; they made you completely beautiful.

他施人因你多有各类的财物，就作你的客商，拿银，铁，锡，铅兑换你的货物。
Tarshish did business with you because of the great amount of your wealth; they gave silver, iron, tin, and lead for your goods.

雅完人，土巴人，米设人都与你交易。他们用人口和铜器兑换你的货物。
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech were your traders; they gave living men and brass vessels for your goods.

陀迦玛族用马和战马并骡子兑换你的货物。
The people of Togarmah gave horses and war-horses and transport beasts for your goods.

底但人与你交易，许多海岛作你的码头。他们拿象牙，乌木与你兑换（兑换或作进贡）。
The men of Rodan were your traders: a great number of sea-lands did business with you: they gave you horns of ivory and ebony as an offering.

亚兰人因你的工作很多，就作你的客商。他们用绿宝石，紫色布绣货，细麻布，珊瑚，红宝石兑换你的货物。
Edom did business with you because of the great number of things which you made; they gave emeralds, purple, and needlework, and the best linen and coral and rubies for your goods.

犹大和以色列地的人都与你交易。他们用米匿的麦子，饼，蜜，油，乳香兑换你的货物。
Judah and the land of Israel were your traders; they gave grain of Minnith and sweet cakes and honey and oil and perfume for your goods.

大马色人因你的工作很多，又因你多有各类的财物，就拿黑本酒和白羊毛与你交易。
Damascus did business with you because of the great amount of your wealth, with wine of Helbon and white wool.

威但人和雅完人拿纺成的线，亮铁，桂皮，菖蒲兑换你的货物。
... for your goods: they gave polished iron and spices for your goods.

底但人用高贵的毯子，鞍，屉与你交易。
Dedan did trade with you in cloths for the backs of horses.

亚拉伯人和基达的一切首领都作你的客商，用羊羔，公绵羊，公山羊与你交易。
Arabia and all the rulers of Kedar did business with you; in lambs and sheep and goats, in these they did business with you.

示巴和拉玛的商人与你交易，他们用各类上好的香料，各类的宝石，和黄金兑换你的货物。
The traders of Sheba and Raamah did trade with you; they gave the best of all sorts of spices and all sorts of stones of great price and gold for your goods.

哈兰人，干尼人，伊甸人，示巴的商人，和亚述人，基抹人与你交易。
Haran and Canneh and Eden, the traders of Asshur and all the Medes:

这些商人以美好的货物包在绣花蓝色包袱内，又有华丽的衣服装在香柏木的箱子里，用绳捆着与你交易。
These were your traders in beautiful robes, in rolls of blue and needlework, and in chests of coloured cloth, corded with cords and made of cedar-wood, in them they did trade with you.

他施的船只接连成帮为你运货，你便在海中丰富极其荣华。
Tarshish ships did business for you in your goods: and you were made full, and great was your glory in the heart of the seas.

荡桨的已经把你荡到大水之处，东风在海中将你打破。
Your boatmen have taken you into great waters: you have been broken by the east wind in the heart of the seas.

你的资财，物件，货物，水手，掌舵的，补缝的，经营交易的，并你中间的战士和人民，在你破坏的日子必都沉在海中。
Your wealth and your goods, the things in which you do trade, your seamen and those guiding your ships, those who make your boards watertight, and those who do business with your goods, and all your men of war who are in you, with all who have come together in you, will go down into the heart of the seas in the day of your downfall.

你掌舵的呼号之声一发，郊野都必震动。
At the sound of the cry of your ships' guides, the boards of the ship will be shaking.

凡荡桨的和水手，并一切泛海掌舵的，都必下船登岸。
And all the boatmen, the seamen and those who are expert at guiding a ship through the sea, will come down from their ships and take their places on the land;

他们必为你放声痛哭，把尘土撒在头上，在灰中打滚。
And their voices will be sounding over you, and crying bitterly they will put dust on their heads, rolling themselves in the dust:

又为你使头上光秃，用麻布束腰，号啕痛哭，苦苦悲哀。
And they will have the hair of their heads cut off because of you, and will put haircloth on their bodies, weeping for you with bitter grief in their souls, even with bitter sorrow.

他们哀号的时候，为你作起哀歌哀哭，说，有何城如推罗？有何城如她在海中成为寂寞的呢？
And in their weeping they will make a song of grief for you, sorrowing over you and saying, Who is like Tyre, who has come to an end in the deep sea?

你由海上运出货物，就使许多国民充足。你以许多资财，货物使地上的君王丰富。
When your goods went out over the seas, you made numbers of peoples full; the wealth of the kings of the earth was increased with your great wealth and all your goods.

你在深水中被海浪打破的时候，你的货物和你中间的一切人民，就都沉下去了。
Now that you are broken by the seas in the deep waters, your goods and all your people will go down with you.

海岛的居民为你惊奇。他们的君王都甚恐慌，面带愁容。
All the people of the sea-lands are overcome with wonder at you, and their kings are full of fear, their faces are troubled.

各国民中的客商都向你发嘶声。你令人惊恐，不再存留于世，直到永远。
Those who do business among the peoples make sounds of surprise at you; you have become a thing of fear, you have come to an end for ever.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
The word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

人子阿，你对推罗君王说，主耶和华如此说，因你心里高傲，说，我是神。我在海中坐神之位。你虽然居心自比神，也不过是人，并不是神。
Son of man, say to the ruler of Tyre, This is what the Lord has said: Because your heart has been lifted up, and you have said, I am a god, I am seated on the seat of God in the heart of the seas; but you are man and not God, though you have made your heart as the heart of God:

看哪，你比但以理更有智慧，什么秘事都不能向你隐藏。
See, you are wiser than Daniel; there is no secret which is deeper than your knowledge:

你靠自己的智慧聪明得了金银财宝，收入库中。
By your wisdom and deep knowledge you have got power for yourself, and put silver and gold in your store-houses:

你靠自己的大智慧和贸易增添资财，又因资财心里高傲。
By your great wisdom and by your trade your power is increased, and your heart is lifted up because of your power:

所以主耶和华如此说，因你居心自比神，
For this cause the Lord has said: Because you have made your heart as the heart of God,

我必使外邦人，就是列国中的强暴人临到你这里。他们必拔刀砍坏你用智慧得来的美物，亵渎你的荣光。
See, I am sending against you strange men, feared among the nations: they will let loose their swords against your bright wisdom, they will make your glory a common thing.

他们必使你下坑。你必死在海中，与被杀的人一样。
They will send you down to the underworld, and your death will be the death of those who are put to the sword in the heart of the seas.

在杀你的人面前你还能说我是神吗？其实你在杀害你的人手中，不过是人，并不是神。
Will you say, in the face of those who are taking your life, I am God? but you are man and not God in the hands of those who are wounding you.

你必死在外邦人手中，与未受割礼（或作不洁下同）的人一样，因为这是主耶和华说的。
Your death will be the death of those who are without circumcision, by the hands of men from strange lands: for I have said it, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你为推罗王作起哀歌，说主耶和华如此说，你无所不备，智慧充足，全然美丽。
Son of man, make a song of grief for the king of Tyre, and say to him, This is what the Lord has said: You are all-wise and completely beautiful;

你曾在伊甸神的园中，佩戴各样宝石，就是红宝石，红璧玺，金钢石，水苍玉，红玛瑙，碧玉，蓝宝石，绿宝石，红玉，和黄金。又有精美的鼓笛在你那里，都是在你受造之日预备齐全的。
You were in Eden, the garden of God; every stone of great price was your clothing, the sardius, the topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the emerald and the carbuncle: your store-houses were full of gold, and things of great price were in you; in the day when you were made they were got ready.

你是那受膏遮掩约柜的基路伯。我将你安置在神的圣山上。你在发光如火的宝石中间往来。
I gave you your place with the winged one; I put you on the mountain of God; you went up and down among the stones of fire.

你从受造之日所行的都完全，后来在你中间又察出不义。
There has been no evil in your ways from the day when you were made, till sin was seen in you.

因你贸易很多，就被强暴的事充满，以致犯罪，所以我因你亵渎圣地，就从神的山驱逐你。遮掩约柜的基路伯阿，我已将你从发光如火的宝石中除灭。
Through all your trading you have become full of violent ways, and have done evil: so I sent you out shamed from the mountain of God; the winged one put an end to you from among the stones of fire.

你因美丽心中高傲，又因荣光败坏智慧，我已将你摔倒在地，使你倒在君王面前，好叫他们目睹眼见。
Your heart was lifted up because you were beautiful, you made your wisdom evil through your sin: I have sent you down, even to the earth; I have made you low before kings, so that they may see you.

你因罪孽众多，贸易不公，就亵渎你那里的圣所。故此，我使火从你中间发出，烧灭你，使你在所有观看的人眼前变为地上的炉灰。
By all your sin, even by your evil trading, you have made your holy places unclean; so I will make a fire come out from you, it will make a meal of you, and I will make you as dust on the earth before the eyes of all who see you.

各国民中，凡认识你的，都必为你惊奇。你令人惊恐，不再存留于世，直到永远。
All who have knowledge of you among the peoples will be overcome with wonder at you: you have become a thing of fear, and you will never be seen again.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要向西顿预言攻击她，
Son of man, let your face be turned to Zidon, and be a prophet against it, and say,

说主耶和华如此说，西顿哪，我与你为敌，我必在你中间得荣耀。我在你中间施行审判，显为圣的时候，人就知道我是耶和华。
These are the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, O Zidon; and I will get glory for myself in you: and they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I send my punishments on her, and I will be seen to be holy in her.

我必使瘟疫进入西顿，使血流在她街上。被杀的必在其中仆倒，四围有刀剑临到她，人就知道我是耶和华。
And I will send on her disease and blood in her streets; and the wounded will be falling in the middle of her, and the sword will be against her on every side; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

四围恨恶以色列家的人，必不再向他们作刺人的荆棘，伤人的蒺藜，人就知道我是主耶和华。
And there will no longer be a plant with sharp points wounding the children of Israel, or a thorn troubling them among any who are round about them, who put shame on them; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

主耶和华如此说，我将分散在万民中的以色列家招聚回来，向他们在列邦人眼前显为圣的时候，他们就在我赐给我仆人雅各之地，仍然居住。
This is what the Lord has said: When I have got together the children of Israel from the peoples among whom they are wandering, and have been made holy among them before the eyes of the nations, then they will have rest in the land which is theirs, which I gave to my servant Jacob

他们要在这地上安然居住。我向四围恨恶他们的众人施行审判以后，他们要盖造房屋，栽种葡萄园，安然居住，就知道我是耶和华他们的神。
And they will be safe there, building houses and planting vine-gardens and living without fear; when I have sent my punishments on all those who put shame on them round about them; and they will be certain that I am the Lord their God.

第十年十月十二日，耶和华的话临到我说，
In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the twelfth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要向埃及王法老预言攻击他和埃及全地，
Son of man, let your face be turned against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and be a prophet against him and against all Egypt:

说主耶和华如此说，埃及王法老阿，我与你这卧在自己河中的大鱼为敌。你曾说，这河是我的，是我为自己造的。
Say to them, These are the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great river-beast stretched out among his Nile streams, who has said, The Nile is mine, and I have made it for myself.

我耶和华必用钩子钩住你的腮颊，又使江河中的鱼贴住你的鳞甲。我必将你和所有贴住你鳞甲的鱼，从江河中拉上来，
And I will put hooks in your mouth, and the fish of your streams will be hanging from your skin; and I will make you come up out of your streams, with all the fish of your streams hanging from your skin.

把你并江河中的鱼都抛在旷野。你必倒在田间，不被收殓，不被掩埋。我已将你给地上野兽，空中飞鸟作食物。
And I will let you be in the waste land, you and all the fish of your streams: you will go down on the face of the land; you will not be taken up or put to rest in the earth; I have given you for food to the beasts of the field and the birds of the heaven.

埃及一切的居民，因向以色列家成了芦苇的杖，就知道我是耶和华。
And it will be clear to all the people of Egypt that I am the Lord, because you have been a false support to the children of Israel.

他们用手持住你，你就断折，伤了他们的肩。他们倚靠你，你就断折，闪了他们的腰。
When they took a grip of you in their hands, you were crushed so that their arms were broken: and when they put their weight on you for support, you were broken and all their muscles gave way.

所以主耶和华如此说，我必使刀剑临到你，从你中间将人与牲畜剪除。
For this cause the Lord has said: See, I am sending a sword on you, cutting off from you man and beast.

埃及地必荒废凄凉，他们就知道我是耶和华。因为法老说，这河是我的，是我所造的，
And the land of Egypt will be an unpeopled waste; and they will be certain that I am the Lord: because he has said, The Nile is mine, and I made it.

所以我必与你并你的江河为敌，使埃及地，从色弗尼塔直到古实境界，全然荒废凄凉。
See, then, I am against you and against your streams, and I will make the land of Egypt an unpeopled waste, from Migdol to Syene, even as far as the edge of Ethiopia.

人的脚，兽的蹄都不经过，四十年之久并无人居住。
No foot of man will go through it and no foot of beast, and it will be unpeopled for forty years.

我必使埃及地在荒凉的国中成为荒凉，使埃及城在荒废的城中变为荒废，共有四十年。我必将埃及人分散在列国，四散在列邦。
I will make the land of Egypt a waste among the countries which are made waste, and her towns will be unpeopled among the towns which have been made waste, for forty years: and I will send the Egyptians in flight among the nations and wandering through the countries.

主耶和华如此说，满了四十年，我必招聚分散在各国民中的埃及人。
For this is what the Lord has said: At the end of forty years I will get the Egyptians together from the peoples where they have gone in flight:

我必叫埃及被掳的人回来，使他们归回本地巴忒罗。在那里必成为低微的国，
I will let the fate of Egypt be changed, and will make them come back into the land of Pathros, into the land from which they came; and there they will be an unimportant kingdom.

必为列国中最低微的，也不再自高于列国之上。我必减少他们，以致不再辖制列国。
It will be the lowest of the kingdoms, and never again will it be lifted up over the nations: I will make them small, so that they may not have rule over the nations.

埃及必不再作以色列家所倚靠的。以色列家仰望埃及人的时候，便思念罪孽。他们就知道我是主耶和华。
And Egypt will no longer be the hope of the children of Israel, causing sin to come to mind when their eyes are turned to them: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

二十七年正月初一日，耶和华的话临到我说，
Now in the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒使他的军兵大大效劳，攻打推罗，以致头都光秃，肩都磨破。然而他和他的军兵攻打推罗，并没有从那里得什么酬劳。
Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, made his army do hard work against Tyre, and the hair came off every head and every arm was rubbed smooth: but he and his army got no payment out of Tyre for the hard work which he had done against it.

所以主耶和华如此说，我必将埃及地赐给巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒。他必掳掠埃及群众，抢其中的财为掳物，夺其中的货为掠物，这就可以作他军兵的酬劳。
For this cause the Lord has said: See, I am giving the land of Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon: he will take away her wealth, and take her goods by force and everything which is there; and this will be the payment for his army.

我将埃及地赐给他，酬他所效的劳，因王与军兵是为我勤劳。这是主耶和华说的。
I have given him the land of Egypt as the reward for his hard work, because they were working for me, says the Lord.

当那日，我必使以色列家的角发生，又必使你以西结在他们中间得以开口。他们就知道我是耶和华。
In that day I will make a horn put out buds for the children of Israel, and I will let your words come freely among them, and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
The word of the Lord came to me again, saying,

人子阿，你要发预言说，主耶和华如此说，哀哉这日。你们应当哭号。
Son of man, be a prophet, and say, These are the words of the Lord: Give a cry, Aha, for the day!

因为耶和华的日子临近，就是密云之日，列国受罚之期。
For the day is near, the day of the Lord is near, a day of cloud; it will be the time of the nations.

必有刀剑临到埃及。在埃及被杀之人仆倒的时候，古实人就有痛苦，人民必被掳掠，基址必被拆毁。
And a sword will come on Egypt, and cruel pain will be in Ethiopia, when they are falling by the sword in Egypt; and they will take away her wealth and her bases will be broken down.

古实人，弗人（或作吕彼亚人），路德人，杂族的人民，并古巴人，以及同盟之地的人都要与埃及人一同倒在刀下。
Ethiopia and Put and Lud and all the mixed people and Libya and the children of the land of the Cherethites will all be put to death with them by the sword.

耶和华如此说，扶助埃及的也必倾倒。埃及因势力而有的骄傲必降低微。其中的人民，从色弗尼塔起（见二十九章十节）必倒在刀下。这是主耶和华说的。
This is what the Lord has said: The supporters of Egypt will have a fall, and the pride of her power will come down: from Migdol to Syene they will be put to the sword in it, says the Lord.

埃及地在荒凉的国中必成为荒凉。埃及城在荒废的城中也变为荒废。
And she will be made waste among the countries which have been made waste, and her towns will be among the towns which are unpeopled.

我在埃及中使火着起。帮助埃及的，都被灭绝。那时，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I have put a fire in Egypt and all her helpers are broken.

到那日，必有使者坐船，从我面前出去，使安逸无虑的古实人惊惧。必有痛苦临到他们，好像埃及遭灾的日子一样。看哪，这事临近了。
In that day men will go out quickly to take the news, causing fear in untroubled Ethiopia; and bitter pain will come on them as in the day of Egypt; for see, it is coming.

主耶和华如此说，我必借巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的手，除灭埃及众人。
This is what the Lord has said: I will put an end to great numbers of the people of Egypt by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon.

他和随从他的人，就是列国中强暴的，必进来毁灭这地。他们必拔刀攻击埃及，使遍地有被杀的人。
He and the people with him, causing fear among the nations, will be sent for the destruction of the land; their swords will be let loose against Egypt and the land will be full of dead.

我必使江河干涸，将地卖在恶人的手中。我必借外邦人的手，使这地和其中所有的变为凄凉。这是我耶和华说的。
And I will make the Nile streams dry, and will give the land into the hands of evil men, causing the land and everything in it to be wasted by the hands of men from a strange country: I the Lord have said it.

主耶和华如此说，我必毁灭偶像，从挪弗除灭神像。必不再有君王出自埃及地。我要使埃及地的人惧怕。
This is what the Lord has said: In addition to this, I will give up the images to destruction and put an end to the false gods in Noph; never again will there be a ruler in the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.

我必使巴忒罗荒凉，在琐安中使火着起，向挪施行审判。
And I will make Pathros a waste, and put a fire in Zoan, and send my punishments on No.

我必将我的忿怒倒在埃及的保障上，就是训上，并要剪除挪的众人。
I will let loose my wrath on Sin, the strong place of Egypt, cutting off the mass of the people of No.

我必在埃及中使火着起。训必大大痛苦。挪必被攻破。挪弗白日见仇敌（白日或作终日）。
And I will put a fire in Egypt; Syene will be twisting in pain, and No will be broken into, as by the onrush of waters.

亚文和比伯实的少年人必倒在刀下。这些城的人必被掳掠。
The young men of On and Pi-beseth will be put to the sword: and these towns will be taken away prisoners.

我在答比匿折断埃及的诸轭，使她因势力而有的骄傲在其中止息。那时，日光必退去。至于这城，必有密云遮蔽，其中的女子必被掳掠。
And at Tehaphnehes the day will become dark, when the yoke of Egypt is broken there, and the pride of her power comes to an end: as for her, she will be covered with a cloud, and her daughters will be taken away prisoners.

我必这样向埃及施行审判，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will send my punishments on Egypt: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

十一年正月初七日，耶和华的话临到我说，
Now in the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，我已打折埃及王法老的膀臂。没有敷药，也没有用布缠好，使他有力持刀。
Son of man, the arm of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, has been broken by me, and no band has been put round it to make it well, no band has been twisted round it to make it strong for gripping the sword.

所以主耶和华如此说，看哪，我与埃及王法老为敌，必将他有力的膀臂和已打折的膀臂全行打断，使刀从他手中坠落。
For this cause the Lord has said: See, I am against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and by me his strong arm will be broken; and I will make the sword go out of his hand.

我必将埃及人分散在列国，四散在列邦。
And I will send the Egyptians in flight among the nations and wandering through the countries.

我必使巴比伦王的膀臂有力，将我的刀交在他手中。却要打断法老的膀臂，他就在巴比伦王面前唉哼，如同受死伤的人一样。
And I will make the arms of the king of Babylon strong, and will put my sword in his hand: but Pharaoh's arms will be broken, and he will give cries of pain before him like the cries of a man wounded to death.

我必扶持巴比伦王的膀臂，法老的膀臂却要下垂。我将我的刀交在巴比伦王手中，他必举刀攻击埃及地，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will make the arms of the king of Babylon strong, and the arms of Pharaoh will be hanging down; and they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon and it is stretched out against the land of Egypt.

我必将埃及人分散在列国，四散在列邦。他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will send the Egyptians in flight among the nations and wandering through the countries; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

十一年三月初一日，耶和华的话临到我说，
Now in the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要向埃及王法老和他的众人说，在威势上谁能与你相比呢？
Son of man, say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and to his people; Whom are you like in your great power?

亚述王曾如利巴嫩中的香柏树，枝条荣美，影密如林，极其高大，树尖插入云中。
See, a pine-tree with beautiful branches and thick growth, giving shade and very tall; and its top was among the clouds.

众水使它生长。深水使它长大。所栽之地有江河围流，汊出的水道延到田野诸树。
It got strength from the waters and the deep made it tall: its streams went round about its planted land and it sent out its waterways to all the trees of the field.

所以它高大超过田野诸树。发旺的时候，枝子繁多，因得大水之力枝条长长。
In this way it became taller than all the trees of the field; and its branches were increased and its arms became long because of the great waters.

空中的飞鸟都在枝子上搭窝。田野的走兽都在枝条下生子。所有大国的人民都在它荫下居住。
In its branches all the birds of heaven came to rest, and under its arms all the beasts of the field gave birth to their young, and great nations were living in its shade.

树大条长，成为荣美，因为根在众水之旁。
So it was beautiful, being so tall and its branches so long, for its root was by great waters.

神园中的香柏树不能遮蔽它。松树不及它的枝子。枫树不及它的枝条。神园中的树都没有它荣美。
No cedars were equal to it in the garden of God; the fir-trees were not like its branches, and plane-trees were as nothing in comparison with its arms; no tree in the garden of God was so beautiful.

我使它的枝条蕃多，成为荣美，以致神伊甸园中的树都嫉妒它。
I made it beautiful with its mass of branches: so that all the trees in the garden of God were full of envy of it.

所以主耶和华如此说，因它高大，树尖插入云中，心骄气傲，
For this cause the Lord has said: Because he is tall, and has put his top among the clouds, and his heart is full of pride because he is so high,

我就必将它交给列国中大有威势的人。他必定办它。我因它的罪恶，已经驱逐它。
I have given him up into the hands of a strong one of the nations; he will certainly give him the reward of his sin, driving him out.

外邦人，就是列邦中强暴的，将它砍断弃掉。它的枝条落在山间和一切谷中，它的枝子折断，落在地的一切河旁。地上的众民已经走去，离开它的荫下。
And men from strange lands, who are to be feared among the nations, after cutting him off, have let him be: on the mountains and in all the valleys his branches have come down; his arms are broken by all the waterways of the land; all the peoples of the earth have gone from his shade, and have let him be.

空中的飞鸟都要宿在这败落的树上，田野的走兽都要卧在它的枝条下，
All the birds of heaven have come to rest on his broken stem where it is stretched on the earth, and all the beasts of the field will be on his branches:

好使水旁的诸树不因高大而自尊，也不将树尖插入云中，并且那些得水滋润，有势力的，也不得高大自立。因为它们在世人中，和下坑的人都被交与死亡，到阴府去了。
In order that no trees by the waters may be lifted up in their growth, putting their tops among the clouds; and that no trees which are watered may take their place on high: for they are all given up to death, to the lowest parts of the earth among the children of men, with those who go down to the underworld.

主耶和华如此说，它下阴间的那日，我便使人悲哀。我为它遮盖深渊，使江河凝结，大水停流。我也使利巴嫩为它凄惨，田野的诸树都因它发昏。
This is what the Lord has said: The day when he goes down to the underworld, I will make the deep full of grief for him; I will keep back her streams and the great waters will be stopped: I will make Lebanon dark for him, and all the trees of the field will be feeble because of him.

我将它扔到阴间，与下坑的人一同下去。那时，列国听见它坠落的响声就都震动，并且伊甸的一切树就是利巴嫩得水滋润，最佳最美的树都在阴府受了安慰。
I will send shaking on the nations at the sound of his fall, when I send him down to the underworld with those who go down into the deep: and on earth they will be comforting themselves, all the trees of Eden, the best of Lebanon, even all the watered ones.

它们也与它同下阴间，到被杀的人那里。它们曾作它的膀臂，在列国中它的荫下居住。
And they will go down with him to the underworld, to those who have been put to the sword; even those who were his helpers, living under his shade among the nations

在这样荣耀威势上，在伊甸园诸树中，谁能与你相比呢？然而你要与伊甸的诸树一同下到阴府，在未受割礼的人中，与被杀的人一同躺卧。法老和他的群众乃是如此。这是主耶和华说的。
Whom then are you like? for you will be sent down with the trees of Eden into the lowest parts of the earth: there you will be stretched out among those without circumcision, with those who were put to the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his people, says the Lord.

十二年十二月初一日，耶和华的话临到我说，
And it came about in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first day of the month, that the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要为埃及王法老作哀歌，说，从前你在列国中，如同少壮狮子。现在你却像海中的大鱼。你冲出江河，用爪搅动诸水，使江河浑浊。
Son of man, make a song of grief for Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and say to him, Young lion of the nations, destruction has come on you; and you were like a sea-beast in the seas, sending out bursts of water, troubling the waters with your feet, making their streams dirty.

主耶和华如此说，我必用多国的人民，将我的网撒在你身上，把你拉上来。
This is what the Lord has said: My net will be stretched out over you, and I will take you up in my fishing-net.

我必将你丢在地上，抛在田野，使空中的飞鸟都落在你身上，使遍地的野兽吃你得饱。
And I will let you be stretched on the land; I will send you out violently into the open field; I will let all the birds of heaven come to rest on you and will make the beasts of all the earth full of you.

我必将你的肉丢在山间，用你高大的尸首填满山谷。
And I will put your flesh on the mountains, and make the valleys full of your blood.

我又必用你的血浇灌你所游泳之地，漫过山顶。河道都必充满。
And the land will be watered with your blood, and the waterways will be full of you.

我将你扑灭的时候，要把天遮蔽，使众星昏暗，以密云遮掩太阳，月亮也不放光。
And when I put out your life, the heaven will be covered and its stars made dark; I will let the sun be covered with a cloud and the moon will not give her light.

我必使天上的亮光都在你以上变为昏暗，使你的地上黑暗。这是主耶和华说的。
All the bright lights of heaven I will make dark over you, and put dark night on your land, says the Lord.

我使你败亡的风声传到你所不认识的各国。那时，我必使多民的心因你愁烦。
And the hearts of numbers of peoples will be troubled, when I send your prisoners among the nations, into a country which is strange to you.

我在许多国民和君王面前向你抡我的刀，国民就必因你惊奇，君王也必因你极其恐慌。在你仆倒的日子，他们各人为自己的性命时刻战兢。
And I will make a number of peoples overcome with wonder at you, and their kings will be full of fear because of you, when my sword is waved before them: they will be shaking every minute, every man fearing for his life, in the day of your fall.

主耶和华如此说，巴比伦王的刀必临到你。
For this is what the Lord has said: The sword of the king of Babylon will come on you.

我必借勇士的刀使你的众民仆倒。这勇士都是列国中强暴的。他们必使埃及的骄傲归于无有。埃及的众民必被灭绝。
I will let the swords of the strong be the cause of the fall of your people; all of them men to be feared among the nations: and they will make waste the pride of Egypt, and all its people will come to destruction.

我必从埃及多水旁除灭所有的走兽。人脚兽蹄必不再搅浑这水。
And I will put an end to all her beasts which are by the great waters, and they will never again be troubled by the foot of man or by the feet of beasts.

那时，我必使埃及河澄清，江河像油缓流。这是主耶和华说的。
Then I will make their waters clear and their rivers will be flowing like oil, says the Lord.

我使埃及地变为荒废凄凉。这地缺少从前所充满的，又击杀其中一切的居民。那时，他们就知道我是耶和华。
When I make Egypt an unpeopled waste, cutting off from the land all the things in it; when I send punishment on all those living in it, then it will be clear to them that I am the Lord.

人必用这哀歌去哀哭，列国的女子为埃及和她的群众也必以此悲哀。这是主耶和华说的。
It is a song of grief, and people will give voice to it, the daughters of the nations will give voice to it, even for Egypt and all her people, says the Lord.

十二年十二月十五日，耶和华的话临到我说，
And in the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要为埃及群众哀号，又要将埃及和有名之国的女子，并下坑的人，一同扔到阴府去。
Son of man, let your voice be loud in sorrow for the people of Egypt and send them down, even you and the daughters of the nations; I will send them down into the lowest parts of the earth, with those who go down into the underworld.

你埃及的美丽胜过谁呢？你下去与未受割礼的人一同躺卧吧。
Are you more beautiful than any? go down, and take your rest among those without circumcision,

他们必在被杀的人中仆到。她被交给刀剑，要把她和她的群众拉去。
Among those who have been put to the sword: they will give a resting-place with them to all their people.

强盛的勇士要在阴间对埃及王和帮助他的说话。他们是未受割礼被杀的人，已经下去，躺卧不动。
The strong among the great ones will say to him from the underworld, Are you more beautiful than any? go down, you and your helpers, and take your rest among those without circumcision, and those who have been put to the sword.

亚述和她的众民都在那里，她民的坟墓在她四围。他们都是被杀倒在刀下的。
There is Asshur and all her army, round about her last resting-place: all of them put to death by the sword:

他们的坟墓在坑中极深之处。她的众民在她坟墓的四围，都是被杀倒在刀下的。他们曾在活人之地使人惊恐。
Whose resting-places are in the inmost parts of the underworld, who were a cause of fear in the land of the living.

以拦也在那里，她的群众在她坟墓的四围，都是被杀倒在刀下，未受割礼而下阴府的。他们曾在活人之地使人惊恐，并且与下坑的人一同担当羞辱。
There is Elam and all her people, round about her last resting-place: all of them put to death by the sword, who have gone down without circumcision into the lowest parts of the earth, who were a cause of fear in the land of the living, and are put to shame with those who go down to the underworld:

人给她和她的群众在被杀的人中设立床榻。她民的坟墓在她四围，他们都是未受割礼被刀杀的。他们曾在活人之地使人惊恐，并且与下坑的人一同担当羞辱。以拦已经放在被杀的人中。
They have made a bed for her among the dead, and all her people are round about her resting-place: all of them without circumcision, put to death with the sword; for they were a cause of fear in the land of the living, and are put to shame with those who go down to the underworld: they have been given a place among those who have been put to the sword.

米设，土巴，和她们的群众都在那里。她民的坟墓在她四围，他们都是未受割礼被刀杀的。他们曾在活人之地使人惊恐。
There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her people, round about her last resting-place: all of them without circumcision, put to death by the sword; for they were a cause of fear in the land of the living.

他们不得与那未受割礼仆倒的勇士一同躺卧。这些勇士带着兵器下阴间，头枕刀剑，骨头上有本身的罪孽。他们曾在活人之地使勇士惊恐。
And they have been put to rest with the fighting men who came to their end in days long past, who went down to the underworld with their instruments of war, placing their swords under their heads, and their body-covers are over their bones; for their strength was a cause of fear in the land of the living.

法老阿，你必在未受割礼的人中败坏，与那些被杀的人一同躺卧。
But you will have your bed among those without circumcision, and will be put to rest with those who have been put to death with the sword.

以东也在那里。她君王和一切首领虽然仗着势力，还是放在被杀的人中。他们必与未受割礼的和下坑的人一同躺卧。
There is Edom, her kings and all her princes, who have been given a resting-place with those who were put to the sword: they will be resting among those without circumcision, even with those who go down to the underworld.

在那里有北方的众王子和一切西顿人，都与被杀的人下去。他们虽然仗着势力使人惊恐，还是蒙羞。他们未受割礼，和被刀杀的一同躺卧，与下坑的人一同担当羞辱。
There are the chiefs of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, who have gone down with those who have been put to the sword: they are shamed on account of all the fear caused by their strength; they are resting there without circumcision, among those who have been put to the sword, and are put to shame with those who go down to the underworld.

法老看见他们，便为他被杀的军队受安慰。这是主耶和华说的。
Pharaoh will see them and be comforted on account of all his people: even Pharaoh and all his army, put to death by the sword, says the Lord.

我任凭法老在活人之地使人惊恐，法老和他的群众必放在未受割礼和被杀的人中。这是主耶和华说的。
For he put his fear in the land of the living: and he will be put to rest among those without circumcision, with those who have been put to death with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his people, says the Lord.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要告诉本国的子民说，我使刀剑临到哪一国，那一国的民从他们中间选立一人为守望的。
Son of man, give a word to the children of your people, and say to them, When I make the sword come on a land, if the people of the land take a man from among their number and make him their watchman:

他见刀剑临到那地，若吹角警戒众民，
If, when he sees the sword coming on the land, by sounding the horn he gives the people news of their danger;

凡听见角声不受警戒的，刀剑若来除灭了他，他的罪就必归到自己的头上（罪原文作血）。
Then anyone who, hearing the sound of the horn, does not take note of it, will himself be responsible for his death, if the sword comes and takes him away.

他听见角声，不受警戒，他的罪必归到自己的身上。他若受警戒，便是救了自己的性命。
On hearing the sound of the horn, he did not take note; his blood will be on him; for if he had taken note his life would have been safe.

倘若守望的人见刀剑临到，不吹角，以致民不受警戒，刀剑来杀了他们中间的一个人，他虽然死在罪孽之中，我却要向守望的人讨他丧命的罪（罪原文作血）。
But if the watchman sees the sword coming, and does not give a note on the horn, and the people have no word of the danger, and the sword comes and takes any person from among them; he will be taken away in his sin, but I will make the watchman responsible for his blood.

人子阿，我照样立你作以色列家守望的人。所以你要听我口中的话，替我警戒他们。
So you, son of man, I have made you a watchman for the children of Israel; and you are to give ear to the word of my mouth and give them news from me of their danger.

我对恶人说，恶人哪，你必要死。你以西结若不开口警戒恶人，使他离开所行的道，这恶人必死在罪孽之中，我却要向你讨他丧命的罪（罪原文作血）。
When I say to the evil-doer, Death will certainly overtake you; and you say nothing to make clear to the evil-doer the danger of his way; death will overtake that evil man in his evil-doing, but I will make you responsible for his blood.

倘若你警戒恶人转离所行的道，他仍不转离，他必死在罪孽之中，你却救自己脱离了罪。
But if you make clear to the evil-doer the danger of his way for the purpose of turning him from it, and he is not turned from his way, death will overtake him in his evil-doing, but your life will be safe.

人子阿，你要对以色列家说，你们常说，我们的过犯罪恶在我们身上，我们必因此消灭，怎能存活呢？
And you, son of man, say to the children of Israel, You say, Our wrongdoing and our sins are on us and we are wasting away in them; how then may we have life?

你对他们说，主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我断不喜悦恶人死亡，惟喜悦恶人转离所行的道而活。以色列家阿，你们转回，转回吧。离开恶道，何必死亡呢？
Say to them, By my life, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the evil-doer; it is more pleasing to me if he is turned from his way and has life: be turned, be turned from your evil ways; why are you looking for death, O children of Israel?

人子阿，你要对本国的人民说，义人的义，在犯罪之日不能救他。至于恶人的恶，在他转离恶行之日也不能使他倾倒。义人在犯罪之日也不能因他的义存活。
And you, son of man, say to the children of your people, The righteousness of the upright man will not make him safe in the day when he does wrong; and the evil-doing of the evil man will not be the cause of his fall in the day when he is turned from his evil-doing; and the upright man will not have life because of his righteousness in the day when he does evil.

我对义人说，你必定存活。他若倚靠他的义而作罪孽，他所行的义都不被记念。他必因所作的罪孽死亡。
When I say to the upright that life will certainly be his; if he puts his faith in his righteousness and does evil, not one of his upright acts will be kept in memory; but in the evil he has done, death will overtake him.

再者，我对恶人说，你必定死亡。他若转离他的罪，行正直与合理的事，
And when I say to the evil-doer, Death will certainly be your fate; if he is turned from his sin and does what is ordered and right;

还人的当头和所抢夺的，遵行生命的律例，不作罪孽，他必定存活，不致死亡。
If the evil-doer lets one who is in his debt have back what is his, and gives back what he had taken by force, and is guided by the rules of life, doing no evil; life will certainly be his, death will not overtake him.

他所犯的一切罪必不被记念。他行了正直与合理的事，必定存活。
Not one of the sins which he has done will be kept in mind against him: he has done what is ordered and right, life will certainly be his.

你本国的子民还说，主的道不公平。其实他们的道不公平。
But the children of your people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: when it is they whose way is not equal.

义人转离他的义而作罪孽，就必因此死亡。
When the upright man, turning away from his righteousness, does evil, death will overtake him in it.

恶人转离他的恶，行正直与合理的事，就必因此存活。
And when the evil man, turning away from his evil-doing, does what is ordered and right, he will get life by it.

你们还说，主的道不公平。以色列家阿，我必按你们各人所行的审判你们。
And still you say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O children of Israel, I will be your judge, giving to everyone the reward of his ways.

我们被掳之后十二年十月初五日，有人从耶路撒冷逃到我这里，说，城已攻破。
Now in the twelfth year after we had been taken away prisoners, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month, one who had got away in flight from Jerusalem came to me, saying, The town has been taken.

逃来的人未到前一日的晚上，耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在我身上，开我的口。到第二日早晨，那人来到我这里，我口就开了，不再缄默。
Now the hand of the Lord had been on me in the evening, before the man who had got away came to me; and he made my mouth open, ready for his coming to me in the morning; and my mouth was open and I was no longer without voice.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，住在以色列荒废之地的人说，亚伯拉罕独自一人能得这地为业，我们人数众多，这地更是给我们为业的。
Son of man, those who are living in these waste places in the land of Israel say, Abraham was but one, and he had land for his heritage: but we are a great number; the land is given to us for our heritage.

所以你要对他们说，主耶和华如此说，你们吃带血的物，仰望偶像，并且杀人流血，你们还能得这地为业吗？
For this cause say to them, This is what the Lord has said: You take your meat with the blood, your eyes are lifted up to your images, and you are takers of life: are you to have the land for your heritage?

你们倚仗自己的刀剑行可憎的事，人人玷污邻舍的妻，你们还能得这地为业吗？
You put your faith in your swords, you do disgusting things, everyone takes his neighbour's wife: are you to have the land for your heritage?

你要对他们这样说，主耶和华如此说，我指着我的永生起誓，在荒场中的，必倒在刀下。在田野间的，必交给野兽吞吃。在保障和洞里的，必遭瘟疫而死。
This is what you are to say to them: The Lord has said, By my life, truly, those who are in the waste places will be put to the sword, and him who is in the open field I will give to the beasts for their food, and those who are in the strong places and in holes in the rocks will come to their death by disease.

我必使这地荒凉，令人惊骇。她因势力而有的骄傲也必止息。以色列的山都必荒凉，无人经过。
And I will make the land a waste and a cause of wonder, and the pride of her strength will come to an end; and the mountains of Israel will be made waste so that no one will go through.

我因他们所行一切可憎的事使地荒凉，令人惊骇。那时，他们就知道我是耶和华。
Then they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I have made the land a waste and a cause of wonder, because of all the disgusting things which they have done,

人子阿，你本国的子民在墙垣旁边，在房屋门口谈论你。弟兄对弟兄彼此说，来吧。听听有什么话从耶和华而出。
And as for you, son of man, the children of your people are talking together about you by the walls and in the doorways of the houses, saying to one another, Come now, give ear to the word which comes from the Lord.

他们来到你这里如同民来聚会，坐在你面前仿佛是我的民。他们听你的话却不去行。因为他们的口多显爱情，心却追随财利。
And they come to you as my people come, and are seated before you as my people, hearing your words but doing them not: for deceit is in their mouth and their heart goes after profit for themselves.

他们看你如善于奏乐，声音幽雅之人所唱的雅歌，他们听你的话却不去行。
And truly you are to them like a love song by one who has a very pleasing voice and is an expert player on an instrument: for they give ear to your words but do them not.

看哪，所说的快要应验。应验了，他们就知道在他们中间有了先知。
And when this comes about (see, it is coming), then it will be clear to them that a prophet has been among them.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要向以色列的牧人发预言，攻击他们，说，主耶和华如此说，祸哉。以色列的牧人只知牧养自己。牧人岂不当牧养群羊吗？
Son of man, be a prophet against the keepers of the flock of Israel, and say to them, O keepers of the sheep! this is the word of the Lord: A curse is on the keepers of the flock of Israel who take the food for themselves! is it not right for the keepers to give the food to the sheep?

你们吃脂油，穿羊毛，宰肥壮的，却不牧养群羊。
You take the milk and are clothed with the wool, you put the fat beasts to death, but you give the sheep no food.

瘦弱的，你们没有养壮。有病的，你们没有医治。受伤的，你们没有缠裹。被逐的，你们没有领回。失丧的，你们没有寻找。但用强暴严严地辖制。
You have not made the diseased ones strong or made well that which was ill; you have not put bands on the broken or got back that which had been sent away or made search for the wandering ones; and the strong you have been ruling cruelly.

因无牧人，羊就分散。既分散，便作了一切野兽的食物。
And they were wandering in every direction because there was no keeper: and they became food for all the beasts of the field.

我的羊在诸山间，在各高冈上流离，在全地上分散，无人去寻，无人去找。
And my sheep went out of the way, wandering through all the mountains and on every high hill: my sheep went here and there over all the face of the earth; and no one was troubled about them or went in search of them.

所以，你们这些牧人要听耶和华的话。
For this cause, O keepers of the flock, give ear to the word of the Lord:

主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我的羊因无牧人就成为掠物，也作了一切野兽的食物。我的牧人不寻找我的羊。这些牧人只知牧养自己，并不牧养我的羊。
By my life, says the Lord, truly, because my sheep have been taken away, and my sheep became food for all the beasts of the field, because there was no keeper, and my keepers did not go in search of the sheep, but the keepers took food for themselves and gave my sheep no food;

所以你们这些牧人要听耶和华的话。
For this reason, O you keepers of the flock, give ear to the word of the Lord;

主耶和华如此说，我必与牧人为敌，必向他们的手追讨我的羊，使他们不再牧放群羊。牧人也不再牧养自己。我必救我的羊脱离他们的口，不再作他们的食物。
This is what the Lord has said: See I am against the keepers of the flock, and I will make search and see what they have done with my sheep, and will let them be keepers of my sheep no longer; and the keepers will no longer get food for themselves; I will take my sheep out of their mouths so that they may not be food for them.

主耶和华如此说，看哪，我必亲自寻找我的羊，将它们寻见。
For this is what the Lord has said: Truly, I, even I, will go searching and looking for my sheep.

牧人在羊群四散的日子怎样寻找他的羊，我必照样寻找我的羊。这些羊在密云黑暗的日子散到各处，我必从那里救回它们来。
As the keeper goes looking for his flock when he is among his wandering sheep, so I will go looking for my sheep, and will get them safely out of all the places where they have been sent wandering in the day of clouds and black night.

我必从万民中领出它们，从各国内聚集它们，引导它们归回故土，也必在以色列山上一切溪水旁边，境内一切可居之处牧养它们。
And I will take them out from among the peoples, and get them together from the countries, and will take them into their land; and I will give them food on the mountains of Israel by the water-streams and wherever men are living in the country.

我必在美好的草场牧养它们。它们的圈必在以色列高处的山上，它们必在佳美之圈中躺卧，也在以色列山肥美的草场吃草。
I will give them good grass-land for their food, and their safe place will be the mountains of the high place of Israel: there they will take their rest in a good place, and on fat grass-land they will take their food on the mountains of Israel.

主耶和华说，我必亲自作我羊的牧人，使它们得以躺卧。
I myself will give food to my flock, and I will give them rest, says the Lord.

失丧的，我必寻找。被逐的，我必领回。受伤的，我必缠裹。有病的，我必医治。只是肥的壮的，我必除灭，也要秉公牧养它们。
I will go in search of that which had gone wandering from the way, and will get back that which had been sent in flight, and will put bands on that which was broken, and give strength to that which was ill: but the fat and the strong I will give up to destruction; I will give them for their food the punishment which is theirs by right.

我的羊群哪，论到你们，主耶和华如此说，我必在羊与羊中间，公绵羊与公山羊中间施行判断。
And as for you, O my flock, says the Lord, truly, I will be judge between sheep and sheep, the he-sheep and the he-goats.

你们这些肥壮的羊，在美好的草场吃草还以为小事吗？剩下的草，你们竟用蹄践踏了。你们喝清水，剩下的水，你们竟用蹄搅浑了。
Does it seem a small thing to you to have taken your food on good grass-land while the rest of your grass-land is stamped down under your feet? and that after drinking from clear waters you make the rest of the waters dirty with your feet?

至于我的羊，只得吃你们所践踏的，喝你们所搅浑的。
And as for my sheep, their food is the grass which has been stamped on by your feet, and their drink the water which has been made dirty by your feet.

所以，主耶和华如此说，我必在肥羊和瘦羊中间施行判断。
For this reason the Lord has said to them, Truly, I, even I, will be judge between the fat sheep and the thin sheep.

因为你们用胁用肩拥挤一切瘦弱的，又用角抵触，以致使它们四散。
Because you have been pushing with side and leg, pushing the diseased with your horns till they were sent away in every direction;

所以，我必拯救我的群羊不再作掠物。我也必在羊和羊中间施行判断。
I will make my flock safe, and they will no longer be taken away, and I will be judge between sheep and sheep.

我必立一牧人照管他们，牧养他们，就是我的仆人大卫。他必牧养他们，作他们的牧人。
And I will put over them one keeper, and he will give them food, even my servant David; he will give them food and be their keeper.

我耶和华必作他们的神，我的仆人大卫必在他们中间作王。这是耶和华说的。
And I the Lord will be their God and my servant David their ruler; I the Lord have said it.

我必与他们立平安的约，使恶兽从境内断绝，他们就必安居在旷野，躺卧在林中。
And I will make with them an agreement of peace, and will put an end to evil beasts through all the land: and they will be living safely in the waste land, sleeping in the woods.

我必使他们与我山的四围成为福源，我也必叫时雨落下，必有福如甘霖而降。
And I will give the rain at the right time, and I will make the shower come down at the right time; there will be showers of blessing.

田野的树必结果，地也必有出产。他们必在故土安然居住。我折断他们所负的轭，救他们脱离那以他们为奴之人的手。那时，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And the tree of the field will give its fruit and the earth will give its increase, and they will be safe in their land; and they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I have had their yoke broken and have given them salvation from the hands of those who made them servants.

他们必不再作外邦人的掠物，地上的野兽也不再吞吃他们。却要安然居住，无人惊吓。
And their goods will no longer be taken by the nations, and they will not again be food for the beasts of the earth; but they will be living safely and no one will be a cause of fear to them.

我必给他们兴起有名的植物。他们在境内不再为饥荒所灭，也不再受外邦人的羞辱，
And I will give them planting-places of peace, and they will no longer be wasted from need of food or put to shame by the nations.

必知道我，耶和华他们的神是与他们同在，并知道他们以色列家是我的民。这是主耶和华说的。
And they will be certain that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, the children of Israel, are my people, says the Lord.

你们作我的羊，我草场上的羊，乃是以色列人，我也是你们的神。这是主耶和华说的。
And you are my sheep, the sheep of my grass-lands, and I am your God, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向西珥山发预言，攻击它，
Son of man, let your face be turned to Mount Seir, and be a prophet against it,

对它说，主耶和华如此说，西珥山哪，我与你为敌，必向你伸手攻击你，使你荒凉，令人惊骇。
And say to it, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am against you, O Mount Seir, and my hand will be stretched out against you, and I will make you a waste and a cause for wonder.

我必使你的城邑变为荒场，成为凄凉。你就知道我是耶和华。
I will make your towns unpeopled and you will be a waste; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

因为你永怀仇恨，在以色列人遭灾，罪孽到了尽头的时候，将他们交与刀剑，
Because yours has been a hate without end, and you have given up the children of Israel to the power of the sword in the time of their trouble, in the time of the punishment of the end:

所以主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我必使你遭遇流血的报应，罪（原文作血本节同）必追赶你。你既不恨恶杀人流血，所以这罪必追赶你。
For this cause, by my life, says the Lord, because you have been sinning through blood, blood will come after you.

我必使西珥山荒凉，令人惊骇，来往经过的人我必剪除。
And I will make Mount Seir a cause for wonder and a waste, cutting off from it all comings and goings.

我必使西珥山满有被杀的人。被刀杀的，必倒在你小山和山谷，并一切的溪水中。
I will make his mountains full of those who have been put to death; in your valleys and in all your water-streams men will be falling by the sword.

我必使你永远荒凉，使你的城邑无人居住，你的民就知道我是耶和华。
I will make you waste for ever, and your towns will be unpeopled: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

因为你曾说，这二国这二邦必归于我，我必得为业。（其实耶和华仍在那里）
Because you have said, The two nations and the two countries are to be mine, and we will take them for our heritage; though the Lord was there:

所以主耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我必照你的怒气和你从仇恨中向他们所发的嫉妒待你。我审判你的时候，必将自己显明在他们中间。
For this cause, by my life, says the Lord, I will do to you as you have done in your wrath and in your envy, which you have made clear in your hate for them; and I will make clear to you who I am when you are judged by me.

你也必知道我耶和华听见了你的一切毁谤，就是你攻击以色列山的话，说，这些山荒凉，是归我们吞灭的。
And you will see that I the Lord have had knowledge of all the bitter things which you have said against the mountains of Israel, saying, They have been made waste, they are given to us to take for our heritage.

你们也用口向我夸大，增添与我反对的话，我都听见了。
And you have made yourselves great against me with your mouths, increasing your words against me; and it has come to my ears.

主耶和华如此说，全地欢乐的时候，我必使你荒凉。
This is what the Lord has said: Because you were glad over my land when it was a waste, so will I do to you:

你怎样因以色列家的地业荒凉而喜乐，我必照你所行的待你。西珥山哪，你和以东全地必都荒凉。你们就知道我是耶和华。
You will become a waste, O Mount Seir, and all Edom, even all of it: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

人子阿，你要对以色列山发预言说，以色列山哪，要听耶和华的话。
And you, son of man, be a prophet about the mountains of Israel, and say, You mountains of Israel, give ear to the word of the Lord:

主耶和华如此说，因仇敌说，阿哈。这永久的山冈都归我们为业了。
This is what the Lord has said: Because your hater has said against you, Aha! and, The old waste places are our heritage, we have taken them:

所以要发预言说，主耶和华如此说，因为敌人使你荒凉，四围吞吃，好叫你归与其余的外邦人为业，并且多嘴多舌的人提起你来，百姓也说你有臭名。
For this cause be a prophet, and say, This is what the Lord has said: Because, even because they have been glad over you and put you to shame on every side, because you have become a heritage for the rest of the nations, and you are taken up on the lips of talkers and in the evil talk of the people:

故此，以色列山要听主耶和华的话。大山小冈，水沟山谷，荒废之地，被弃之城，为四围其余的外邦人所占据，所讥刺的，
For this reason, you mountains of Israel, give ear to the word of the Lord; this is what the Lord has said to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, to the unpeopled wastes and to the towns where no one is living, from which the goods have been taken and which have been put to shame by the rest of the nations who are round about:

主耶和华对你们如此说，我真发愤恨如火，责备那其余的外邦人和以东的众人。他们快乐满怀，心存恨恶，将我的地归自己为业，又看为被弃的掠物。
For this cause the Lord has said: Truly, in the heat of my bitter feeling I have said things against the rest of the nations and against all Edom, who have taken my land as a heritage for themselves with the joy of all their heart, and with bitter envy of soul have made attacks on it:

所以，你要指着以色列地说预言，对大山小冈，水沟山谷说，主耶和华如此说，我发愤恨和忿怒说，因你们曾受外邦人的羞辱，
For this cause be a prophet about the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, This is what the Lord has said: Truly, in my bitter feeling and in my wrath I have said these things, because you have undergone the shame of the nations:

所以我起誓说，你们四围的外邦人总要担当自己的羞辱。这是主耶和华说的。
For this cause the Lord has said, See, I have taken an oath that the nations which are round about you are themselves to undergo the shame which they have put on you.

以色列山哪，你必发枝条，为我的民以色列结果子，因为他们快要来到。
But you, O mountains of Israel, will put out your branches and give your fruit to my people Israel; for they are ready to come.

看哪，我是帮助你的，也必向你转意，使你得以耕种。
For truly I am for you, and I will be turned to you, and you will be ploughed and planted:

我必使以色列全家的人数在你上面增多，城邑有人居住，荒场再被建造。
And I will let your numbers be increased, all the children of Israel, even all of them: and the towns will be peopled and the waste places will have buildings;

我必使人和牲畜在你上面加增。他们必生养众多。我要使你照旧有人居住，并要赐福与你比先前更多，你就知道我是耶和华。
Man and beast will be increased in you, and they will have offspring and be fertile: I will make you thickly peopled as you were before, and will do more for you than at the first: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

我必使人，就是我的民以色列，行在你上面。他们必得你为业。你也不再使他们丧子。
Yes, I will have you walked on by the feet of men, even my people Israel; they will have you for a heritage and you will be theirs, and never again will you take their children from them.

主耶和华如此说，因为人对你说，你是吞吃人的，又使国民丧子。
This is what the Lord has said: Because they say to you, You, O land, are the destruction of men, causing loss of children to your nation;

所以主耶和华说，你必不再吞吃人，也不再使国民丧子。
For this reason you will no longer take the lives of men and will never again be the cause of loss of children to your nation, says the Lord.

我使你不再听见各国的羞辱，不再受万民的辱骂，也不再使国民绊跌。这是主耶和华说的。
And I will not let the shaming of the nations come to your ears, and no longer will you be looked down on by the peoples, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿。以色列家住在本地的时候，在行动作为上玷污那地。他们的行为在我面前，好像正在经期的妇人那样污秽。
Son of man, when the children of Israel were living in their land, they made it unclean by their way and their acts: their way before me was as when a woman is unclean at the time when she is kept separate.

所以我因他们在那地上流人的血，又因他们以偶像玷污那地，就把我的忿怒倾在他们身上。
So I let loose my wrath on them because of those whom they had violently put to death in the land, and because they had made it unclean with their images:

我将他们分散在列国，四散在列邦，按他们的行动作为惩罚他们。
And I sent them in flight among the nations and wandering through the countries: I was their judge, rewarding them for their way and their acts.

他们到了所去的列国，就使我的圣名被亵渎。因为人谈论他们说，这是耶和华的民，是从耶和华的地出来的。
And when they came among the nations, wherever they went, they made my holy name unclean, when it was said of them, These are the people of the Lord who have gone out from his land.

我却顾惜我的圣名，就是以色列家在所到的列国中所亵渎的。
But I had pity for my holy name which the children of Israel had made unclean wherever they went.

所以，你要对以色列家说，主耶和华如此说，以色列家阿，我行这事不是为你们，乃是为我的圣名，就是在你们到的列国中所亵渎的。
For this cause say to the children of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: I am doing this, not because of you, O children of Israel, but because of my holy name, which you have made unclean among the nations wherever you went.

我要使我的大名显为圣。这名在列国中已被亵渎，就是你们在他们中间所亵渎的。我在他们眼前，在你们身上显为圣的时候，他们就知道我是耶和华。这是主耶和华说的。
And I will make holy my great name which has been made unclean among the nations, which you have made unclean among them; and it will be clear to the nations that I am the Lord, says the Lord, when I make myself holy in you before their eyes.

我必从各国收取你们，从列邦聚集你们，引导你们归回本地。
For I will take you out from among the nations, and get you together from all the countries, and take you into your land.

我必用清水洒在你们身上，你们就洁净了。我要洁净你们，使你们脱离一切的污秽，弃掉一切的偶像。
And I will put clean water on you so that you may be clean: from all your unclean ways and from all your images I will make you clean.

我也要赐给你们一个新心，将新灵放在你们里面，又从你们的肉体中除掉石心，赐给你们肉心。
And I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you: I will take away the heart of stone from your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh.

我必将我的灵放在你们里面，使你们顺从我的律例，谨守遵行我的典章。
And I will put my spirit in you, causing you to be guided by my rules, and you will keep my orders and do them.

你们必住在我所赐给你们列祖之地。你们要作我的子民，我要作你们的神。
So that you may go on living in the land which I gave to your fathers; and you will be to me a people, and I will be to you a God.

我必救你们脱离一切的污秽，也必命五谷丰登，不使你们遭遇饥荒。
And I will make you free from all your unclean ways: and at my voice the grain will come up and be increased, and I will not let you be short of food.

我必使树木多结果子，田地多出土产，好叫你们不再因饥荒受外邦人的讥诮。
And I will make the tree give more fruit and the field fuller produce, and no longer will you be shamed among the nations for need of food.

那时，你们必追想你们的恶行和你们不善的作为，就因你们的罪孽和可憎的事厌恶自己。
And at the memory of your evil ways and your wrongdoings, you will have bitter hate for yourselves because of your evil-doings and your disgusting ways, O children of Israel.

主耶和华说，你们要知道，我这样行不是为你们。以色列家阿，当为自己的行为抱愧蒙羞。
Not because of you am I doing it, says the Lord; let it be clear to you, and be shamed and made low because of your ways, O children of Israel.

主耶和华如此说，我洁净你们，使你们脱离一切罪孽的日子，必使城邑有人居住，荒场再被建造。
This is what the Lord has said: In the day when I make you clean from all your evil-doings I will let the towns be peopled and there will be building on the waste places.

过路的人虽看为荒废之地，现今这荒废之地仍得耕种。
And the land which was waste will be farmed, in place of being a waste in the eyes of everyone who went by.

他们必说，这先前为荒废之地，现在成如伊甸园。这荒废凄凉，毁坏的城邑现在坚固有人居住。
And they will say, This land which was waste has become like the garden of Eden; and the towns which were unpeopled and wasted and pulled down are walled and peopled.

那时，在你们四围其余的外邦人必知道我耶和华修造那毁坏之处，培植那荒废之地。我耶和华说过，也必成就。
Then the rest of the nations round about you will be certain that I the Lord am the builder of the places which were pulled down and the planter of that which was waste: I the Lord have said it, and I will do it.

主耶和华如此说，我要加增以色列家的人数，多如羊群。他们必为这事向我求问，我要给他们成就。
This is what the Lord has said: The children of Israel will again make prayer to me for this, that I may do it for them; I will make them increased with men like a flock.

耶路撒冷在守节作祭物所献的羊群怎样多，照样，荒凉的城邑必被人群充满。他们就知道我是耶和华。
Like sheep for the offerings, like the sheep of Jerusalem at her fixed feasts, so the unpeopled towns will be made full of men: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在我身上。耶和华借他的灵带我出去，将我放在平原中。这平原遍满骸骨。
The hand of the Lord had been on me, and he took me out in the spirit of the Lord and put me down in the middle of the valley; and it was full of bones;

他使我从骸骨的四围经过，谁知在平原的骸骨甚多，而且极其枯干。
And he made me go past them round about: and I saw that there was a very great number of them on the face of the wide valley, and they were very dry.

他对我说，人子阿，这些骸骨能复活吗？我说，主耶和华阿，你是知道的。
And he said to me, Son of man, is it possible for these bones to come to life? And I made answer, and said, It is for you to say, O Lord.

他又对我说，你向这些骸骨发预言说，枯干的骸骨阿，要听耶和华的话。
And again he said to me, Be a prophet to these bones, and say to them, O you dry bones, give ear to the word of the Lord.

主耶和华对这些骸骨如此说，我必使气息进入你们里面，你们就要活了。
This is what the Lord has said to these bones: See, I will make breath come into you so that you may come to life;

我必给你们加上筋，使你们长肉，又将皮遮蔽你们，使气息进入你们里面，你们就要活了。你们便知道我是耶和华。
And I will put muscles on you and make flesh come on you, and put skin over you, and breath into you, so that you may have life; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

于是，我遵命说预言。正说预言的时候，不料，有响声，有地震。骨与骨互相联络。
So I gave the word as I was ordered: and at my words there was a shaking of the earth, and the bones came together, bone to bone.

我观看，见骸骨上有筋，也长了肉，又有皮遮蔽其上，只是还没有气息。
And looking I saw that there were muscles on them and flesh came up, and they were covered with skin: but there was no breath in them.

主对我说，人子阿，你要发预言，向风发预言，说主耶和华如此说，气息阿，要从四方（原文作风）而来，吹在这些被杀的人身上，使他们活了。
And he said to me, Be a prophet to the wind, be a prophet, son of man, and say to the wind, The Lord has said: Come from the four winds, O wind, breathing on these dead so that they may come to life.

于是我遵命说预言，气息就进入骸骨，骸骨便活了，并且站起来，成为极大的军队。
And I gave the word at his orders, and breath came into them, and they came to life and got up on their feet, a very great army.

主对我说，人子阿，这些骸骨就是以色列全家。他们说，我们的骨头枯干了，我们的指望失去了，我们灭绝净尽了。
Then he said to me, Son of man, these bones are all the children of Israel: and see, they are saying, Our bones have become dry our hope is gone, we are cut off completely.

所以你要发预言对他们说，主耶和华如此说，我的民哪，我必开你们的坟墓，使你们从坟墓中出来，领你们进入以色列地。
For this cause be a prophet to them, and say, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am opening the resting-places of your dead, and I will make you come up out of your resting-places, O my people; and I will take you into the land of Israel.

我的民哪，我开你们的坟墓，使你们从坟墓中出来，你们就知道我是耶和华。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord by my opening the resting-places of your dead and making you come up out of your resting-places, O my people.

我必将我的灵放在你们里面，你们就要活了。我将你们安置在本地，你们就知道我耶和华如此说，也如此成就了。这是耶和华说的。
And I will put my spirit in you, so that you may come to life, and I will give you a rest in your land: and you will be certain that I the Lord have said it and have done it, says the Lord.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要取一根木杖，在其上写为犹大和他的同伴以色列人。又取一根木杖，在其上写为约瑟，就是为以法莲，又为他的同伴以色列全家。
And you, son of man, take one stick, writing on it, For Judah and for the children of Israel who are in his company: then take another stick, writing on it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and all the children of Israel who are in his company:

你要使这两根木杖接连为一，在你手中成为一根。
Then, joining them one to another, make them one stick, so that they may be one in your hand.

你本国的子民问你说，这是什么意思。你不指示我们吗？
And when the children of your people say to you, Will you not make clear to us what these things have to do with us?

你就对他们说，主耶和华如此说，我要将约瑟和他同伴以色列支派的杖，就是那在以法莲手中的，与犹大的杖一同接连为一，在我手中成为一根。
Then say to them, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am taking the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel who are in his company; and I will put it on the stick of Judah and make them one stick, and they will be one in my hand.

你所写的那两根杖要在他们眼前拿在手中，
And the sticks with your writing on them will be in your hand before their eyes.

要对他们说，主耶和华如此说，我要将以色列人从他们所到的各国收取，又从四围聚集他们，引导他们归回本地。
And say to them, These are the words of the Lord: See, I am taking the children of Israel from among the nations where they have gone, and will get them together on every side, and take them into their land:

我要使他们在那地，在以色列山上成为一国，有一王作他们众民的王。他们不再为二国，决不再分为二国。
And I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel; and one king will be king over them all: and they will no longer be two nations, and will no longer be parted into two kingdoms:

也不再因偶像和可憎的物，并一切的罪过玷污自己。我却要救他们出离一切的住处，就是他们犯罪的地方。我要洁净他们，如此，他们要作我的子民，我要作他们的神。
And they will no longer make themselves unclean with their images or with their hated things or with any of their sins: but I will give them salvation from all their turning away in which they have done evil, and will make them clean; and they will be to me a people, and I will be to them a God.

我的仆人大卫必作他们的王。众民必归一个牧人。他们必顺从我的典章，谨守遵行我的律例。
And my servant David will be king over them; and they will all have one keeper: and they will be guided by my orders and will keep my rules and do them.

他们必住在我赐给我仆人雅各的地上，就是你们列祖所住之地。他们和他们的子孙，并子孙的子孙，都永远住在那里。我的仆人大卫必作他们的王，直到永远。
And they will be living in the land which I gave to Jacob, my servant, in which your fathers were living; and they will go on living there, they and their children and their children's children, for ever: and David, my servant, will be their ruler for ever.

并且我要与他们立平安的约，作为永约。我也要将他们安置在本地，使他们的人数增多，又在他们中间设立我的圣所，直到永远。
And I will make an agreement of peace with them: it will be an eternal agreement with them: and I will have mercy on them and make their numbers great, and will put my holy place among them for ever.

我的居所必在他们中间。我要作他们的神，他们要作我的子民。
And my House will be over them; and I will be to them a God, and they will be to me a people.

我的圣所在以色列人中间直到永远，外邦人就必知道我是叫以色列成为圣的耶和华。
And the nations will be certain that I who make Israel holy am the Lord, when my holy place is among them for ever.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

人子阿，你要面向玛各地的歌革，就是罗施，米设，土巴的王发预言攻击他，
Son of man, let your face be turned against Gog, of the land of Magog, the ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and be a prophet against him,

说主耶和华如此说，罗施，米设，土巴的王歌革阿，我与你为敌。
And say, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am against you, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

我必用钩子钩住你的腮颊，调转你，将你和你的军兵，马匹，马兵带出来，都披挂整齐，成了大队，有大小盾牌，各拿刀剑。
And turning you round, I will put hooks in your mouth and make you come out with all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them in full war-dress, a great force with breastplate and body-cover, all of them armed with swords:

波斯人，古实人，和弗人（又作吕彼亚人），各拿盾牌，头上戴盔。
Persia, Cush, and Put with them; all of them with body-cover and metal head-dress:

歌篾人和他的军队，北方极处的陀迦玛族和他的军队，这许多国的民都同着你。
Gomer and all her forces; the people of Togarmah in the inmost parts of the north, with all his forces: a great number of peoples with you.

那聚集到你这里的各队都当准备。你自己也要准备，作他们的大帅。
Be ready, make yourself ready, you and all the forces who are with you, and be ready for my orders.

过了多日，你必被差派。到末后之年，你必来到脱离刀剑从列国收回之地，到以色列常久荒凉的山上。但那从列国中招聚出来的必在其上安然居住。
After a long time you will get your orders: in the last years you will come into the land which has been given back from the sword, which has been got together out of a great number of peoples, on the mountains of Israel which have ever been a waste: but it has been taken out from the peoples and they will be living, all of them, without fear of danger.

你和你的军队，并同着你许多国的民，必如暴风上来，如密云遮盖地面。
And you will go up, you will come like a storm, you will be like a cloud covering the land, you and all your forces, and a great number of peoples with you.

主耶和华如此说，到那时，你心必起意念，图谋恶计，
This is what the Lord has said: In that day it will come about that things will come into your mind, and you will have thoughts of an evil design:

说，我要上那无城墙的乡村，我要到那安静的民那里，他们都没有城墙，无门，无闩，安然居住。
And you will say, I will go up to the land of small unwalled towns; I will go to those who are quiet, living, all of them, without fear of danger, without walls or locks or doors:

我去要抢财为掳物，夺货为掠物，反手攻击那从前荒凉，现在有人居住之地，又攻击那住世界中间，从列国招聚，得了牲畜财货的民。
To take their property by force and go off with their goods; turning your hand against the waste places which now are peopled, and against the people who have been got together out of the nations, who have got cattle and goods for themselves, who are living in the middle of the earth.

示巴人，底但人，他施的客商，和其间的少壮狮子都必问你说，你来要抢财为掳物吗？你聚集军队要夺货为掠物吗？要夺取金银，掳去牲畜，财货吗？要抢夺许多财宝为掳物吗？
Sheba, and Dedan and her traders, Tarshish with all her traders, will say to you, Have you come to take our goods? have you got your armies together to take away our property by force? to take away silver and gold, cattle and goods, to go off with great wealth?

人子阿，你要因此发预言，对歌革说，主耶和华如此说，到我民以色列安然居住之日，你岂不知道吗？
For this cause, son of man, be a prophet and say to Gog, These are the words of the Lord: In that day, when my people Israel are living without fear of danger, will you not be moved against them?

你必从本地，从北方的极处率领许多国的民来，都骑着马，乃一大队极多的军兵。
And you will come from your place in the inmost parts of the north, you and a great number of peoples with you, all of them on horseback, a great force and a strong army:

歌革阿，你必上来攻击我的民以色列，如密云遮盖地面。末后的日子，我必带你来攻击我的地，到我在外邦人眼前，在你身上显为圣的时候，好叫他们认识我。
And you will come up against my people Israel, like a cloud covering the land; and it will come about, in the last days, that I will make you come against my land, so that the nations may have knowledge of me when I make myself holy in you, O Gog, before their eyes.

主耶和华如此说，我在古时借我的仆人以色列的先知所说的，就是你吗？当日他们多年预言我必带你来攻击以色列人。
This is what the Lord has said: You are he of whom I gave them word in earlier times by my servants, the prophets of Israel, who in those days went on saying, year after year, that I would make you come up against them.

主耶和华说，歌革上来攻击以色列地的时候，我的怒气要从鼻孔里发出。
And it will come about in that day, when Gog comes up against the land of Israel, says the Lord, that my wrath will come up, and my passion and my bitter feeling.

我发愤恨和烈怒如火说，那日在以色列地必有大震动，
For in the fire of my wrath I have said, Truly, in that day there will be a great shaking in the land of Israel;

甚至海中的鱼，天空的鸟，田野的兽，并地上的一切昆虫，和其上的众人，因见我的面就都震动。山岭必崩裂，陡岩必塌陷，墙垣都必坍倒。
So that the fish of the sea and the birds of heaven and the beasts of the field and everything moving on the earth, and all the men who are on the face of the earth, will be shaking before me, and the mountains will be overturned and the high places will come down, and every wall will come falling down to the earth.

主耶和华说，我必命我的诸山发刀剑来攻击歌革。人都要用刀剑杀害弟兄。
And I will send to all my mountains for a sword against him, says the Lord: every man's sword will be against his brother.

我必用瘟疫和流血的事刑罚他。我也必将暴雨，大雹与火，并硫磺降与他和他的军队，并他所率领的众民。
And I will take up my cause against him with disease and with blood; and I will send down on him and on his forces and on the peoples who are with him, an overflowing shower and great ice-drops, fire, and burning.

我必显为大，显为圣，在多国人的眼前显现。他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will make my name great and make myself holy, and I will make myself clear to a number of nations; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

人子阿，你要向歌革发预言攻击他，说主耶和华如此说，罗施，米设，土巴的王歌革阿，我与你为敌。
And you, son of man, be a prophet against Gog, and say, These are the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

我必调转你，领你前往，使你从北方的极处上来，带你到以色列的山上。
And turning you round, I will be your guide, and make you come up from the inmost parts of the north; I will make you come on to the mountains of Israel:

我必从你左手打落你的弓，从你右手打掉你的箭。
And with a blow I will send your bow out of your left hand and your arrows falling from your right hand.

你和你的军队，并同着你的列国人，都必倒在以色列的山上。我必将你给各类的鸷鸟和田野的走兽作食物。
On the mountains of Israel you will come down, you and all your forces and the peoples who are with you: I will give you to cruel birds of every sort and to the beasts of the field to be their food.

你必倒在田野，因为我曾说过。这是主耶和华说的。
You will come down in the open field: for I have said it, says the Lord.

我要降火在玛各和海岛安然居住的人身上，他们就知道我是耶和华。
And I will send a fire on Magog, and on those who are living in the sea-lands without fear: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

我要在我民以色列中显出我的圣名，也不容我的圣名再被亵渎，列国人就知道我是耶和华以色列中的圣者。
And I will make clear my holy name among my people Israel; I will no longer let my holy name be made unclean: and the nations will be certain that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel.

主耶和华说，这日事情临近，也必成就，乃是我所说的日子。
See, it is coming and it will be done, says the Lord; this is the day of which I have given word.

住以色列城邑的人必出去捡器械，就是大小盾牌，弓箭，梃杖，枪矛，都当柴烧火，直烧七年，
And those who are living in the towns of Israel will go out and make fires of the instruments of war, burning the body-covers and the breastplates, the bows and the arrows and the sticks and the spears, and for seven years they will make fires of them:

甚至他们不必从田野捡柴，也不必从树林伐木。因为他们要用器械烧火，并且抢夺那抢夺他们的人，掳掠那掳掠他们的人。这是主耶和华说的。
And they will take no wood out of the field or have any cut down in the woods; for they will make their fires of the instruments of war: and they will take by force the property of those who took their property, and go off with the goods of those who took their goods, says the Lord.

当那日，我必将以色列地的谷，就是海东人所经过的谷，赐给歌革为坟地，使经过的人到此停步。在那里人必葬埋歌革和他的群众，就称那地为哈们歌革谷。
And it will come about in those days, that I will give to Gog a last resting-place there in Israel, in the valley of Abarim on the east of the sea: and those who go through will be stopped: and there Gog and all his people will be put to rest, and the place will be named, The valley of Hamon-gog.

以色列家的人必用七个月葬埋他们，为要洁净全地。
And the children of Israel will be seven months putting them in the earth, so as to make the land clean.

全地的居民都必葬埋他们。当我得荣耀的日子，这事必叫他们得名声。这是主耶和华说的。
And all the people of the land will put them in the earth; and it will be to their honour in the day when I let my glory be seen, says the Lord.

他们必分派人时常巡查遍地，与过路的人一同葬埋那剩在地面上的尸首，好洁净全地。过了七个月，他们还要巡查。
And they will put on one side men to do no other work but to go through the land and put in the earth the rest of those who are still on the face of the land, to make it clean: after seven months are ended they are to make a search.

巡查遍地的人要经过全地，见有人的骸骨，就在旁边立一标记，等葬埋的人来将骸骨葬在哈们歌革谷。
And while they go through the land, if anyone sees a man's bone, he is to put up a sign by the place till those who are doing the work have put it in the earth in the valley of Hamon-gog.

他们必这样洁净那地，并有一城名叫哈摩那。
And there they will put all the army of Gog in the earth. So they will make the land clean.

人子阿，主耶和华如此说，你要对各类的飞鸟和田野的走兽说，你们聚集来吧，要从四方聚到我为你们献祭之地，就是在以色列山上献大祭之地，好叫你们吃肉，喝血。
And you, son of man, this is what the Lord has said: Say to the birds of every sort and to all the beasts of the field, Get together and come; come together on every side to the offering which I am putting to death for you, a great offering on the mountains of Israel, so that you may have flesh for your food and blood for your drink.

你们必吃勇士的肉，喝地上首领的血，就如吃公绵羊，羊羔，公山羊，公牛，都是巴珊的肥畜。
The flesh of the men of war will be your food, and your drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of sheep and lambs, of he-goats, of oxen, all of them fat beasts of Bashan.

你们吃我为你们所献的祭，必吃饱了脂油，喝醉了血。
You will go on feasting on the fat till you are full, and drinking the blood till you are overcome with it, of my offering which I have put to death for you.

你们必在我席上饱吃马匹和坐车的人，并勇士和一切的战士。这是主耶和华说的。
At my table you will have food in full measure, horses and war-carriages, great men and all the men of war, says the Lord.

我必显我的荣耀在列国中。万民就必看见我所行的审判与我在他们身上所加的手。
And I will put my glory among the nations, and all the nations will see my punishments which I have put into effect, and my hand which I have put on them.

这样，从那日以后，以色列家必知道我是耶和华他们的神。
So the children of Israel will be certain that I am the Lord their God, from that day and for the future.

列国人也必知道以色列家被掳掠是因他们的罪孽。他们得罪我，我就掩面不顾，将他们交在敌人手中，他们便都倒在刀下。
And it will be clear to the nations that the children of Israel were taken away prisoners for their evil-doing; because they did wrong against me, and my face was covered from them: so I gave them up into the hands of their attackers, and they all came to their end by the sword.

我是照他们的污秽和罪过待他们，并且我掩面不顾他们。
In the measure of their unclean ways and their sins, so I did to them; and I kept my face covered from them.

主耶和华如此说，我要使雅各被掳的人归回，要怜悯以色列全家，又为我的圣名发热心。
For this cause the Lord has said, Now I will let the fate of Jacob be changed, and I will have mercy on all the children of Israel, and will take care of the honour of my holy name.

他们在本地安然居住，无人惊吓，是我将他们从万民中领回，从仇敌之地召来。我在许多国的民眼前，在他们身上显为圣的时候，他们要担当自己的羞辱和干犯我的一切罪。
And they will be conscious of their shame and of all the wrong which they have done against me, when they are living in their land with no sense of danger and with no one to be a cause of fear to them;


When I have taken them back from among the peoples and got them together out of the lands of their haters, and have made myself holy in them before the eyes of a great number of nations.

因我使他们被掳到外邦人中，后又聚集他们归回本地，他们就知道我是耶和华他们的神。我必不再留他们一人在外邦。
And they will be certain that I am the Lord their God, because I sent them away as prisoners among the nations, and have taken them together back to their land; and I have not let one of them be there any longer.

我也不再掩面不顾他们，因我已将我的灵浇灌以色列家。这是主耶和华说的。
And my face will no longer be covered from them: for I have sent the out-flowing of my spirit on the children of Israel, says the Lord.

我们被掳掠第二十五年，耶路撒冷城攻破后十四年，正在年初，月之初十日，耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在我身上，他把我带到以色列地。
In the twenty-fifth year after we had been taken away prisoners, in the first month of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the town was taken, on the very same day, the hand of the Lord was on me, and he took me there.

在神的异象中带我到以色列地，安置在至高的山上。在山上的南边有仿佛一座城建立。
In the visions of God he took me into the land of Israel, and put me down on a very high mountain, on which there was, as it seemed, a building like a town opposite me.

他带我到那里，见有一人，颜色（原文作形状）如铜，手拿麻绳和量度的竿，站在门口。
He took me there, and I saw a man, looking like brass, with a linen cord in his hand and a measuring rod: and he was stationed in the doorway.

那人对我说，人子阿，凡我所指示你的，你都要用眼看，用耳听，并要放在心上。我带你到这里来，特为要指示你。凡你所见的，你都要告诉以色列家。
And the man said to me, Son of man, see with your eyes and give hearing with your ears, and take to heart everything I am going to let you see; for in order that I might let you see them, you have come here: and give an account of all you see to the children of Israel.

我见殿四围有墙。那人手拿量度的竿，长六肘，每肘是一肘零一掌。他用竿量墙，厚一竿，高一竿。
And there was a wall on the outside of the house all round, and in the man's hand there was a measuring rod six cubits long by a cubit and a hand's measure: so he took the measure of the building from side to side, one rod; and from base to top, one rod.

他到了朝东的门，就上门的台阶，量门的这槛，宽一竿。又量门的那槛，宽一竿。
Then he came to the doorway looking to the east, and went up by its steps; and he took the measure of the doorstep, one rod wide.

又有卫房，每房长一竿，宽一竿，相隔五肘。门槛，就是挨着向殿的廊门槛，宽一竿。
And the watchmen's rooms were one rod long and one rod wide; and the space between the rooms was five cubits; the doorstep of the doorway, by the covered way of the doorway inside, was one rod.

他又量向殿门的廊子，宽一竿。
And he took the measure of the covered way of the doorway inside,

又量门廊，宽八肘，墙柱厚二肘。那门的廊子向着殿。
Eight cubits; and its uprights, two cubits; the covered way of the doorway was inside.

东门洞有卫房，这旁三间，那旁三间，都是一样的尺寸。这边的柱子和那边的柱子，也是一样的尺寸。
And the rooms of the doorway on the east were three on this side and three on that; all three were of the same size; and the uprights on this side and on that were of the same size.

他量门口，宽十肘，长十三肘。
And he took the measure of the opening of the doorway, ten cubits wide; and the way down the doorway was thirteen cubits;

卫房前展出的境界，这边一肘，那边一肘。卫房这边六肘，那边六肘。
And the space in front of the rooms, a cubit on this side and a cubit on that side; and the rooms six cubits on this side and six cubits on that.

又量门洞，从这卫房顶的后檐到那卫房顶的后檐，宽二十五肘。卫房门与门相对。
And he took the measure of the doorway from the back of one room to the back of the other, twenty-five cubits across, from door to door.

又量（量原文作造）廊子六十肘（七十经作二十肘），墙柱外是院子，有廊为界，在门洞两边。
And he took the measure of the covered way, twenty cubits; and opening from the covered way of the doorway was the open square round about.

从大门口到内廊前，共五十肘。
And from before the opening of the doorway to before the inner covered way of the doorway was fifty cubits.

卫房和门洞两旁柱间并廊子，都有严紧的窗棂。里边都有窗棂，柱上有雕刻的棕树。
And the rooms and their uprights had sloping windows inside the doorway all round, and in the same way the covered way had windows all round on the inside: and on every upright there were palm-trees.

他带我到外院，见院的四围有铺石地。铺石地上有屋子三十间。
Then he took me into the outer square, and there were rooms and a stone floor made for the open square all round: there were thirty rooms on the stone floor.

铺石地，就是矮铺石地在各门洞两旁，以门洞的长短为度。
And the stone floor was by the side of the doorways, and was as wide as the doorways were long, even the lower floor.

他从下门量到内院外，共宽一百肘，东面北面都是如此。
Then he took the measure of the square across, from before the lower doorway inside to before the inner doorway outside, one hundred cubits. And he took me in the direction of the north,

他量外院朝北的门，长宽若干。
And there was a doorway to the outer square, looking to the north; and he took the measure of it to see how wide and how long it was.

门洞的卫房，这旁三间，那旁三间。门洞的柱子和廊子，与第一门的尺寸一样。门洞长五十肘，宽二十五肘。
And it had three rooms on this side of it and three on that; its uprights and its covered ways were the same size as those of the first doorway: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

其窗棂和廊子，并雕刻的棕树，与朝东的门尺寸一样。登七层台阶上到这门，前面有廊子。
And its windows, and the windows of its covered ways, and its palm-trees, were the same as those of the doorway looking to the east; and there were seven steps up to it; and the covered way went inside.

内院有门与这门相对，北面东面都是如此。他从这门量到那门，共一百肘。
And there was a doorway to the inner square opposite the doorway on the north, like the doorway on the east; and he took the measure from doorway to doorway, a hundred cubits.

他带我往南去，见朝南有门，又照先前的尺寸量门洞的柱子和廊子。
And he took me to the south, and I saw a doorway looking to the south: and he took the measure of its rooms and its uprights and its covered ways by these measures.

门洞两旁与廊子的周围都有窗棂，和先量的窗棂一样。门洞长五十肘，宽二十五肘。
And there were windows in it and in the covered way all round, like the other windows: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

登七层台阶上到这门，前面有廊子。柱上有雕刻的棕树，这边一棵，那边一棵。
And there were seven steps up to it, and its covered way went inside: and it had palm-trees, one on this side and one on that, on its uprights.

内院朝南有门。从这门量到朝南的那门，共一百肘。
And there was a doorway to the inner square looking to the south: he took the measure from doorway to doorway to the south, a hundred cubits.

他带我从南门到内院，就照先前的尺寸量南门。
Then he took me to the inner square by the south doorway: and he took the measure of the south doorway by these measures;

卫房和柱子，并廊子都照先前的尺寸。门洞两旁与廊子的周围都有窗棂。门洞长五十肘，宽二十五肘。
And the rooms in it and the uprights and the covered ways, by these measures:

周围有廊子，长二十五肘，宽五肘。
And there were windows in it and in the covered way all round: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

廊子朝着外院，柱上有雕刻的棕树。登八层台阶上到这门。
The covered way was on the side nearest the outer square; and there were palm-trees on the uprights: and there were eight steps going up to it.

他带我到内院的东面，就照先前的尺寸量东门。
And he took me into the inner square facing the east: and he took the measure of the doorway by these measures;

卫房和柱子，并廊子都照先前的尺寸。门洞两旁与廊子的周围都有窗棂。门洞长五十肘，宽二十五肘。
And of the rooms in it and its uprights and its covered ways, by these measures: and there were windows in it and in the covered way round about: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

廊子朝着外院。门洞两旁的柱子都有雕刻的棕树。登八层台阶上到这门。
And the covered way was on the side nearest the outer square; there were palm-trees on the uprights, on this side and on that: and there were eight steps going up to it.

他带我到北门，就照先前的尺寸量那门，
And he took me to the north doorway: and he took the measure of it by these measures;

就是量卫房和柱子，并廊子。门洞周围都有窗棂。门洞长五十肘，宽二十五肘。
Its rooms, its uprights, and its covered way had the same measures, and its covered way had windows all round: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

廊柱朝着外院。门洞两旁的柱子都有雕刻的棕树。登八层台阶上到这门。
Its uprights were on the side nearest to the outer square; there were palm-trees on the uprights, on this side and on that: and there were eight steps going up to it.

门洞的柱旁有屋子和门。祭司（原文作他们）在那里洗燔祭牲。
And there was a room with a door in the covered way of the doorway, where the burned offering was washed.

在门廊内，这边有两张桌子，那边有两张桌子，在其上可以宰杀燔祭牲，赎罪祭牲，和赎愆祭牲。
And in the covered way of the doorway there were two tables on this side and two tables on that side, on which the burned offering and the sin-offering and the offering for error were put to death:

上到朝北的门口，这边有两张桌子，门廊那边也有两张桌子。
On the outer side, to the north, as one goes up to the opening of the doorway, were two tables.

门这边有四张桌子，那边有四张桌子，共八张。在其上祭司宰杀牺牲。
There were four tables on one side and four tables on the other, by the side of the doorway; eight tables, on which they put to death the beasts for the offerings.

为燔祭牲有四张桌子，是凿过的石头作成的，长一肘半，宽一肘半，高一肘。祭司将宰杀燔祭牲和平安祭牲所用的器皿放在其上。
And there were four tables for the burned offering, made of cut stone, one and a half cubits long, one and a half cubits wide and a cubit high, where the instruments were placed which were used for putting to death the burned offering and the beasts for the offerings.

有钩子，宽一掌，钉在廊内的四围。桌子上有牺牲的肉。
And they had edges all round as wide as a man's hand: and on the tables was the flesh of the offerings.

在北门旁，内院里有屋子，为歌唱的人而设。这屋子朝南。在南门旁，又有一间朝北（南原文作东）。
And he took me into the inner square, and there were two rooms in the inner square, one at the side of the north doorway, facing south; and one at the side of the south doorway, facing north.

他对我说，这朝南的屋子是为看守殿宇的祭司。
And he said to me, This room, facing south, is for the priests who have the care of the house.

那朝北的屋子是为看守祭坛的祭司。这些祭司是利未人中撒督的子孙，近前来事奉耶和华的。
And the room facing north is for the priests who have the care of the altar: these are the sons of Zadok, who, from among the sons of Levi, come near to the Lord to do the work of his house.

他又量内院，长一百肘，宽一百肘，是见方的。祭坛在殿前。
And he took the measure of the open square, a hundred cubits long and a hundred cubits wide, being square; and the altar was in front of the house.

于是他带我到殿前的廊子，量廊子的墙柱。这面厚五肘，那面厚五肘。门两旁，这边三肘，那边三肘。
Then he took me to the covered way before the house, and took the measure of its uprights, five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other: and the doorway was fourteen cubits wide; and the side-walls of the doorway were three cubits on one side and three cubits on the other.

廊子长二十肘，宽十一肘。上廊子有台阶。靠近墙柱又有柱子，这边一根，那边一根。
The covered way was twenty cubits long and twelve cubits wide, and they went up to it by ten steps; and there were pillars by the uprights, one on one side and one on the other.

他带我到殿那里量墙柱，这面厚六肘，那面厚六肘，宽窄与会幕相同。
And he took me to the Temple, and took the measure of the uprights, six cubits wide on one side and six cubits wide on the other.

门口宽十肘。门两旁，这边五肘，那边五肘。他量殿长四十肘，宽二十肘。
And the door-opening was ten cubits wide; and the side walls of the door-opening were five cubits on one side and five cubits on the other: and it was forty cubits long and twenty cubits wide.

他到内殿量墙柱，各厚二肘。门口宽六肘，门两旁各宽七肘。
And he went inside and took the measure of the uprights of the door-opening, two cubits: and the door-opening, six cubits; and the side-walls of the door-opening were seven cubits on one side and seven cubits on the other.

他量内殿，长二十肘，宽二十肘。他对我说，这是至圣所。
And by his measure it was twenty cubits long and twenty cubits wide in front of the Temple: and he said to me, This is the most holy place.

他又量殿墙，厚六肘。围着殿有旁屋，各宽四肘。
Then he took the measure of the wall of the house, which was six cubits; and of the side-rooms round the house, which were four cubits wide.

旁屋有三层，层叠而上，每层排列三十间。旁屋的梁木搁在殿墙坎上，免得插入殿墙。
And the side-rooms, room over room, were three times thirty; there were inlets in the wall of the house for the side-rooms round about, for supports in the wall of the house.

这围殿的旁屋越高越宽。因旁屋围殿悬叠而上，所以越上越宽，从下一层，由中一层，到上一层。
The side-rooms became wider as they went higher up the house, by the amount of the space let into the wall up round about the house, because of the inlets in the house; and one went up from the lowest floor by steps to the middle, and from the middle to the upper floor.

我又见围着殿有高月台。旁屋的根基，高足一竿，就是六大肘。
And I saw that the house had a stone floor all round; the bases of the side-rooms were a full rod of six great cubits high.

旁屋的外墙厚五肘。旁屋之外还有余地。
The wall supporting the side-rooms on the outside was five cubits thick: and there was a free space of five cubits between the side-rooms of the house.

在旁屋与对面的房屋中间有空地，宽二十肘。
And between the rooms was a space twenty cubits wide all round the house.

旁屋的门都向余地，一门向北，一门向南。周围的余地宽五肘。
And the free space had doors opening from the side-rooms, one door on the north and one door on the south: and the free space was five cubits wide all round.

在西面空地之后有房子，宽七十肘，长九十肘，墙四围厚五肘。
And the building which was in front of the separate place at the side to the west was seventy cubits wide; the wall of the building was five cubits thick all round and ninety cubits long.

这样，他量殿，长一百肘，又量空地和那房子并墙，共长一百肘。
And he took the measure of the house; it was a hundred cubits long; and the separate place and the building with its walls was a hundred cubits long;

殿的前面和两旁的空地，宽一百肘。
And the east front of the house and of the separate place was a hundred cubits wide.

他量空地后面的那房子，并两旁的楼廊，共长一百肘。
And he took the measure of the building in front of the separate place which was at the back of it, and the pillared walks on one side and on the other side; they were a hundred cubits long; and the Temple and the inner part and its outer covered way were covered in;

内殿，院廊，门槛，严紧的窗棂，并对着门槛的三层楼廊，从地到窗棂（窗棂都有蔽子），
And the sloping windows and the covered ways round all three of them were of shakiph-wood all round from the level of the earth up to the windows;

直到门以上，就是到内殿和外殿内外四围墙壁，都按尺寸用木板遮蔽。
And there was a roof over the doorway and as far as the inner house, and to the outside and on the wall all round, inside and outside.

墙上雕刻基路伯和棕树。每二基路伯中间有一棵棕树，每基路伯有二脸。
And it had pictured forms of winged beings and palm-trees; a palm-tree between two winged ones, and every winged one had two faces;

这边有人脸向着棕树，那边有狮子脸向着棕树，殿内周围都是如此。
So that there was the face of a man turned to the palm-tree on one side, and the face of a young lion on the other side: so it was made all round the house.

从地至门以上，都有基路伯和棕树。殿墙就是这样。
From earth level up to the windows there were winged ones and palm-trees pictured on the wall.

殿的门柱是方的。至圣所的前面，形状和殿的形状一样。
...

坛是木头作的，高三肘，长二肘。坛角和坛面，并四旁，都是木头作的。他对我说，这是耶和华面前的桌子。
The altar was made of wood, and was three cubits high and two cubits long; it had angles, and its base and sides were of wood; and he said to me, This is the table which is before the Lord.

殿和至圣所的门各有两扇。
The Temple had two doors.

每扇分两扇，这两扇是摺叠的。这边门分两扇，那边门也分两扇。
And the holy place had two doors, and the doors had two turning leaves, two for one and two for the other.

殿的门扇上雕刻基路伯和棕树，与刻在墙上的一般。在外头廊前有木槛。
And on them were pictured winged ones and palm-trees, as on the walls; and a ... of wood was on the front of the covered way outside.

廊这边那边都有严紧的窗棂和棕树。殿的旁屋和槛就是这样。
And there were sloping windows and palm-trees on one side and on the other, on the sides of the covered way: and the side-rooms of the house and the ...

他带我出来向北，到外院，又带我进入圣屋。这圣屋一排顺着空地，一排与北边铺石地之屋相对。
And he took me out into the inner square in the direction of the north: and he took me into the rooms which were opposite the separate place and opposite the building to the north.

这圣屋长一百肘，宽五十肘，有向北的门。
On the north side it was a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide,

对着内院那二十肘宽之空地，又对着外院的铺石地，在第三层楼上有楼廊对着楼廊。
Opposite the space of twenty cubits which was part of the inner square, and opposite the stone floor of the outer square. There were covered ways facing one another on the third floor.

在圣屋前有一条夹道，宽十肘，长一百肘。房门都向北。
And in front of the rooms was a walk, ten cubits wide and a hundred cubits long; and their doors were facing north.

圣屋因为楼廊占去些地方，所以上层比中下两层窄些。
And the higher rooms were shorter: for the covered ways took up more space from these than from the lower and middle rooms.

圣屋有三层，却无柱子，不像外院的屋子有柱子。所以上层比中下两层更窄。
For they were on three floors, and they had no pillars like the pillars of the outer square; so the highest was narrower than the lowest and middle floors from the earth level.

圣屋外，东边有墙，靠着外院，长五十肘。
And the wall which went outside by the side of the rooms, in the direction of the outer square in front of the rooms, was fifty cubits long.

靠着外院的圣屋长五十肘。殿北面的圣屋长一百肘。
For the rooms in the outer square were fifty cubits long: and in front of the Temple was a space of a hundred cubits.

在圣屋以下，东头有进入之处，就是从外院进入之处。
And under these rooms was the way in from the east side, as one goes into them from the outer square at the head of the outer wall.

向南（原文作东）在内院墙里有圣屋，一排与铺石地之屋相对，一排顺着空地。
(And he took me) to the south, and in front of the separate place and in front of the building there were rooms.

这圣屋前的夹道与北边圣屋的夹道长宽一样。出入之处与北屋门的样式相同。
And there was a walk in front of them like that by the rooms on the north; they were equally long and wide; and the ways out of them were the same in design and had the same sort of doors.

正在墙前，夹道的东头，有门可以进入，与向南圣屋的门一样。
And under the rooms on the south was a door at the head of the outer wall in the direction of the east as one goes in.

他对我说，顺着空地的南屋北屋，都是圣屋。亲近耶和华的祭司当在那里吃至圣的物，也当在那里放至圣的物，就是素祭，赎罪祭，和赎愆祭，因此处为圣。
And he said to me, The north rooms and the south rooms in front of the separate place are the holy rooms, where the priests who come near the Lord take the most holy things for their food: there the most holy things are placed, with the meal offering and the sin-offering and the offering for error; for the place is holy.

祭司进去出了圣所的时候，不可直到外院，但要在圣屋放下他们供职的衣服，因为是圣衣。要穿上别的衣服才可以到属民的外院。
When the priests go in, they may not go out of the holy place into the outer square, and there they are to put the robes in which they do the work of the Lord's house, for they are holy: and they have to put on other clothing before they come near that which has to do with the people.

他量完了内殿，就带我出朝东的门，量院的四围。
And when he had come to the end of measuring the inner house, he took me out to the doorway looking to the east, and took its measure all round.

他用量度的竿量四围，量东面五百肘（原文作竿本章下同），
He went round and took the measure of it on the east side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured with the rod all round.

用竿量北面五百肘，
And he went round and took the measure of it on the north side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured with the rod all round.

用竿量南面五百肘，
And he went round and took the measure of it on the south side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured with the rod all round.

又转到西面，用竿量五百肘。
And he went round and took the measure of it on the west side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured with the rod all round.

他量四面，四围有墙，长五百肘，宽五百肘，为要分别圣地与俗地。
He took its measure on the four sides: and it had a wall all round, five hundred long and five hundred wide, separating what was holy from what was common.

以后，他带我到一座门，就是朝东的门。
And he took me to the doorway looking to the east:

以色列神的荣光从东而来。他的声音如同多水的声音。地就因他的荣耀发光。
And there was the glory of the God of Israel coming from the way of the east: and his voice was like the sound of great waters, and the earth was shining with his glory.

其状如从前他来灭城的时候我所见的异象，那异象如我在迦巴鲁河边所见的异象，我就俯伏在地。
And the vision which I saw was like the vision I had seen when he came for the destruction of the town: and like the vision which I saw by the river Chebar; and I went down on my face.

耶和华的荣光从朝东的门照入殿中。
And the glory of the Lord came into the house by the way of the doorway looking to the east.

灵将我举起，带入内院，不料，耶和华的荣光充满了殿。
And the spirit, lifting me up, took me into the inner square; and I saw that the house was full of the glory of the Lord.

我听见有一位从殿中对我说话。有一人站在我旁边。
And the voice of one talking to me came to my ears from inside the house; and the man was by my side.

他对我说，人子阿，这是我宝座之地，是我脚掌所踏之地。我要在这里住，在以色列人中直到永远。以色列家和他们的君王必不再玷污我的圣名，就是行邪淫，在锡安的高处葬埋他们君王的尸首，
And he said to me, Son of man, this is the place where the seat of my power is and the resting-place of my feet, where I will be among the children of Israel for ever: and no longer will the people of Israel make my holy name unclean, they or their kings, by their loose ways and by the dead bodies of their kings;

使他们的门槛挨近我的门槛，他们的门框挨近我的门框。他们与我中间仅隔一墙，并且行可憎的事，玷污了我的圣名，所以我发怒灭绝他们。
By putting their doorstep by my doorstep, and the pillar of their door by the pillar of my door, with only a wall between me and them; and they have made my holy name unclean by the disgusting things which they have done: so in my wrath I sent destruction on them.

现在他们当从我面前远除邪淫和他们君王的尸首，我就住在他们中间直到永远。
Now let them put their loose ways and the dead bodies of their kings far from me, and I will be among them for ever.

人子阿，你要将这殿指示以色列家，使他们因自己的罪孽惭愧，也要他们量殿的尺寸。
You, son of man, give the children of Israel an account of this house, so that they may be shamed because of their evil-doing: and let them see the vision of it and its image.

他们若因自己所行的一切事惭愧，你就将殿的规模，样式，出入之处，和一切形状，典章，礼仪，法则指示他们，在他们眼前写上，使他们遵照殿的一切规模典章去作。
And they will be shamed by what they have done; so give them the knowledge of the form of the house and its structure, and the ways out of it and into it, and all its laws and its rules, writing it down for them: so that they may keep all its laws and do them.

殿的法则乃是如此，殿在山顶上，四围的全界要称为至圣。这就是殿的法则。
This is the law of the house: On the top of the mountain all the space round it on every side will be most holy. See, this is the law of the house.

以下量祭坛，是以肘为度（这肘是一肘零一掌）。底座高一肘，边宽一肘，四围起边高一掌，这是坛的座。
And these are the measures of the altar in cubits: (the cubit being a cubit and a hand's measure;) its hollow base is a cubit high and a cubit wide, and it has an overhanging edge as wide as a hand-stretch all round it:

从底座到下层磴台，高二肘，边宽一肘。从小磴台到大磴台，高四肘，边宽一肘。
And from the base on the earth level to the lower shelf, the altar is two cubits high and a cubit wide; and from the smaller shelf to the greater shelf it is four cubits high and a cubit wide.

坛上的供台，高四肘。供台的四拐角上都有角。
And the fireplace is four cubits high: and coming up from the fireplace are the horns, a cubit high.

供台长十二肘，宽十二肘，四面见方。
And the fireplace is twelve cubits long and twelve cubits wide, square on its four sides.

磴台长十四肘，宽十四肘，四面见方。四围起边高半肘，底座四围的边宽一肘。台阶朝东。
And the shelf is fourteen cubits long and fourteen cubits wide, on its four sides; the edge round it is half a cubit; the base of it is a cubit all round, and its steps are facing the east.

他对我说，人子阿，主耶和华如此说，建造祭坛，为要在其上献燔祭洒血，造成的时候典章如下，
And he said to me, Son of man, the Lord God has said, These are the rules for the altar, when they make it, for the offering of burned offerings on it and the draining out of the blood.

主耶和华说，你要将一只公牛犊作为赎罪祭，给祭司利未人撒督的后裔，就是那亲近我，事奉我的。
You are to give to the priests, the Levites of the seed of Zadok, who come near to me, says the Lord God, to do my work, a young ox for a sin-offering.

你要取些公牛的血，抹在坛的四角和磴台的四拐角，并四围所起的边上。你这样洁净坛，坛就洁净了。
You are to take some of its blood and put it on the four horns and on the four angles of the shelf and on the edge all round: and you are to make it clean and free from sin.

你又要将那作赎罪祭的公牛犊烧在殿外，圣地之外预定之处。
And you are to take the ox of the sin-offering, and have it burned in the special place ordered for it in the house, outside the holy place.

次日，要将无残疾的公山羊献为赎罪祭。要洁净坛，像用公牛犊洁净的一样。
And on the second day you are to have a he-goat without any mark on it offered for a sin-offering; and they are to make the altar clean as they did with the young ox.

洁净了坛，就要将一只无残疾的公牛犊和羊群中一只无残疾的公绵羊
And after you have made it clean, let a young ox without a mark be offered, and a male sheep from the flock without a mark.

奉到耶和华前。祭司要撒盐在其上，献与耶和华为燔祭。
And you are to take them before the Lord, and the priests will put salt on them, offering them up for a burned offering to the Lord.

七日内，每日要预备一只公山羊为赎罪祭，也要预备一只公牛犊和羊群中的一只公绵羊，都要没有残疾的。
Every day for seven days you are to give a goat for a sin-offering: and let them give in addition a young ox and a male sheep from the flock without any mark on them.

七日祭司洁净坛，坛就洁净了。要这样把坛分别为圣。
For seven days they are to make offerings to take away sin from the altar and to make it clean; so they are to make it holy.

满了七日，自八日以后，祭司要在坛上献你们的燔祭和平安祭。我必悦纳你们。这是主耶和华说的。
And when these days have come to an end, then on the eighth day and after, the priests will make your burned offerings on the altar and your peace-offerings; and I will take pleasure in you, says the Lord.

他又带我回到圣地朝东的外门。那门关闭了。
And he took me back to the outer doorway of the holy place, looking to the east; and it was shut.

耶和华对我说，这门必须关闭，不可敞开，谁也不可由其中进入。因为耶和华以色列的神已经由其中进入，所以必须关闭。
And the Lord said to me, This doorway is to be shut, it is not to be open, and no man is to go in by it, because the Lord, the God of Israel, has gone in by it; and it is to be shut.

至于王，他必按王的位分，坐在其内，在耶和华面前吃饼。他必由这门的廊而入，也必由此而出。
But the ruler will be seated there to take his food before the Lord; he will go in by the covered way to the door, and will come out by the same way.

他又带我由北门来到殿前。我观看，见耶和华的荣光充满耶和华的殿，我就俯伏在地。
And he took me to the north doorway in front of the house; and, looking, I saw that the house of the Lord was full of the glory of the Lord; and I went down on my face.

耶和华对我说，人子阿，我对你所说耶和华殿中的一切典章法则，你要放在心上，用眼看，用耳听，并要留心殿宇和圣地一切出入之处。
And the Lord said to me, Son of man, take to heart, and let your eyes see and your ears be open to everything I say to you about all the rules of the house of the Lord and all its laws; and take note of the ways into the house and all the ways out of the holy place.

你要对那悖逆的以色列家说，主耶和华如此说，以色列家阿，你们行一切可憎的事，当够了吧。
And say to the uncontrolled children of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: O you children of Israel, let it be enough for you, among the disgusting things which you have done,

你们把我的食物，就是脂油和血献上的时候，将身心未受割礼的外邦人领进我的圣地，玷污了我的殿。又背了我的约，在你们一切可憎的事上，加上这一层。
To have let men from strange lands, without circumcision of heart or flesh, come into my holy place, making my house unclean; and to have made the offering of my food, even the fat and the blood; and in addition to all your disgusting ways, you have let my agreement be broken.

你们也没有看守我的圣物，却派别人在圣地替你们看守我所吩咐你们的。
And you have not taken care of my holy things; but you have put them as keepers to take care of my work in my holy place.

主耶和华如此说，以色列中的外邦人，就是身心未受割礼的，都不可入我的圣地。
For this cause the Lord has said, No man from a strange land, without circumcision of heart and flesh, of all those who are living among the children of Israel, is to come into my holy place.

当以色列人走迷的时候，有利未人远离我，就是走迷离开我，随从他们的偶像，他们必担当自己的罪孽。
But as for the Levites, who went far from me, when Israel went out of the right way, turning away from me to go after their images; their punishment will come on them.

然而他们必在我的圣地当仆役，照管殿门，在殿中供职。必为民宰杀燔祭牲和平安祭牲，必站在民前伺候他们。
But they may be caretakers in my holy place, and overseers at the doors of the house, doing the work of the house: they will put to death the burned offering and the beasts offered for the people, and they will take their place before them as their servants.

因为这些利未人曾在偶像前伺候这民，成了以色列家罪孽的绊脚石，所以我向他们起誓，他们必担当自己的罪孽。这是主耶和华说的。
Because they did this work for them before their images, and became a cause of sin to the children of Israel; for this cause my hand has been lifted up against them, says the Lord, and their punishment will be on them.

他们不可亲近我，给我供祭司的职分，也不可挨近我的一件圣物，就是至圣的物。他们却要担当自己的羞辱和所行可憎之事的报应。
And they will not come near me to do the work of priests to me, or come near any of my holy things, or the things which are most holy: but their shame will be on them, and the punishment for the disgusting things which they have done.

然而我要使他们看守殿宇，办理其中的一切事，并作其内一切当作之工。
But I will make them responsible for the care of the house and all its work and everything which is done in it.

以色列人走迷离开我的时候，祭司利未人撒督的子孙仍看守我的圣所。他们必亲近我，事奉我，并且侍立在我面前，将脂油与血献给我。这是主耶和华说的。
But as for the priests, the sons of Zadok, who took care of my holy place when the children of Israel were turned away from me, they are to come near me to do my work, they will take their places before me, offering to me the fat and the blood, says the Lord;

他们必进入我的圣所，就近我的桌前事奉我，守我所吩咐的。
They are to come into my holy place and they are to come near to my table, to do my work and have the care of my house.

他们进内院门必穿细麻衣。在内院门和殿内供职的时候不可穿羊毛衣服。
And when they come in by the doorways of the inner square, they are to be clothed in linen robes; there is to be no wool on them while they are doing my work in the doorway of the inner square and inside the house.

他们头上要戴细麻布裹头巾，腰穿细麻布裤子。不可穿使身体出汗的衣服。
They are to have linen head-dresses on their heads and linen trousers on their legs, and they are to have nothing round them to make their skin wet with heat.

他们出到外院的民那里，当脱下供职的衣服，放在圣屋内，穿上别的衣服，免得因圣衣使民成圣。
And when they go out into the outer square to the people, they are to take off the robes in which they do the work of priests, and put them away in the holy rooms, and put on other clothing, so that the people may not be made holy by their robes.

不可剃头，也不可容发绺长长，只可剪发。
They are not to have all the hair cut off their heads, and they are not to let their hair get long, but they are to have the ends of their hair cut.

祭司进内院的时候都不可喝酒。
The priests are not to take wine when they go into the inner square.

不可娶寡妇和被休的妇人为妻，只可娶以色列后裔中的处女，或是祭司遗留的寡妇。
And they are not to take as wives any widow or woman whose husband has put her away: but they may take virgins of the seed of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.

他们要使我的民知道圣俗的分别，又使他们分辨洁净的和不洁净的。
And they are to make clear to my people the division between what is holy and what is common, and to give them the knowledge of what is clean and what is unclean.

有争讼的事，他们应当站立判断，要按我的典章判断。在我一切的节期必守我的律法，条例，也必以我的安息日为圣日。
In any cause, they are to be in the position of judges, judging in harmony with my decisions: they are to keep my laws and my rules in all my fixed feasts; and they are to keep my Sabbaths holy.

他们不可挨近死尸沾染自己，只可为父亲，母亲，儿子，女儿，弟兄，和未嫁人的姐妹沾染自己。
They are not to come near any dead person so as to become unclean: but for a father or mother or son or daughter or brother or for a sister who has no husband, they may make themselves unclean.

祭司洁净之后，必再计算七日。
And after he has been made clean, seven days are to be numbered for him.

当他进内院，进圣所，在圣所中事奉的日子，要为自己献赎罪祭。这是主耶和华说的。
And on the day when he goes into the inner square, to do the work of the holy place, he is to make his sin-offering, says the Lord.

祭司必有产业，我是他们的产业。不可在以色列中给他们基业。我是他们的基业。
And they are to have no heritage; I am their heritage: you are to give them no property in Israel; I am their property.

素祭，赎罪祭，和赎愆祭他们都可以吃，以色列中一切永献的物都要归他们。
Their food is to be the meal offering and the sin-offering and the offering for error; and everything given specially to the Lord in Israel will be theirs.

首先初熟之物和一切所献的供物都要归给祭司。你们也要用初熟的麦子磨面给祭司。这样，福气就必临到你们的家了。
And the best of all the first-fruits of everything, and every offering which is lifted up of all your offerings, will be for the priests: and you are to give the priest the first of your bread-making, so causing a blessing to come on your house.

无论是鸟是兽，凡自死的，或是撕裂的，祭司都不可吃。
The priests may not take for food any bird or beast which has come to a natural death or whose death has been caused by another animal.

你们拈阄分地为业，要献上一分给耶和华为圣供地，长二万五千肘，宽一万肘。这分以内，四围都为圣地。
And when you are making a distribution of the land, by the decision of the Lord, for your heritage, you are to make an offering to the Lord of a part of the land as holy: it is to be twenty-five thousand long and twenty thousand wide: all the land inside these limits is to be holy.

其中有作为圣所之地，长五百肘，宽五百肘，四面见方。四围再有五十肘为郊野之地。
Of this, a square five hundred long and five hundred wide is to be for the holy place, with a space of fifty cubits all round it.

要以肘为度量地，长二万五千肘，宽一万肘。其中有圣所，是至圣的。
And of this measure, let a space be measured, twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide: in it there will be the holy place, even the most holy.

这是全地的一分圣地，要归与供圣所职事的祭司，就是亲近事奉耶和华的，作为他们房屋之地与圣所之圣地。
This holy part of the land is to be for the priests, the servants of the holy place, who come near to the Lord to do his work; it is to be a place for their houses and for grass-land and for cattle.

又有一分，长二万五千肘，宽一万肘，要归与在殿中供职的利未人，作为二十间房屋之业。
A space of land twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide is to be for the Levites, the servants of the house, a property for themselves, for towns for their living-places.

也要分定属城的地业，宽五千肘，长二万五千肘，挨着那分圣供地，要归以色列全家。
And as the property for the town you are to have a part five thousand wide and twenty-five thousand long, by the side of the offering of the holy part of the land: this is to be for all the children of Israel.

归王之地要在圣供地和属城之地的两旁，就是圣供地和属城之地的旁边，西至西头，东至东头，从西到东，其长与每支派的分一样。
And for the ruler there is to be a part on one side and on the other side of the holy offering and of the property of the town, in front of the holy offering and in front of the property of the town on the west of it and on the east: measured in the same line as one of the parts of the land, from its limit on the west to its limit on the east of the land.

这地在以色列中必归王为业。我所立的王必不再欺压我的民，却要按支派将地分给以色列家。
And this will be his heritage in Israel: and my rulers will no longer be cruel masters to my people; but they will give the land as a heritage to the children of Israel by their tribes.

主耶和华如此说，以色列的王阿，你们应当知足，要除掉强暴和抢夺的事，施行公平和公义，不再勒索我的民。这是主耶和华说的。
This is what the Lord has said: Let this be enough for you, O rulers of Israel: let there be an end of violent behaviour and wasting; do what is right, judging uprightly; let there be no more driving out of my people, says the Lord.

你们要用公道天平，公道伊法，公道吧特。
Have true scales and a true ephah and a true bath.

伊法与吧特大小要一样。吧特可盛贺梅珥十分之一，伊法也可盛贺梅珥十分之一，都以贺梅珥的大小为准。
The ephah and the bath are to be of the same measure, so that the bath is equal to a tenth of a homer, and the ephah to a tenth of a homer: the unit of measure is to be a homer.

舍客勒是二十季拉。二十舍客勒，二十五舍客勒，十五舍客勒，为你们的弥那。
And the shekel is to be twenty gerahs: five shekels are five, and ten shekels are ten, and your maneh is to be fifty shekels

你们当献的供物乃是这样，一贺梅珥麦子要献伊法六分之一。一贺梅珥大麦要献伊法六分之一。
This is the offering you are to give: a sixth of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and a sixth of an ephah out of a homer of barley;

你们献所分定的油，按油的吧特，一柯珥油要献吧特十分之一。原来十吧特就是一贺梅珥。
And the fixed measure of oil is to be a tenth of a bath from the cor, for ten baths make up the cor;

从以色列滋润的草场上每二百羊中，要献一只羊羔。这都可作素祭，燔祭，平安祭，为民赎罪。这是主耶和华说的。
And one lamb from the flock out of every two hundred, from all the families of Israel, for a meal offering and for a burned offering and for peace-offerings, to take away their sin, says the Lord.

此地的民都要奉上这供物给以色列中的王。
All the people are to give this offering to the ruler.

王的本分是在节期，月朔，安息日，就是以色列家一切的节期，奉上燔祭，素祭，奠祭。他要预备赎罪祭，素祭，燔祭，和平安祭，为以色列家赎罪。
And the ruler will be responsible for the burned offering and the meal offering and the drink offering, at the feasts and the new moons and the Sabbaths, at all the fixed feasts of the children of Israel: he will give the sin-offering and meal offering and burned offering and the peace-offerings, to take away the sin of the children of Israel.

主耶和华如此说，正月初一日，你要取无残疾的公牛犊，洁净圣所。
This is what the Lord has said: In the first month, on the first day of the month, you are to take a young ox without any mark on him, and you are to make the holy place clean.

祭司要取些赎罪祭牲的血，抹在殿的门柱上和坛磴台的四角上，并内院的门框上。
And the priest is to take some of the blood of the sin-offering and put it on the uprights at the sides of the doors of the house, and on the four angles of the shelf of the altar, and on the sides of the doorway of the inner square.

本月初七日（七十经作七月初一日）也要为误犯罪的，和愚蒙犯罪的如此行，为殿赎罪。
And this you are to do on the seventh day of the month for everyone who is in error and for the feeble-minded: you are to make the house free from sin.

正月十四日，你们要守逾越节，守节七日，要吃无酵饼。
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, you are to have the Passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread is to be your food.

当日，王要为自己和国内的众民预备一只公牛作赎罪祭。
And on that day the ruler is to give for himself and for all the people of the land an ox for a sin-offering.

这节的七日，每日他要为耶和华预备无残疾的公牛七只，公绵羊七只为燔祭。每日又要预备公山羊一只为赎罪祭。
And on the seven days of the feast he is to give a burned offering to the Lord, seven oxen and seven sheep without any mark on them, every day for seven days; and a he-goat every day for a sin-offering.

他也要预备素祭，就是为一只公牛同献一伊法细面，为一只公绵羊同献一伊法细面，每一伊法细面加油一欣。
And he is to give a meal offering, an ephah for every ox and an ephah for every sheep and a hin of oil to every ephah.

七月十五日守节的时候，七日他都要如此行，照逾越节的赎罪祭，燔祭，素祭，和油的条例一样。
In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month, at the feast, he is to give the same for seven days; the sin-offering, the burned offering, the meal offering, and the oil as before.

主耶和华如此说，内院朝东的门，在办理事务的六日内必须关闭。惟有安息日和月朔必须敞开。
This is what the Lord has said: The doorway of the inner square looking to the east is to be shut on the six working days; but on the Sabbath it is to be open, and at the time of the new moon it is to be open.

王要从这门的廊进入，站在门框旁边。祭司要为他预备燔祭和平安祭，他就要在门槛那里敬拜，然后出去。这门直到晚上不可关闭。
And the ruler is to go in through the covered way of the outer doorway outside, and take his place by the pillar of the doorway, and the priests will make his burned offering and his peace-offerings and he will give worship at the doorstep of the doorway; then he will go out, and the door will not be shut till the evening.

在安息日和月朔，国内的居民要在这门口，耶和华面前敬拜。
And the people of the land are to give worship at the door of that doorway before the Lord on the Sabbaths and at the new moons.

安息日，王所献与耶和华的燔祭要用无残疾的羊羔六只，无残疾的公绵羊一只。
And the burned offering offered to the Lord by the ruler on the Sabbath day is to be six lambs without a mark on them and a male sheep without a mark;

同献的素祭要为公绵羊献一伊法细面，为羊羔照他的力量而献，一伊法细面加油一欣。
And the meal offering is to be an ephah for the sheep, and for the lambs whatever he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

当月朔，要献无残疾的公牛犊一只，羊羔六只，公绵羊一只，都要无残疾的。
And at the time of the new moon it is to be a young ox of the herd without a mark on him, and six lambs and a male sheep, all without a mark:

他也要预备素祭，为公牛献一伊法细面，为公绵羊献一伊法细面，为羊羔照他的力量而献，一伊法细面加油一欣。
And he is to give a meal offering, an ephah for the ox and an ephah for the sheep, and for the lambs whatever he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

王进入的时候必由这门的廊而入，也必由此而出。
And when the ruler comes in, he is to go in through the covered way of the doorway, and he is to go out by the same way.

在各节期，国内居民朝见耶和华的时候，从北门进入敬拜的，必由南门而出。从南门进入的，必由北门而出。不可从所入的门而出，必要直往前行，由对门而出。
But when the people of the land come before the Lord at the fixed feasts, he who comes in by the north doorway to give worship is to go out by the south doorway; and he who comes in by the south doorway is to go out by the north doorway: he is not to come back by the doorway through which he went in, but is to go straight before him.

民进入，王也要在民中进入。民出去，王也要一同出去。
And the ruler, when they come in, is to come among them, and is to go out when they go out.

在节期和圣会的日子同献的素祭，要为一只公牛献一伊法细面，为一只公绵羊献一伊法细面，为羊羔照他的力量而献，一伊法细面加油一欣。
At the feasts and the fixed meetings the meal offerings are to be an ephah for an ox, and an ephah for a male sheep, and for the lambs whatever he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

王预备甘心献的燔祭或平安祭，就是向耶和华甘心献的，当有人为他开朝东的门。他就预备燔祭和平安祭，与安息日预备的一样，献毕就出去。他出去之后，当有人将门关闭。
And when the ruler makes a free offering, a burned offering or a peace-offering freely given to the Lord, the doorway looking to the east is to be made open for him, and he is to make his burned offering and his peace-offerings as he does on the Sabbath day: and he will go out; and the door will be shut after he has gone out.

每日，你要预备无残疾一岁的羊羔一只，献与耶和华为燔祭。要每早晨预备。
And you are to give a lamb a year old without any mark on it for a burned offering to the Lord every day: morning by morning you are to give it.

每早晨也要预备同献的素祭，细面一伊法六分之一，并油一欣三分之一，调和细面。这素祭要常献与耶和华为永远的定例。
And you are to give, morning by morning, a meal offering with it, a sixth of an ephah and a third of a hin of oil dropped on the best meal; a meal offering offered to the Lord at all times by an eternal order.

每早晨要这样预备羊羔，素祭，并油为常献的燔祭。
And they are to give the lamb and the meal offering and the oil, morning by morning, for a burned offering at all times.

主耶和华如此说，王若将产业赐给他的儿子，就成了他儿子的产业，那是他们承受为业的。
This is what the Lord has said: If the ruler gives a property to any of his sons, it is his heritage and will be the property of his sons; it is theirs for their heritage.

倘若王将一分产业赐给他的臣仆，就成了他臣仆的产业。到自由之年仍要归与王。至于王的产业，必归与他的儿子。
And if he gives a part of his heritage to one of his servants, it will be his till the year of making free, and then it will go back to the ruler; for it is his sons' heritage, and is to be theirs.

王不可夺取民的产业，以致驱逐他们离开所承受的。他要从自己的地业中，将产业赐给他儿子，免得我的民分散，各人离开所承受的。
And the ruler is not to take the heritage of any of the people, driving them out of their property; he is to give a heritage to his sons out of the property which is his: so that my people may not be sent away from their property.

那带我的，将我从门旁进入之处，领进为祭司预备的圣屋，是朝北的，见后头西边有一块地。
And he took me through by the way in at the side of the doorway into the holy rooms which are the priests', looking to the north: and I saw a place at the side of them to the west.

他对我说，这是祭司煮赎愆祭，赎罪祭，烤素祭之地，免得带到外院，使民成圣。
And he said to me, This is the place where the offering for error and the sin-offering are to be cooked in water by the priests, and where the meal offering is to be cooked in the oven; so that they may not be taken out into the outer square to make the people holy.

他又带我到外院，使我经过院子的四拐角，见每拐角各有一个院子。
And he took me out into the outer square and made me go by the four angles of the square; and I saw that in every angle of the open square there was a space shut in.

院子四拐角的院子，周围有墙，每院长四十肘，宽三十肘。四拐角院子的尺寸都是一样，
In the four angles there were spaces walled in, forty cubits long and thirty wide; the four were of the same size.

其中周围有一排房子，房子内有煮肉的地方。
And there was a line of wall all round inside them, round all four, and boiling-places were made under it all round about.

他对我说，这都是煮肉的房子，殿内的仆役要在这里煮民的祭物。
And he said to me, These are the boiling-rooms, where the offering of the people is cooked by the servants of the house.

他带我回到殿门，见殿的门槛下有水往东流出（原来殿面朝东）。这水从槛下，由殿的右边，在祭坛的南边往下流。
And he took me back to the door of the house; and I saw that waters were flowing out from under the doorstep of the house on the east, for the house was facing east: and the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house, on the south side of the altar.

他带我出北门，又领我从外边转到朝东的外门，见水从右边流出。
And he took me out by the north doorway, and made me go round to the outside of the doorway looking to the east; and I saw waters running slowly out on the south side.

他手拿准绳往东出去的时候，量了一千肘，使我趟过水，水到踝子骨。
And the man went out to the east with the line in his hand, and after measuring a thousand cubits, he made me go through the waters, which came over my feet.

他又量了一千肘，使我趟过水，水就到膝。再量了一千肘，使我趟过水，水便到腰。
And again, measuring a thousand cubits, he made me go through the waters which came up to my knees. Again, measuring a thousand, he made me go through the waters up to the middle of my body.

又量了一千肘，水便成了河，使我不能趟过。因为水势涨起，成为可？？的水，不可趟的河。
Again, after his measuring a thousand, it became a river which it was not possible to go through: for the waters had become deep enough for swimming, a river it was not possible to go through.

他对我说，人子阿，你看见了什么。他就带我回到河边。
And he said to me, Son of man, have you seen this? Then he took me to the river's edge.

我回到河边的时候，见在河这边与那边的岸上有极多的树木。
And he took me back, and I saw at the edge of the river a very great number of trees on this side and on that.

他对我说，这水往东方流去，必下到亚拉巴，直到海。所发出来的水必流入盐海，使水变甜（原文作得医治下同）。
And he said to me, These waters are flowing out to the east part of the land and down into the Arabah; and they will go to the sea, and the waters will be made sweet.

这河水所到之处，凡滋生的动物都必生活，并且因这流来的水必有极多的鱼，海水也变甜了。这河水所到之处，百物都必生活。
And it will come about that every living and moving thing, wherever their streams come, will have life; and there will be very much fish because these waters have come there and have been made sweet: and everything wherever the river comes will have life.

必有渔夫站在河边，从隐基底直到隐以革莲，都作晒（或作张）网之处。那鱼各从其类，好像大海的鱼甚多。
And fishermen will take up their places by it: from En-gedi as far as En-eglaim will be a place for the stretching out of nets; the fish will be of every sort, like the fish of the Great Sea, a very great number.

只是泥泞之地与洼湿之处不得治好，必为盐地。
The wet places and the pools will not be made sweet; they will be given up to salt.

在河这边与那边的岸上必生长各类的树木。其果可作食物，叶子不枯干，果子不断绝。每月必结新果子，因为这水是从圣所流出来的。树上的果子必作食物，叶子乃为治病。
And by the edge of the river, on this side and on that, will come up every tree used for food, whose leaves will ever be green and its fruit will not come to an end: it will have new fruit every month, because its waters come out from the holy place: the fruit will be for food and the leaf will make well those who are ill.

主耶和华如此说，你们要照地的境界，按以色列十二支派分地为业。约瑟必得两分。
This is what the Lord has said: These are the limits by which you will take up your heritage in the land among the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph is to have two parts.

你们承受这地为业，要彼此均分。因为我曾起誓应许将这地赐与你们的列祖。这地必归你们为业。
And you are to make an equal division of it; as I gave my oath to your fathers to give it to you: for this land is to be your heritage.

地的四界乃是如此，北界从大海往希特伦，直到西达达口。
And this is to be the limit of the land: on the north side, from the Great Sea, in the direction of Hethlon, as far as the way into Hamath;

又往哈马，比罗他，西伯莲（西伯莲在大马色与哈马两界中间），到浩兰边界的哈撒哈提干。
To Zedad, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the limit of Damascus and the limit of Hazar-hatticon, which is on the limit of Hauran.

这样，境界从海边往大马色地界上的哈萨以难，北边以哈马地为界。这是北界。
And this is the limit from the sea in the direction of Hazar-enon; and the limit of Damascus is to the north, and on the north is the limit of Hamath. This is the north side.

东界在浩兰，大马色，基列，和以色列地的中间，就是约旦河。你们要从北界量到东海。这是东界。
And the east side will be from Hazar-enon, which is between Hauran and Damascus; and between Gilead and the land of Israel the Jordan will be the limit, to the east sea, to Tamar. This is the east side.

南界是从他玛到米利巴加低斯的水，延到埃及小河，直到大海。这是南界。
And the south side to the south will be from Tamar as far as the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the stream of Egypt, to the Great Sea. This is the south side, on the south.

西界就是大海，从南界直到哈马口对面之地。这是西界。
And the west side will be the Great Sea, from the limit on the south to a point opposite the way into Hamath. This is the west side.

你们要按着以色列的支派彼此分这地。
You will make a division of the land among you, tribe by tribe.

要拈阄分这地为业，归与自己和你们中间寄居的外人，就是在你们中间生养儿女的外人。你们要看他们如同以色列人中所生的一样。他们在以色列支派中要与你们同得地业
And you are to make a distribution of it, by the decision of the Lord, for a heritage to you and to the men from other lands who are living among you and who have children in your land: they will be the same to you as if they were Israelites by birth, they will have their heritage with you among the tribes of Israel.

外人寄居在哪支派中，你们就在那里分给他地业。这是主耶和华说的。
In whatever tribe the man from a strange land is living, there you are to give him his heritage, says the Lord.

众支派按名所得之地记在下面，从北头，由希特伦往哈马口，到大马色地界上的哈萨以难。北边靠着哈马地（各支派的地都有东西的边界），是但的一分。
Now these are the names of the tribes: from the north end, from the west on the way of Hethlon to the way into Hamath, in the direction of Hazar-enon, with the limit of Damascus to the north, by Hamath; and on the limit from the east side to the west side: Dan, one part.

挨着但的地界，从东到西，是亚设的一分。
And on the limit of Dan, from the east side to the west side: Asher, one part.

挨着亚设的地界，从东到西，是拿弗他利的一分。
And on the limit of Asher, from the east side to the west side: Naphtali, one part.

挨着拿弗他利的地界，从东到西，是玛拿西的一分。
And on the limit of Naphtali, from the east side to the west side: Manasseh, one part.

挨着玛拿西的地界，从东到西，是以法莲的一分。
And on the limit of Manasseh, from the east side to the west side: Ephraim, one part.

挨着以法莲的地界，从东到西，是流便的一分。
And on the limit of Ephraim, from the east side to the west side: Reuben, one part.

挨着流便的地界，从东到西，是犹大的一分。
And on the limit of Reuben, from the east side to the west side: Judah, one part.

挨着犹大的地界，从东到西，必有你们所当献的供地，宽二万五千肘。从东界到西界，长短与各分之地相同，圣地当在其中。
And on the limit of Judah, from the east side to the west side, will be the offering which you are to make, twenty-five thousand wide, and as long as one of the parts, from the east side to the west side: and the holy place will be in the middle of it.

你们献与耶和华的供地要长二万五千肘，宽一万肘。
The offering you will give to the Lord is to be twenty-five thousand long and twenty-five thousand wide.

这圣供地要归与祭司，北长二万五千肘，西宽一万肘，东宽一万肘，南长二万五千肘。耶和华的圣地当在其中。
And for these, that is the priests, the holy offering is to be twenty-five thousand long to the north, ten thousand wide to the west, ten thousand wide to the east and twenty-five thousand long to the south; and the holy place of the Lord will be in the middle of it.

这地要归与撒督的子孙中成为圣的祭司，就是那守我所吩咐的。当以色列人走迷的时候，他们不像那些利未人走迷了。
For the priests who have been made holy, those of the sons of Zadok who kept the orders I gave them, who did not go out of the right way when the children of Israel went from the way, as the Levites did,

这要归与他们为供地，是全地中至圣的。供地挨着利未人的地界。
Even for them will be the offering from the offering of the land, a thing most holy, on the limit of the land given to the Levites.

利未人所得的地要长二万五千肘，宽一万肘，与祭司的地界相等，都长二万五千肘，宽一万肘。
And the Levites are to have a part of the land equal to the limit of the priests', twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide, all of it together to be twenty-five thousand long and twenty thousand wide.

这地不可卖，不可换，初熟之物也不可归与别人，因为是归耶和华为圣的。
And they are not to let any of it go for a price, or give it in exchange; and the part of the land given to the Lord is not to go into other hands: for it is holy to the Lord.

这二万五千肘前面所剩下五千肘宽之地要作俗用，作为造城盖房郊野之地。城要在当中。
And the other five thousand, measured from side to side, in front of the twenty-five thousand, is to be for common use, for the town, for living in and for a free space: and the town will be in the middle of it.

城的尺寸乃是如此，北面四千五百肘，南面四千五百肘，东面四千五百肘，西面四千五百肘。
And these will be its measures: the north side, four thousand five hundred, and the south side, four thousand five hundred, and on the east side, four thousand five hundred, and on the west side, four thousand five hundred.

城必有郊野，向北二百五十肘，向南二百五十肘，向东二百五十肘，向西二百五十肘。
And the town will have a free space on the north of two hundred and fifty, on the south of two hundred and fifty, on the east of two hundred and fifty, and on the west of two hundred and fifty.

靠着圣供地的余地，东长一万肘，西长一万肘，要与圣供地相等。其中的土产要作城内工人的食物。
And the rest, in measure as long as the holy offering, will be ten thousand to the east and ten thousand to the west: and its produce will be for food for the workers of the town.

所有以色列支派中，在城内作工的，都要耕种这地。
It will be farmed by workers of the town from all the tribes of Israel.

你们所献的圣供地连归城之地，是四方的，长二万五千肘，宽二万五千肘。
The size of the offering all together is to be twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand: you are to make the holy offering a square, together with the property of the town.

圣供地连归城之地，两边的余地要归与王。供地东边，南北二万五千肘，东至东界，西边南北二万五千肘，西至西界，与各分之地相同，都要归王。圣供地和殿的圣地要在其中，
And the rest is to be for the prince, on this side and on that side of the holy offering and of the property of the town, in front of the twenty-five thousand to the east, as far as the east limit, and to the west, in front of the twenty-five thousand, as far as the west limit, and of the same measure as those parts; it will be the property of the prince: and the holy offering and holy place of the house will be in the middle of it.

并且利未人之地，与归城之地的东西两边延长之地（这两地在王地中间），就是在犹大和便雅悯两界中间，要归与王。
And the property of the Levites and the property of the town will be in the middle of the prince's property; between the limit of Judah's part and the limit of Benjamin's part will be for the prince.

论到其余的支派，从东到西，是便雅悯的一分。
And as for the rest of the tribes: from the east side to the west side: Benjamin, one part.

挨着便雅悯的地界，从东到西，是西缅的一分。
And on the limit of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side: Simeon, one part.

挨着西缅的地界，从东到西，是以萨迦的一分。
And on the limit of Simeon, from the east side to the west side: Issachar, one part.

挨着以萨迦的地界，从东到西，是西布伦的一分。
And on the limit of Issachar, from the east side to the west side: Zebulun, one part.

挨着西布伦的地界，从东到西，是迦得的一分。
And on the limit of Zebulun, from the east side to the west side: Gad one part.

迦得地的南界是从他玛到米利巴加低斯的水，延到埃及小河，直到大海。
And on the limit of Gad, on the south side and to the south of it, the limit will be from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the stream, to the Great Sea.

这就是你们要拈阄分给以色列支派为业之地，乃是他们各支派所得之分。这是主耶和华说的。
This is the land of which distribution is to be made by the decision of the Lord, among the tribes of Israel for their heritage, and these are their heritages, says the Lord.

城的北面四千五百肘。出城之处如下。
And these are the outskirts of the town: on the north side, four thousand five hundred by measure;

城的各门要按以色列支派的名字。北面有三门，一为流便门，一为犹大门，一为利未门。
And the doors of the town are to be named by the names of the tribes of Israel; three doors on the north, one for Reuben, one for Judah, one for Levi;

东面四千五百肘，有三门，一为约瑟门，一为便雅悯门，一为但门。
And at the east side, four thousand five hundred by measure, and three doors, one for Joseph, one for Benjamin, one for Dan;

南面四千五百肘，有三门，一为西缅门，一为以萨迦门，一为西布伦门。
And at the south side, four thousand five hundred by measure, and three doors, one for Simeon, one for Issachar, one for Zebulun;

西面四千五百肘，有三门，一为迦得门，一为亚设门，一为拿弗他利门。
At the west side, four thousand five hundred by measure, with their three doors, one for Gad, one for Asher, one for Naphtali.

城四围共一万八千肘。从此以后，这城的名字必称为耶和华的所在。
It is to be eighteen thousand all round: and the name of the town from that day will be, The Lord is there.