当乌西雅，约坦，亚哈斯，希西家，作犹大王的时候，亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚得默示，论到犹大和耶路撒冷。
The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which he saw about Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

天哪，要听，地阿，侧耳而听。因为耶和华说，我养育儿女，将他们养大，他们竟悖逆我。
Give ear, O heavens, and you, O earth, to the word which the Lord has said: I have taken care of my children till they became men, but their hearts have been turned away from me.

牛认识主人，驴认识主人的槽。以色列却不认识，我的民却不留意。
Even the ox has knowledge of its owner, and the ass of the place where its master puts its food: but Israel has no knowledge, my people give no thought to me.

？？，犯罪的国民，担着罪孽的百姓，行恶的种类，败坏的儿女。他们离弃耶和华，藐视以色列的圣者，与他生疏，往后退步。
O nation full of sin, a people weighted down with crime, a generation of evil-doers, false-hearted children: they have gone away from the Lord, they have no respect for the Holy One of Israel, their hearts are turned back from him.

你们为什么屡次悖逆，还要受责打吗？你们已经满头疼痛，全心发昏。
Why will you have more and more punishment? why keep on in your evil ways? Every head is tired and every heart is feeble.

从脚掌到头顶，没有一处完全的。尽是伤口，青肿，与新打的伤痕。都没有收口，没有缠裹，也没有用膏滋润。
The body, from head to foot, is all diseased; it is a mass of open wounds, marks of blows, and broken flesh: the flow of blood has not been stopped, and no oil has been put on the wounds.

你们的地土已经荒凉。你们的城邑被火焚毁。你们的田地，在你们眼前为外邦人所侵吞，既被外邦人倾覆，就成为荒凉。
Your country has become waste; your towns are burned with fire; as for your land, it is overturned before your eyes, made waste and overcome by men from strange lands.

仅存锡安城（城原文作女子），好像葡萄园的草棚，瓜田的茅屋，被围困的城邑。
And the daughter of Zion has become like a tent in a vine-garden, like a watchman's house in a field of fruit, like a town shut in by armies.

若不是万军之耶和华给我们稍留余种，我们早已像所多玛，蛾摩拉的样子了。
If the Lord of armies had not kept some at least of us safe, we would have been like Sodom, and the fate of Gomorrah would have been ours.

你们这所多玛的官长阿，要听耶和华的话。你们这蛾摩拉的百姓阿，要侧耳听我们神的训诲。
Give ear to the word of the Lord, you rulers of Sodom; let your hearts be turned to the law of our God, you people of Gomorrah.

耶和华说，你们所献的许多祭物，与我何益呢？公绵羊的燔祭，和肥畜的脂油，我已经够了。公牛的血，羊羔的血，公山羊的血，我都不喜悦。
What use to me is the number of the offerings which you give me? says the Lord; your burned offerings of sheep, and the best parts of fat cattle, are a weariness to me; I take no pleasure in the blood of oxen, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

你们来朝见我，谁向你们讨这些，使你们践踏我的院宇呢？
At whose request do you come before me, making my house unclean with your feet?

你们不要再献虚浮的供物。香品是我所憎恶的。月朔，和安息日，并宣召的大会，也是我所憎恶的。作罪孽，又守严肃会，我也不能容忍。
Give me no more false offerings; the smoke of burning flesh is disgusting to me, so are your new moons and Sabbaths and your holy meetings.

你们的月朔，和节期，我心里恨恶，我都以为麻烦。我担当，便不耐烦。
Your new moons and your regular feasts are a grief to my soul: they are a weight in my spirit; I am crushed under them.

你们举手祷告，我必遮眼不看。就是你们多多地祈祷，我也不听。你们的手都满了杀人的血。
And when your hands are stretched out to me, my eyes will be turned away from you: even though you go on making prayers, I will not give ear: your hands are full of blood.

你们要洗濯，自洁。从我眼前除掉你们的恶行。要止住作恶，
Be washed, make yourselves clean; put away the evil of your doings from before my eyes; let there be an end of sinning;

学习行善。寻求公平，解救受欺压的，给孤儿伸冤，为寡妇辨屈。
Take pleasure in well-doing; let your ways be upright, keep down the cruel, give a right decision for the child who has no father, see to the cause of the widow.

耶和华说，你们来，我们彼此辩论。你们的罪虽像朱红，必变成雪白。虽红如丹颜，必白如羊毛。
Come now, and let us have an argument together, says the Lord: how may your sins which are red like blood be white as snow? how may their dark purple seem like wool?

你们若甘心听从，必吃地上的美物。
If you will give ear to my word and do it, the good things of the land will be yours;

若不听从，反倒悖逆，必被刀剑吞灭。这是耶和华亲口说的。
But if your hearts are turned against me, I will send destruction on you by the sword; so the Lord has said.

可叹忠信的城，变为妓女。从前充满了公平，公义居在其中，现今却有凶手居住。
The upright town has become untrue; there was a time when her judges gave right decisions, when righteousness had a resting-place in her, but now she is full of those who take men's lives.

你的银子，变为渣滓，你的酒，用水搀对。
Your silver is no longer true metal, your wine is mixed with water.

你的官长居心悖逆，与盗贼作伴。各都喜爱贿赂，追求赃私。他们不为孤儿伸冤，寡妇的案件，也不得呈到他们面前。
Your chiefs have gone against the Lord, they have become friends of thieves; every one of them is looking for profit and going after rewards; they do not give right decisions for the child who has no father, and they do not let the cause of the widow come before them.

因此主万军之耶和华以色列的大能者说，哎，我要向我的对头雪恨，向我的敌人报仇。
For this reason the Lord, the Lord of armies, the Strong One of Israel, has said, I will put an end to my haters, and send punishment on those who are against me;

我必反手加在你身上，炼尽你的渣滓，除净你的杂质。
And my hand will again be on you, washing away what is unclean as with soap, and taking away all your false metal;

我也必复还你的审判官，像起初一样，复还你的谋士，像起先一般。然后你必称为公义之城，忠信之邑。
And I will give you judges again as at the first, and wise guides as in the past; then you will be named, The Town of Righteousness, the true town.

锡安必因公平得蒙救赎，其中归正的人，必因公义得蒙救赎。
Upright acts will be the price of Zion's forgiveness, and by righteousness will men be living there.

但悖逆的，和犯罪的，必一同败亡，离弃耶和华的，必致消灭。
But a common destruction will overtake sinners and evil-doers together, and those who have gone away from the Lord will be cut off.

那等人必因你们所喜爱的橡树抱愧，你们必因所选择的园子蒙羞。
For you will be put to shame because of the trees of your desire, and because of the gardens of your pleasure.

因为你们必如叶子枯干的橡树，好像无水浇灌的园子。
For you will be like a tree whose leaves have become dry, and like a garden without water.

有权势的必如麻瓤，他的工作，好像火星，都要一同焚毁，无人扑灭。
And the strong will be as food for the fire, and his work as a flame; and they will be burned together, with no one to put out the fire.

亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚得默示，论到犹大和耶路撒冷。
The word which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw about Judah and Jerusalem.

末后的日子，耶和华殿的山必坚立，超乎诸山，高举过于万岭。万民都要流归这山。
And it will come about in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord will be placed on the top of the mountains, and be lifted up over the hills; and all nations will come to it.

必有许多国的民前往，说，来吧，我们登耶和华的山。奔雅各神的殿。主必将他的道教训我们，我们也要行他的路。因为训诲必出于锡安，耶和华的言语，必出于耶路撒冷。
And the peoples will say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob: and he will give us knowledge of his ways, and we will be guided by his word; for out of Zion the law will go out, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

他必在列国中施行审判，为许多国民断定是非。他们要将刀打成犁头，把枪打成镰刀。这国不举刀攻击那国，他们也不再学习战事。
And he will be the judge between the nations, and the peoples will be ruled by his decisions: and their swords will be turned into plough-blades, and their spears into vine-knives: no longer will the nations be turning their swords against one another, and the knowledge of war will be gone for ever.

雅各家阿，来吧，我们在耶和华的光明中行走。
O family of Jacob, come, and let us go in the light of the Lord.

耶和华，你离弃了你百姓雅各家，是因他们充满了东方的风俗，作观兆的，像非利士人一样，并与外邦人击掌。
For you, O Lord, have given up your people, the family of Jacob, because they are full of the evil ways of the east, and make use of secret arts like the Philistines, and are friends with the children of strange countries.

他们的国满了金银，财宝也无穷，他们的地满了马匹，车辆也无数。
And their land is full of silver and gold, and there is no end to their stores; their land is full of horses, and there is no end to their carriages.

他们的地满了偶像。他们跪拜自己手所造的，就是自己指头所作的。
Their land is full of images; they give worship to the work of their hands, even to that which their fingers have made.

卑贱人屈膝，尊贵人下跪。所以不可饶恕他们。
And the poor man's head is bent, and the great man goes down on his face: for this cause there will be no forgiveness for their sin.

你当进入岩穴，藏在土中，躲避耶和华的惊吓，和他威严的荣光。
Go into a hole in the rock, covering yourselves with dust, in fear of the Lord, before the glory of his power.

到那日，眼目高傲的必降为卑，性情狂傲的都必屈膝。惟独耶和华被尊崇。
The high looks of man will be put to shame, and the pride of men will be made low, and only the Lord will be lifted up in that day.

必有万军耶和华降罚的一个日子，要临到骄傲狂妄的，一切自高的，都必降为卑。
For the day of the Lord of armies is coming on all the pride of men, and on all who are high and lifted up;

又临到利巴嫩高大的香柏树，和巴珊的橡树。
And on all the high trees of Lebanon, and on all the strong trees of Bashan;

又临到一切高山的峻岭。
And on all the high mountains, and on all the hills which are lifted up;

又临到高台和坚固城墙。
And on every high tower, and on every strong wall;

又临到他施的船只，并一切可爱的美物。
And on all the ships of Tarshish, and on all the fair boats.

骄傲的必屈膝，狂妄的必降卑。在那日，惟独耶和华被尊崇。
And the high looks of man will be put to shame, and the pride of men will be made low: and only the Lord will be lifted up in that day.

偶像必全然废弃
And the images will never be seen again.

耶和华兴起使地大震动的时候，人就进入石洞，进入土穴，躲避耶和华的惊吓，和他威严的荣光。
And men will go into cracks of the rocks, and into holes of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and before the glory of his power, when he comes out of his place, shaking the earth with his strength.

到那日，人必将为拜而造的金偶像，银偶像，抛给田鼠和蝙蝠。
In that day men will put their images of silver and of gold, which they made for worship, in the keeping of the beasts of the dark places;

到耶和华兴起使地大震动的时候，人好进入磐石洞中，和岩石穴里，躲避耶和华的惊吓，和他威严的荣光。
To take cover in the cracks of the rocks, and in the holes of the hills, for fear of the Lord, and before the glory of his power, when he comes out of his place, shaking the earth with his strength.

你们休要倚靠世人，他鼻孔里不过有气息。他在一切事上可算什么呢？
Have no more to do with man, whose life is only a breath, for he is of no value.

主万军之耶和华，从耶路撒冷和犹大，除掉众人所倚靠的，所仗赖的，就是所倚靠的粮，所仗赖的水。
For the Lord, the Lord of armies, is about to take away from Jerusalem and from Judah all their support; their store of bread and of water;

除掉勇士，和战士，审判官，和先知，占卜的，和长老。
The strong man and the man of war; the judge and the prophet; the man who has knowledge of secret arts, and the man who is wise because of his years;

五十夫长，和尊贵人。谋士，和有巧艺的，以及妙行法术的。
The captain of fifty, and the man of high position, and the wise guide, and the wonder-worker, and he who makes use of secret powers.

主说，我必使孩童作他们的首领，使婴孩辖管他们。
And I will make children their chiefs, and foolish ones will have rule over them.

百姓要彼此欺压，各人受邻舍的欺压。少年人必侮慢老年人，卑贱人必侮慢尊贵人。
And the people will be crushed, every one by his neighbour; the young will be full of pride against the old, and those of low position will be lifted up against the noble.

人在父家拉住弟兄，说，你有衣服，可以作我们的官长，这败落的事归在你手下吧。
When one man puts his hand on another in his father's house, and says, You have clothing, be our ruler and be responsible for us in our sad condition:

那时他必扬声说，我不作医治你们的人。因我家中没有粮食，也没有衣服。你们不可立我作百姓的官长。
Then he will say with an oath, I will not be a helper, for in my house there is no bread or clothing: I will not let you make me a ruler of the people.

耶路撒冷败落，犹大倾倒。因为他们的舌头，和行为，与耶和华反对，惹了他荣光的眼目。
For Jerusalem has become feeble, and destruction has come on Judah, because their words and their acts are against the Lord, moving the eyes of his glory to wrath.

他们的面色证明自己的不正。他们述说自己的罪恶，并不隐瞒，好像所多玛一样。他们有祸了。因为作恶自害。
Their respect for a man's position is a witness against them; and their sin is open to the view of all; like that of Sodom, it is not covered. A curse on their soul! for the measure of their sin is full.

你们要论义人说，他必享福乐。因为要吃自己行为所结的果子。
Happy is the upright man! for he will have joy of the fruit of his ways.

恶人有祸了。他必遭灾难。因为要照自己手所行的受报应。
Unhappy is the sinner! for the reward of his evil doings will come on him.

至于我的百姓，孩童欺压他们，妇女辖管他们。我的百姓阿，引导你的，使你走错，并毁坏你所行的道路。
As for my people, their ruler is acting like a child, and those who have authority over them are women. O my people, your guides are the cause of your wandering, turning your footsteps out of the right way.

耶和华起来辩论，站着审判众民。
The Lord is ready to take up his cause against his people, and is about to come forward as their judge.

耶和华必审问他民中的长老，和首领，说，吃尽葡萄园果子的，就是你们。向贫穷人所夺的，都在你们家中。
The Lord comes to be the judge of their responsible men and of their rulers: it is you who have made waste the vine-garden, and in your houses is the property of the poor which you have taken by force.

主万军之耶和华说，你们为何压制我的百姓，搓磨贫穷人的脸呢？
By what right are you crushing my people, and putting a bitter yoke on the necks of the poor? This is the word of the Lord, the Lord of armies.

耶和华又说，因为锡安的女子狂傲，行走挺项，卖弄眼目，俏步徐行，脚下玎铛。
Again, the Lord has said, Because the daughters of Zion are full of pride, and go with outstretched necks and wandering eyes, with their foot-chains sounding when they go:

所以主必使锡安的女子头长秃疮，耶和华又使她们赤露下体。
The Lord will send disease on the heads of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will let their secret parts be seen.

到那日，主必除掉她们华美的脚钏，发网，月牙圈。
In that day the Lord will take away the glory of their foot-rings, and their sun-jewels, and their moon-ornaments,

耳环，手镯，蒙脸的帕子。
The ear-rings, and the chains, and the delicate clothing,

华冠，足链，华带，香盒，符囊。
The head-bands, and the arm-chains, and the worked bands, and the perfume-boxes, and the jewels with secret powers,

戒指，鼻环。
The rings, and the nose-jewels,

吉服，外套，云肩，荷包。
The feast-day dresses, and the robes, and the wide skirts, and the handbags,

手镜，细麻衣，裹头巾，蒙身的帕子。
The looking-glasses, and the fair linen, and the high head-dresses, and the veils.

必有臭烂代替馨香，绳子代替腰带，光秃代替美发，麻衣系腰代替华服，烙伤代替美容。
And in the place of sweet spices will be an evil smell, and for a fair band a thick cord; for a well-dressed head there will be the cutting-off of the hair, and for a beautiful robe there will be the clothing of sorrow; the mark of the prisoner in place of the ornaments of the free.

你的男丁，必倒在刀下，你的勇士，必死在阵上。
Your men will be put to the sword, and your men of war will come to destruction in the fight.

锡安（原文作他）的城门必悲伤，哀号。他必荒凉坐在地上。
And in the public places of her towns will be sorrow and weeping; and she will be seated on the earth, waste and uncovered.

在那日，七个女人必拉住一个男人，说，我们吃自己的食物，穿自己的衣服。但求你许我们归你名下。求你除掉我们的羞耻。
And in that day seven women will put their hands on one man, saying, There will be no need for you to give us food or clothing, only let us go under your name, so that our shame may be taken away.

到那日，耶和华发生的苗，必华美尊荣，地的出产，必为以色列逃脱的人显为荣华茂盛。
In that day will the young growth of the Lord be beautiful in glory, and the fruit of the earth will be the pride of those who are still living in Israel.

主以公义的灵，和焚烧的灵，将锡安女子的污秽洗去，又将耶路撒冷中杀人的血除净，那时，剩在锡安留在耶路撒冷的，就是一切住耶路撒冷，在生命册上记名的，必称为圣。
And it will come about that the rest of the living in Zion, and of those who have been kept from destruction in Jerusalem, will be named holy, even everyone who has been recorded for life in Jerusalem:


When Zion has been washed from her sin by the Lord, and Jerusalem made clean from her blood by a judging and a burning wind.

耶和华也必在锡安全山，并各会众以上，使白日有烟云，黑夜有火焰的光。因为在全荣耀之上必有遮蔽。
And over every living-place on Mount Zion, all over all her meetings, the Lord will make a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all, the glory of the Lord will be a cover and a tent;

必有亭子，白日可以得荫避暑，也可以作为藏身之处，躲避狂风暴雨。
And a shade in the daytime from the heat, and a safe cover from storm and from rain.

我要为我所亲爱的唱歌，是我所爱者的歌，论他葡萄园的事。我所亲爱的有葡萄园，在肥美的山冈上。
Let me make a song about my loved one, a song of love for his vine-garden. My loved one had a vine-garden on a fertile hill:

他刨挖园子，捡去石头，栽种上等的葡萄树，在园中盖了一座楼，又凿出压酒池。指望结好葡萄，反倒结了野葡萄。
And after working the earth of it with a spade, he took away its stones, and put in it a very special vine; and he put up a watchtower in the middle of it, hollowing out in the rock a place for the grape-crushing; and he was hoping that it would give the best grapes, but it gave common grapes.

耶路撒冷的居民，和犹大人哪，请你们现今在我与我的葡萄园中断定是非。
And now, you people of Jerusalem and you men of Judah, be the judges between me and my vine-garden.

我为我葡萄园所作之外，还有什么可作的呢？我指望结好葡萄，怎么倒结了野葡萄呢？
Is there anything which might have been done for my vine-garden which I have not done? why then, when I was hoping for the best grapes did it give me common grapes?

现在我告诉你们，我要向我葡萄园怎样行。我必撤去篱笆，使它被吞灭，拆毁墙垣，使它被践踏。
And now, this is what I will do to my vine-garden: I will take away the circle of thorns round it, and it will be burned up; its wall will be broken down and the beasts of the field will go through it;

我必使它荒废，不再修理，不再锄刨。荆棘蒺藜倒要生长。我也必命云不降雨在其上。
And I will make it waste; its branches will not be touched with the knife, or the earth worked with the spade; but blackberries and thorns will come up in it: and I will give orders to the clouds not to send rain on it.

万军之耶和华的葡萄园，就是以色列家，他所喜爱的树，就是犹大人。他指望的是公平，谁知倒有暴虐（或作倒流人血）。指望的是公义，谁知倒有冤声。
For the vine-garden of the Lord of armies is the people of Israel, and the men of Judah are the plant of his delight: and he was looking for upright judging, and there was blood; for righteousness, and there was a cry for help.

祸哉，那些以房接房，以地连地，以致不留余地的，只顾自己独居境内。
Cursed are those who are joining house to house, and putting field to field, till there is no more living-space for any but themselves in all the land!

我耳闻万军之耶和华说，必有许多又大又美的房屋，成为荒凉，无人居住。
The Lord of armies has said to me secretly, Truly, numbers of great and fair houses will be waste, with no one living in them.

三十亩葡萄园只出一吧特酒，一贺梅珥谷种只结一伊法粮食。
For ten fields of vines will only give one measure of wine, and a great amount of seed will only give a small measure of grain.

祸哉，那些清早起来，追求浓酒，留连到夜深，甚至因酒发烧的人。
Cursed are those who get up early in the morning to give themselves up to strong drink; who keep on drinking far into the night till they are heated with wine!

他们在筵席上弹琴，鼓瑟，击鼓，吹笛，饮酒，却不顾念耶和华的作为，也不留心他手所作的。
And corded instruments and wind-instruments and wine are in their feasts: but they give no thought to the work of the Lord, and they are not interested in what his hands are doing.

所以我的百姓，因无知就被掳去。他们的尊贵人甚是饥饿，群众极其干渴。
For this cause my people are taken away as prisoners into strange countries for need of knowledge: and their rulers are wasted for need of food, and their loud-voiced feasters are dry for need of water.

故此，阴间扩张其欲，开了无限量的口。他们的荣耀，群众，繁华，并快乐的人，都落在其中。
For this cause the underworld has made wide its throat, opening its mouth without limit: and her glory, and the noise of her masses, and her loud-voiced feasters, will go down into it.

卑贱人被压服，尊贵人降为卑，眼目高傲的人也降为卑。
And the poor man's head is bent, and the great man goes down on his face, and the eyes of pride are put to shame:

惟有万军之耶和华，因公平而崇高，圣者神，因公义显为圣。
But the Lord of armies is lifted up as judge, and the Holy God is seen to be holy in righteousness.

那时羊羔必来吃草，如同在自己的草场，丰肥人的荒场被游行的人吃尽。
Then the lambs will get food as in their grass-lands, and the fat cattle will be feasting in the waste places.

祸哉，那些以虚假之细绳牵罪孽的人，他们又像以套绳拉罪恶。
Cursed are those who make use of ox-cords for pulling the evil thing, and the bands of a young ox for their sin!

说，任他急速行，赶快成就他的作为，使我们看看。任以色列圣者所谋划的临近成就，使我们知道。
Who say, Let him do his work quickly, let him make it sudden, so that we may see it: let the design of the Holy One of Israel come near, so that it may be clear to us.

祸哉，那些称恶为善，称善为恶，以暗为光，以光为暗，以苦为甜，以甜为苦的人。
Cursed are those who give the name of good to evil, and of evil to what is good: who make light dark, and dark light: who make bitter sweet, and sweet bitter!

祸哉，那些自以为有智慧，自看为通达的人。
Cursed are those who seem wise to themselves, and who take pride in their knowledge!

祸哉，那些勇于饮酒，以能力调浓酒的人。
Cursed are those who are strong to take wine, and great in making mixed drinks!

他们因受贿赂，就称恶人为义，将义人的义夺去。
Who for a reward give support to the cause of the sinner, and who take away the righteousness of the upright from him.

火苗怎样吞灭碎秸，干草怎样落在火焰之中，照样，他们的根必像朽物，他们的花，必像灰尘飞腾。因为他们厌弃万军之耶和华的训诲，藐视以色列圣者的言语。
For this cause, as the waste of the grain is burned up by tongues of fire, and as the dry grass goes down before the flame, so their root will be like the dry stems of grain, and their flower will go up in dust: because they have gone against the law of the Lord of armies, and have given no honour to the word of the Holy One of Israel.

所以耶和华的怒气向他的百姓发作，他的手伸出攻击他们，山岭就震动，他们的尸首在街市上好像粪土。虽然如此，他的怒气还未转消，他的手仍伸不缩。
For this reason the wrath of the Lord has been burning against his people, and his hand has been stretched out against them in punishment, and the hills were shaking, and their dead bodies were like waste in the open places of the town.

他必竖立大旗，招远方的国民，发丝声叫他们从地极而来。看哪，他们必急速奔来。
And he will let a flag be lifted up as a sign to a far-off nation, whistling to them from the ends of the earth: and they will come quickly and suddenly.

其中没有疲倦的，绊跌的，没有打盹的，睡觉的。腰带并不放松，鞋带也不折断。
There is no weariness among them, and no man is feeble-footed: they come without resting or sleeping, and the cord of their shoes is not broken.

他们的箭快利，弓也上了弦。马蹄算如坚石，车轮好像旋风。
Their arrows are sharp, and every bow is bent: the feet of their horses are like rock, and their wheels are like a rushing storm.

他们要吼叫像母狮子，咆哮像少壮狮子。他们要咆哮抓食，坦然叼去，无人救回。
The sound of their armies will be like the voice of a lion, and their war-cry like the noise of young lions: with loud cries they will come down on their food and will take it away safely, and there will be no one to take it out of their hands.

那日他们要向以色列人吼叫，像海浪？？訇。人若望地，只见黑暗艰难。光明在云中变为昏暗。
And his voice will be loud over him in that day like the sounding of the sea: and if a man's eyes are turned to the earth, it is all dark and full of trouble; and the light is made dark by thick clouds.

当乌西雅王崩的那年，我见主坐在高高的宝座上。他的衣裳垂下，遮满圣殿。
In the year of King Uzziah's death I saw the Lord seated in his place, high and lifted up, and the Temple was full of the wide skirts of his robe.

其上有撒拉弗侍立。各有六个翅膀。用两个翅膀遮脸，两个翅膀遮脚，两个翅膀飞翔。
Over him were the winged ones: every one had six wings; two for covering his face, two for covering his feet, and two for flight.

彼此呼喊说，圣哉，圣哉，圣哉，万军之耶和华。他的荣光充满全地。
And one said in a loud voice to another, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of armies: all the earth is full of his glory.

因呼喊者的声音，门槛的根基震动，殿充满了烟云。
And the bases of the door-pillars were shaking at the sound of his cry, and the house was full of smoke.

那时我说，祸哉，我灭亡了。因为我是嘴唇不洁的人，又住在嘴唇不洁的民中。又因我眼见大君王万军之耶和华。
Then I said, The curse is on me, and my fate is destruction; for I am a man of unclean lips, living among a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the Lord of armies.

有一撒拉弗飞到我跟前，手里拿着红炭，是用火剪从坛上取下来的。
Then a winged one came to me with a burning coal in his hand, which he had taken from off the altar with the fire-spoon.

将炭沾我的口，说，看哪，这炭沾了你的嘴。你的罪孽便除掉，你的罪恶就赦免了。
And after touching my mouth with it, he said, See, your lips have been touched with this; and your evil is taken away, and you are made clean from sin.

我又听见主的声音，说，我可以差遣谁呢？谁肯为我们去呢？我说，我在这里，请差遣我。
And the voice of the Lord came to my ears, saying, Whom am I to send, and who will go for us? Then I said, Here am I, send me.

他说，你去告诉这百姓说，你们听是要听见，却不明白。看是要看见，却不晓得。
And he said, Go, and say to this people, You will go on hearing, but learning nothing; you will go on seeing, but without getting wiser.

要使这百姓心蒙脂油，耳朵发沉，眼睛昏迷。恐怕眼睛看见，耳朵听见，心里明白，回转过来，便得医治。
Make the hearts of this people fat, and let their ears be stopped, and their eyes shut; for fear that they may see with their eyes, and be hearing with their ears, and their heart may become wise, and they may be turned to me and made well.

我就说，主阿，这到几时为止呢？他说，直到城邑荒凉，无人居住，房屋空闲无人，地土极其荒凉。
Then I said, Lord, how long? And he said in answer, Till the towns are waste and unpeopled, and the houses have no men, and the land becomes completely waste,

并且耶和华将人迁到远方，在这境内撇下的地土很多。
And the Lord has taken men far away, and there are wide waste places in the land.

境内剩下的人，若还有十分之一，也必被吞灭。像栗树，橡树，虽被砍伐，树？？子，却仍存留。这圣洁的种类在国中也是如此。
And even if there is still a tenth part in it, it will again be burned, like a tree of the woods whose broken end is still in the earth after the tree has been cut down (the holy seed is the broken end).

乌西雅的孙子约坦的儿子犹大王亚哈斯在位的时候，亚兰王利汛，和利玛利的儿子以色列王比加上来攻打耶路撒冷，却不能攻取。
Now it came about in the days of Ahaz, the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin, the king of Aram, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah, the king of Israel, came up to Jerusalem to make war against it, but were not able to overcome it.

有人告诉大卫家说，亚兰与以法莲已经同盟。王的心和百姓的心就都跳动，好像林中的树被风吹动一样。
And word came to the family of David that Aram had put up its tents in Ephraim. And the king's heart, and the hearts of his people, were moved, like the trees of the wood shaking in the wind.

耶和华对以赛亚说，你和你的儿子施亚雅述出去，到上池的水沟头，在漂布地的大路上，去迎接亚哈斯。
Then the Lord said to Isaiah, Go out now, you and Shear-jashub, your son, and you will come across Ahaz at the end of the stream flowing from the higher pool, in the highway of the washerman's field;

对他说，你要谨慎安静。不要因亚兰王利汛，和利玛利的儿子，这两个冒烟的火把头所发的烈怒害怕，也不要心里胆怯。
And say to him, Take care and be quiet; have no fear, and do not let your heart be feeble, because of these two ends of smoking fire-wood, because of the bitter wrath of Rezin and Aram, and of the son of Remaliah.

因为亚兰，和以法莲，并利玛利的儿子，设恶谋害你，
Because Aram has made evil designs against you, saying,

说，我们可以上去，攻击犹大，扰乱它，攻破它，在其中立他比勒的儿子为王。
Let us go up against Judah, troubling her, and forcing our way into her, and let us put up a king in her, even the son of Tabeel:

所以主耶和华如此说，这所谋的必立不住，也不得成就。
This is the word of the Lord God: This design will not come about or be effected.

原来亚兰的首城是大马色，大马色的首领是利汛。六十五年之内，以法莲必然破坏，不再成为国民。
For the head of Aram is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin (and in sixty-five years from now Ephraim will be broken, and will no longer be a people):

以法莲的首城是撒玛利亚，撒玛利亚的首领是利玛利的儿子。你们若是不信，定然不得立稳。
And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If you will not have faith, your kingdom will be broken.

耶和华又晓谕亚哈斯说，
And Isaiah said again to Ahaz,

你向耶和华你的神求一个兆头。或求显在深处，或求显在高处。
Make a request to the Lord your God for a sign, a sign in the deep places of the underworld, or in the high heavens.

亚哈斯说，我不求，我不试探耶和华。
But Ahaz said, I will not put the Lord to the test by making such a request.

以赛亚说，大卫家阿，你们当听。你们使人厌烦岂算小事，还要使我的神厌烦吗？
And he said, Give ear now, O family of David: is it not enough that you are driving men to disgust? will you do the same to my God?

因此，主自己要给你们一个兆头，必有童女怀孕生子，给他起名叫以马内利。（就是神与我们同在的意思）
For this cause the Lord himself will give you a sign; a young woman is now with child, and she will give birth to a son, and she will give him the name Immanuel.

到他晓得弃恶择善的时候，他必吃奶油与蜂蜜。
Butter and honey will be his food, when he is old enough to make a decision between evil and good.

因为在这孩子还不晓得弃恶择善之先，你所憎恶的那二王之地，必致见弃。
For before the child is old enough to make a decision between evil and good, the land whose two kings you are now fearing will have become waste.

耶和华必使亚述王攻击你的日子临到，你和你的百姓，并你的父家，自从以法莲离开犹大以来，未曾有这样的日子。
The Lord is about to send on you, and on your people, and on your father's house, such a time of trouble as there has not been from the days of the separating of Ephraim from Judah; even the coming of the king of Assyria.

那时，耶和华要发丝声，使埃及江河源头的苍蝇，和亚述地的蜂子飞来。
And it will be in that day that the Lord will make a piping sound for the fly which is in the end of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee which is in the land of Assyria.

都必飞来，落在荒凉的谷内，磐石的穴里，和一切荆棘篱笆中，并一切的草场上。
And they will come, covering all the waste valleys, and the holes of the rocks, and the thorns, and all the watering-places.

那时，主必用大河外赁的剃头刀，就是亚述王，剃去头发，和脚上的毛，并要剃净胡须。
In that day will the Lord take away the hair of the head and of the feet, as well as the hair of the face, with a blade got for a price from the other side of the River; even with the king of Assyria.

那时，一个人要养活一只母牛犊，两只母绵羊。
And it will be in that day that a man will give food to a young cow and two sheep;

因为出的奶多，他就得吃奶油。在境内所剩的人，都要吃奶油与蜂蜜。
And they will give so much milk that he will be able to have butter for his food: for butter and honey will be the food of all who are still living in the land.

从前凡种一千棵葡萄树，值银一千舍客勒的地方，到那时，必长荆棘和蒺藜。
And it will be in that day that in every place where before there were a thousand vines valued at a thousand shekels of silver, there will be nothing but blackberries and thorns.

人上那里去，必带弓箭，因为遍地满了荆棘和蒺藜。
Men will come there with bows and arrows, because all the land will be full of blackberries and thorns.

所有用锄刨挖的山地，你因怕荆棘和蒺藜，不敢上那里去。只可成了放牛之处，为羊践踏之地。
And they will send out the oxen and the sheep on all the hills which before were worked with the spade, ... fear of blackberries and thorns.

耶和华对我说，你取一个大牌，拿人所用的笔，（或作人常用的字）写上玛黑珥沙拉勒哈施吧斯。（就是掳掠速临抢夺快到的意思）
And the Lord said to me, Take a great writing-board, and on it put down in common letters, Maher-shalal-hash-baz;

我要用诚实的见证人，祭司乌利亚，和耶比利家的儿子撒迦利亚，记录这事。
And take true witnesses to the writing, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah, the son of Jeberechiah.

我以赛亚与妻子（原文作女先知）同室。她怀孕生子，耶和华就对我说，给他起名叫玛黑珥沙拉勒哈施吧斯。
And I went in to my wife, and she became with child, and gave birth to a son. Then the Lord said to me, Give him the name Maher-shalal-hash-baz,

因为在这小孩子不晓得叫父叫母之先，大马色的财宝，和撒玛利亚的掳物，必在亚述王面前搬了去。
For before the child is able to say, Father, or, Mother, the wealth of Damascus and the goods of Samaria will be taken away by the king of Assyria.

耶和华又晓谕我说，
And the Lord said again to me,

这百姓既厌弃西罗亚缓流的水，喜悦利汛和利玛利的儿子。
Because this people will have nothing to do with the softly-flowing waters of Shiloah, and have fear of Rezin and Remaliah's son;

因此，主必使大河翻腾的水猛然冲来，就是亚述王，和他所有的威势。必漫过一切的水道，涨过两岸。
For this cause the Lord is sending on them the waters of the River, deep and strong, even the king of Assyria and all his glory: and it will come up through all its streams, overflowing all its edges:

必冲入犹大。涨溢泛滥，直到颈项。以马内利阿，他展开翅膀，遍满你的地。
And it will come on into Judah; rushing on and overflowing, till the waters are up to the neck; *** and his outstretched wings will be covering the land from side to side: for God is with us.

列国的人民哪，任凭你们喧嚷，终必破坏。远方的众人哪，当侧耳而听。任凭你们束起腰来，终必破坏。你们束起腰来，终必破坏。
Have knowledge, O peoples, and be in fear; give ear, all you far-off parts of the earth:

任凭你们同谋，终归无有。任凭你们言定，终不成立。因为神与我们同在。
Let your designs be formed, and they will come to nothing; give your orders, and they will not be effected: for God is with us.

耶和华以大能的手，指教我不可行这百姓所行的道，对我这样说，
For the Lord, controlling me with a strong hand, gave me orders not to go in the way of this people, saying,

这百姓说，同谋背叛，你们不要说，同谋背叛。他们所怕的，你们不要怕，也不要畏惧。
Do not say, It is holy, about everything of which this people says, It is holy; and do not be in fear of what they go in fear of.

但要尊万军之耶和华为圣。以他为你们所当怕的，所当畏惧的。
But let the Lord of armies be holy to you, and go in fear of him, giving honour to him.

他必作为圣所。却向以色列两家作绊脚的石头，跌人的磐石。向耶路撒冷的居民，作为圈套和网罗。
And he will be for a holy place: but for a stone of falling and a rock of trouble to the two houses of Israel, and to the men of Jerusalem, for a net in which they may be taken.

许多人必在其上绊脚跌倒，而且跌碎，并陷入网罗，被缠住。
And numbers of them, falling on the stone, will be broken, and will be taken in the net.

你要卷起律法书，在我门徒中间封住训诲。
Let my teaching be kept secret: and my words be given to my disciples only.

我要等候那掩面不顾雅各家的耶和华，我也要仰望他。
And I will be waiting for the Lord, whose face is veiled from the house of Jacob, and I will be looking for him.

看哪，我与耶和华所给我的儿女，就是从住在锡安山万军之耶和华来的，在以色列中作为预兆和奇迹。
See, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the Lord of armies, whose resting-place is in Mount Zion.

有人对你们说，当求问那些交鬼的，和行巫术的，就是声音绵蛮，言语微细的。你们便回答说，百姓不当求问自己的神吗？岂可为活人求问死人呢？
And when they say to you, Make request for us to those who have control of spirits, and to those wise in secret arts, who make hollow bird-like sounds; is it not right for a people to make request to their gods, to make request for the living to the dead?

人当以训诲和法度为标准。他们所说的，若不与此相符，必不得见晨光。
Then say to them, Put your faith in the teaching and the witness. ... If they do not say such things. ... For him there is no dawn. ...

他们必经过这地，受艰难，受饥饿。饥饿的时候，心中焦躁，咒骂自己的君王，和自己的神。
And he will go through the land in bitter trouble and in need of food; and when he is unable to get food, he will become angry, cursing his king and his God, and his eyes will be turned to heaven on high;

仰观上天，俯察下地，不料，尽是艰难，黑暗，和幽暗的痛苦。他们必被赶入乌黑的黑暗中去。
And he will be looking down on the earth, and there will be trouble and dark clouds, black night where there is no seeing.

但那受过痛苦的，必不再见幽暗。从前神使西布伦地，和拿弗他利地被藐视。末后却使这沿海的路，约旦河外，外邦人的加利利地，得着荣耀。
In earlier times he made the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali of small value, but after that he gave it glory, by the way of the sea, on the other side of Jordan, Galilee of the nations.

在黑暗中行走的百姓，看见了大光。住在死荫之地的人，有光照耀他们。
The people who went in the dark have seen a great light, and for those who were living in the land of the deepest night, the light is shining.

你使这国民繁多，加增他们的喜乐。他们在你面前欢喜，好像收割的欢喜，像人分掳物那样的快乐。
You have made them very glad, increasing their joy. They are glad before you as men are glad in the time of getting in the grain, or when they make division of the goods taken in war.

因为他们所负的重轭，和肩头上的杖，并欺压他们人的棍，你都已经折断，好像在米甸的日子一样。
For by your hand the yoke on his neck and the rod on his back, even the rod of his cruel master, have been broken, as in the day of Midian.

战士在乱杀之间所穿戴的盔甲，并那滚在血中的衣服，都必作为可烧的，当作火柴。
For every boot of the man of war with his sounding step, and the clothing rolled in blood, will be for burning, food for the fire.

因有一婴孩为我们而生，有一子赐给我们。政权必担在他的肩头上。他名称为奇妙，策士，全能的神，永在的父，和平的君。
For to us a child has come, to us a son is given; and the government has been placed in his hands; and he has been named Wise Guide, Strong God, Father for ever, Prince of Peace.

他的政权与平安必加增无穷。他必在大卫的宝座上，治理他的国，以公平公义使国坚定稳固，从今直到永远。万军之耶和华的热心，必成就这事。
Of the increase of his rule and of peace there will be no end, on the seat of David, and in his kingdom; to make it strong, supporting it with wise decision and righteousness, now and for ever. By the fixed purpose of the Lord of armies this will be done.

主使一言入于雅各家，落于以色列家。
The Lord has sent a word to Jacob, and it has come on Israel;

这众百姓，就是以法莲和撒玛利亚的居民，都要知道。他们凭骄傲自大的心说，
And all the people will have experience of it, even Ephraim and the men of Samaria, who say in the pride of their uplifted hearts,

砖墙塌了，我们却要凿石头建筑，桑树砍了，我们却要换香柏树。
The bricks have come down, but we will put up buildings of cut stone in their place: the sycamores are cut down, but they will be changed to cedars.

因此，耶和华要高举利汛的敌人，来攻击以色列，并要激动以色列的仇敌，
For this cause the Lord has made strong the haters of Israel, driving them on to make war against him;

东有亚兰人，西有非利士人。他们张口要吞吃以色列。虽然如此，耶和华的怒气还未转消，他的手仍伸不缩。
Aram on the east, and the Philistines on the west, who have come against Israel with open mouths. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

这百姓还没有归向击打他们的主，也没有寻求万军之耶和华。
But the heart of the people was not turned to him who sent punishment on them, and they made no prayer to the Lord of armies.

因此，耶和华一日之间，必从以色列中剪除头与尾，棕枝与芦苇。
For this cause the Lord took away from Israel head and tail, high and low, in one day.

长老和尊贵人，就是头。以谎言教人的先知，就是尾。
The man who is honoured and responsible is the head, and the prophet who gives false teaching is the tail.

因为引导这百姓的，使他们走错了路。被引导的，都必败亡。
For the guides of this people are the cause of their wandering from the right way, and those who are guided by them come to destruction.

所以主必不喜悦他们的少年人，也不怜恤他们的孤儿寡妇。因为各人是亵渎的，是行恶的，并且各人的口，都说愚妄的话。虽然如此，耶和华的怒气还未转消，他的手仍伸不缩。
For this cause the Lord will have no pleasure in their young men, and no pity on their widows and the children without fathers: for they are all haters of God and evil-doers, and foolish words come from every mouth. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

邪恶像火焚烧，烧灭荆棘和蒺藜。在稠密的树林中着起来，就成为烟柱，旋转上腾。
For evil was burning like a fire; the blackberries and thorns were burned up; the thick woods took fire, rolling up in dark clouds of smoke.

因万军之耶和华的烈怒，地都烧遍。百姓成为火柴，无人怜爱弟兄。
The land was dark with the wrath of the Lord of armies: the people were like those who take men's flesh for food.

有人右边抢夺，仍受饥饿。左边吞吃，仍不饱足。各人吃自己膀臂上的肉。
On the right a man was cutting off bits and was still in need; on the left a man took a meal but had not enough; no man had pity on his brother; every man was making a meal of the flesh of his neighbour.

玛拿西吞吃（或作攻击下同）以法莲，以法莲吞吃玛拿西。又一同攻击犹大。虽然如此，耶和华的怒气还未转消，他的手仍伸不缩。
Manasseh was making a meal of Ephraim, and Ephraim of Manasseh; and together they were attacking Judah. For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

祸哉，那些设立不义之律例的，和记录奸诈之判语的。
Cursed are those who make evil decisions, and the writers who make the records of their cruel acts:

为要屈枉穷乏人，夺去我民中困苦人的理，以寡妇当作掳物，以孤儿当作掠物。
Who do wrong to the poor in their cause, and take away the right of the crushed among my people, so that they may have the property of widows, and get under their power those who have no father.

到降罚的日子，有灾祸从远方临到，那时，你们怎样行呢？你们向谁逃奔求救呢？你们的荣耀（或作财宝）存留何处呢？
And what will you do in the day of punishment, and in the destruction which is coming from far? to whom will you go for help, and what will become of your glory?

他们只得屈身在被掳的人以下，仆倒在被杀的人以下，虽然如此，耶和华的怒气还未转消，他的手仍伸不缩。
... For all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

亚述是我怒气的棍，手中拿我恼恨的杖。
Ho! Assyrian, the rod of my wrath, the instrument of my punishment!

我要打发他攻击亵渎的国民，吩咐他攻击我所恼怒的百姓，抢财为掳物，夺货为掠物，将他们践踏，像街上的泥土一样。
I will send him against a nation of wrongdoers, and against the people of my wrath I will give him orders, to take their wealth in war, crushing them down like the dust in the streets.

然而他不是这样的意思，他心也不这样打算。他心里倒想毁灭，剪除不少的国。
But this is not what is in his mind, and this is not his design; but his purpose is destruction, and the cutting off of more and more nations.

他说，我的臣仆，岂不都是王吗？
For he says, Are not all my captains kings?

迦勒挪岂不像迦基米施吗？哈马岂不像亚珥拔吗？撒玛利亚岂不像大马色吗？
Will not the fate of Calno be like that of Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?

我手已经够到有偶像的国。这些国雕刻的偶像过于耶路撒冷和撒玛利亚的偶像。
As my hand has come on the kingdoms of the images, whose pictured images were more in number than those of Jerusalem and Samaria;

我怎样待撒玛利亚，和其中的偶像，岂不照样待耶路撒冷，和其中的偶像吗？
So, as I have done to Samaria and her images, I will do to Jerusalem and her images.

主在锡安山，和耶路撒冷，成就他一切工作的时候，主说，我必罚亚述王自大的心，和他高傲眼目的荣耀。
For this cause it will be that, when the purpose of the Lord against Mount Zion and Jerusalem is complete, I will send punishment on the pride of the heart of the king of Assyria, and on the glory of his uplifted eyes.

因为他说，我所成就的事，是靠我手的能力，和我的智慧。我本有聪明。我挪移列国的地界，抢夺他们所积蓄的财宝，并且我像勇士，使坐宝座的降为卑。
For he has said, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my knowledge, for I am wise: and I have taken away the limits of the peoples' lands, and the stores of their wealth have become mine; and I have made towns low in the dust, sending destruction on those living in them;

我的手够到列国的财宝，好像人够到鸟窝。我也得了全地，好像人拾起所弃的雀蛋。没有动翅膀的，没有张嘴的，也没有鸣叫的。
And I have put my hands on the wealth of the peoples, as on the place where a bird has put her eggs; and as a man may take the eggs from which a bird has gone, so I have taken all the earth for myself: and not a wing was moved, and not a mouth gave out a sound.

斧，岂可向用斧砍木的自夸呢？锯，岂可向用锯的自大呢？好比棍抡起那举棍的，好比杖举起那非木的人。
Will the axe say high-sounding words against him who is using it, or the blade be full of pride against him who is cutting with it? As if a rod had the power of shaking him who is using it, or as if a stick might take up him who is not wood.

因此，主万军之耶和华，必使亚述王的肥壮人变为瘦弱。在他的荣华之下，必有火着起，如同焚烧一样。
For this cause the Lord, the Lord of armies, will make his fat become wasted; and in his inner parts a fire will be lighted like a burning flame.

以色列的光必如火，他的圣者必如火焰。在一日之间，将亚述王的荆棘，和蒺藜，焚烧净尽。
And the light of Israel will be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: wasting and burning up his thorns in one day.

又将他树林，和肥田的荣耀，全然烧尽。好像拿军旗的昏过去一样。
And he will put an end to the glory of his woods and of his planted fields, soul and body together; and it will be as when a man is wasted by disease.

他林中剩下的树必稀少，就是孩子也能写其数。
And the rest of the trees of his wood will be small in number, so that a child may put them down in writing.

到那日，以色列所剩下的，和雅各家所逃脱的，不再倚靠那击打他们的，却要诚实倚靠耶和华以色列的圣者。
And it will be in that day that the rest of Israel, and those of Jacob who have come safely through these troubles, will no longer go for help to him whose rod was on their back, but their faith will be in the Lord, the Holy One of Israel.

所剩下的，就是雅各家所剩下的，必归回全能的神。
The rest, even the rest of Jacob, will come back to the Strong God.

以色列阿，你的百姓，虽多如海沙，惟有剩下的归回。原来灭绝的事已定，必有公义施行，如水涨溢。
For though your people, O Israel, are as the sand of the sea, only a small number will come back: for the destruction is fixed, overflowing in righteousness.

因为主万军之耶和华，在全地之中，必成就所定规的结局。
For the Lord, the Lord of armies, is about to make destruction complete in all the land.

所以主万军之耶和华如此说，住锡安我的百姓阿，亚述王虽然用棍击打你，又照埃及的样子，举杖攻击你，你却不要怕他。
For this cause the Lord, the Lord of armies, says, O my people living in Zion, have no fear of the Assyrian, even if his rod comes on your back, and his stick is lifted up as in Egypt.

因为还有一点点时候，向你们发的忿恨就要完毕，我的怒气要向他发作，使他灭亡。
For in a very short time my passion will be over, and my wrath will be turned to their destruction.

万军之耶和华要兴起鞭来攻击他，好像在俄立磐石那里杀戮米甸人一样。耶和华的杖，要向海伸出，把杖举起，像在埃及一样。
And the Lord of armies will be shaking a whip against him, as when he overcame Midian at the rock of Oreb: and his rod will be lifted up against them as it was against the Egyptians.

到那日，亚述王的重担必离开你的肩头，他的轭必离开你的颈项。那轭也必因肥壮的缘故撑断。（或作因膏油的缘故毁坏）
And in that day the weight which he put on your back will be taken away, and his yoke broken from off your neck.

亚述王来到亚叶，经过米矶仑。在密抹安放辎重。
He has gone up from Pene-Rimmon, he has come to Aiath; he has gone past Migron, at Michmash he puts his forces in order.

他们过了隘口，在迦巴住宿。拉玛人战兢。扫罗的基比亚人逃跑。
They have gone across the mountain; Geba will be our resting-place tonight, they say: Ramah is shaking with fear; Gibeah of Saul has gone in flight.

迦琳的居民哪，（居民原文作女子）要高声呼喊。莱煞人哪，须听。哀哉，困苦的亚拿突阿。
Give a loud cry, daughter of Gallim; let Laishah give ear; let Anathoth give answer to her.

玛得米那人躲避。基柄的居民逃遁。
Madmenah has gone; the men of Gebim are putting their goods in a safe place.

当那日，亚述王要在挪伯歇兵。向锡安女子的山，就是耶路撒冷的山，抡手攻他。
This very day he is stopping at Nob; he is shaking his hand against the mountain of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

看哪，主万军之耶和华，以惊吓削去树枝。长高的必被砍下，高大的必被伐倒。
See, the Lord, the Lord of armies, is cutting off his branches with a great noise, and his strong ones are falling and his high ones are coming down.

稠密的树林，他要用铁器砍下，利巴嫩的树木必被大能者伐倒。
And he is cutting down the thick places of the wood with an axe, and Lebanon with its tall trees is coming down.

从耶西的本（原文作？？）必发一条，从他根生的枝子必结果实。
And there will come a rod out of the broken tree of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots will give fruit.

耶和华的灵必住在他身上，就是使他有智慧和聪明的灵，谋略和能力的灵，知识和敬畏耶和华的灵。
And the spirit of the Lord will be resting on him, the spirit of wisdom and good sense, the spirit of wise guiding and strength, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

他必以敬畏耶和华为乐。行审判不凭眼见，断是非也不凭耳闻。
And he will not be guided in his judging by what he sees, or give decisions by the hearing of his ears:

却要以公义审判贫穷人，以正直判断世上的谦卑人。以口中的杖击打世界。以嘴里的气杀戮恶人。
But he will do right in the cause of the poor, and give wise decisions for those in the land who are in need; and the rod of his mouth will come down on the cruel, and with the breath of his lips he will put an end to the evil-doer.

公义必当他的腰带，信实必当他胁下的带子。
And righteousness will be the cord of his robe, and good faith the band round his breast.

豺狼必与绵羊羔同居，豹子与山羊羔同卧。少壮狮子，与牛犊，并肥畜同群。小孩子要牵引他们。
And the wolf will be living with the lamb, and the leopard will take his rest with the young goat; and the lion will take grass for food like the ox; and the young lion will go with the young ones of the herd; and a little child will be their guide.

牛必与熊同食。牛犊必与小熊同卧。狮子必吃草与牛一样。
And the cow and the bear will be friends while their young ones are sleeping together.

吃奶的孩子必玩耍在虺蛇的洞口，断奶的婴儿必按手在毒蛇的穴上。
And the child at the breast will be playing by the hole of the snake, and the older child will put his hand on the bright eye of the poison-snake.

在我圣山的遍处，这一切都不伤人，不害物。因为认识耶和华的知识要充满遍地，好像水充满洋海一般。
There will be no cause of pain or destruction in all my holy mountain: for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the sea is covered by the waters.

到那日，耶西的根立作万民的大旗。外邦人必寻求他。他安息之所大有荣耀。
And in that day, the eyes of the nations will be turned to the root of Jesse which will be lifted up as the flag of the peoples; and his resting-place will be glory.

当那日，主必二次伸手救回自己百姓中所余剩的，就是在亚述，埃及，巴忒罗，古实，以拦，示拿，哈马，并众海岛所剩下的。
And in that day the hand of the Lord will be stretched out the second time to get back the rest of his people, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the sea-lands.

他必向列国竖立大旗，招回以色列被赶散的人，又从地的四方聚集分散的犹大人。
And he will put up a flag as a sign to the nations, and he will get together those of Israel who had been sent away, and the wandering ones of Judah, from the four ends of the earth.

以法莲的嫉妒就必消散，扰害犹大的必被剪除。以法莲必不嫉妒犹大，犹大也不扰害以法莲。
And the envy of Ephraim will be gone, and those who make trouble for Judah will come to an end: Ephraim will have no more envy of Judah, and there will be an end of Judah's hate for Ephraim.

他们要向西飞，扑在非利士人的肩头上。（肩头上或作西界）一同掳掠东方人，伸手按住以东和摩押。亚扪人也必顺服他们。
And they will be united in attacking the Philistines on the west, and together they will take the goods of the children of the east: their hand will be on Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon will be under their rule.

耶和华必使埃及海汊枯干。抡手用暴热的风，使大河分为七条，令人过去不至湿脚。
And the Lord will make the tongue of the Egyptian sea completely dry; and with his burning wind his hand will be stretched out over the River, and it will be parted into seven streams, so that men may go over it with dry feet.

为主余剩的百姓，就是从亚述剩下回来的，必有一条大道，如当日以色列从埃及地上来一样。
And there will be a highway for the rest of his people from Assyria; as there was for Israel in the day when he came up out of the land of Egypt.

到那日，你必说，耶和华阿，我要称谢你因为你虽然向我发怒，你的怒气却已转消，你又安慰了我。
And in that day you will say I will give praise to you, O Lord; for though you were angry with me, your wrath is turned away, and I am comforted.

看哪，神是我的拯救。我要倚靠他，并不惧怕。因为主耶和华是我的力量，是我的诗歌。他也成了我的拯救。
See, God is my salvation; I will have faith in the Lord, without fear: for the Lord Jah is my strength and song; and he has become my salvation.

所以你们必从救恩的泉源欢然取水。
So with joy will you get water out of the springs of salvation.

在那日，你们要说，当称谢耶和华，求告他的名，将他所行的传扬在万民中，提说他的名已被尊崇。
And in that day you will say, Give praise to the Lord, let his name be honoured, give word of his doings among the peoples, say that his name is lifted up.

你们要向耶和华唱歌。因他所行的甚是美好。但愿这事普传天下。
Make a song to the Lord; for he has done noble things: give news of them through all the earth.

锡安的居民哪，当扬声欢呼。因为在你们中间的以色列圣者，乃为至大。
Let your voice be sounding in a cry of joy, O daughter of Zion, for great is the Holy One of Israel among you.

亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚得默示论巴比伦。
The word of the Lord about Babylon which Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saw.

应当在净光的山竖立大旗，向群众扬声招手，使他们进入贵胄的门。
Put up a flag on a clear mountain-top, make a loud outcry to them, give directions with the hand, so that they may go into the doors of the great ones.

我吩咐我所挑出来的人。我招呼我的勇士，就是那矜夸高傲之辈，为要成就我怒中所定的。
I have given orders to my holy ones, I have sent out my men of war, those of mine who take pride in their power, to give effect to my wrath.

山间有多人的声音，好像是大国人民。有许多国的民聚集哄嚷的声音。这是万军之耶和华点齐军队，预备打仗。
The noise of great numbers in the mountains, like the noise of a strong people! The noise of the kingdoms of the nations meeting together! The Lord of armies is numbering his forces for war.

他们从远方来，从天边来，就是耶和华并他恼恨的兵器，要毁灭这全地。
They come from a far country, from the farthest part of heaven, even the Lord and the instruments of his wrath, with destruction for all the land.

你们要哀号，因为耶和华的日子临近了。这日来到，好像毁灭从全能者来到。
Send out a cry of grief; for the day of the Lord is near; it comes as destruction from the Most High.

所以人手都必软弱，人心都必消化。
For this cause all hands will be feeble, and every heart of man be turned to water;

他们必惊惶悲痛。愁苦必将他们抓住。他们疼痛，好像产难的妇人一样。彼此惊奇相看，脸如火焰。
Their hearts will be full of fear; pains and sorrows will overcome them; they will be in pain like a woman in childbirth; they will be shocked at one another; their faces will be like flames.

耶和华的日子临到，必有残忍，忿恨，烈怒。使这地荒凉，从其中除灭罪人。
See, the day of the Lord is coming, cruel, with wrath and burning passion: to make the land a waste, driving the sinners in it to destruction.

天上的众星群宿，都不发光。日头一出，就变黑暗，月亮也不放光。
For the stars of heaven and its bright armies will not give their light: the sun will be made dark in his journey through the heaven, and the moon will keep back her light.

我必因邪恶，刑罚世界，因罪孽，刑罚恶人。使骄傲人的狂妄止息，制伏强暴人的狂傲。
And I will send punishment on the world for its evil, and on the sinners for their wrongdoing; and I will put an end to all pride, and will make low the power of the cruel.

我必使人比精金还少，使人比俄斐纯金更少。
I will make men so small in number, that a man will be harder to get than gold, even the best gold of Ophir.

我万军之耶和华在忿恨中发烈怒的日子，必使天震动，使地摇撼，离其本位。
For this cause the heavens will be shaking, and the earth will be moved out of its place, in the wrath of the Lord of armies, and in the day of his burning passion.

人必像被追赶的鹿，像无人收聚的羊，各归回本族，各逃到本土。
And it will be that, like a roe in flight, and like wandering sheep, they will go every man to his people and to his land.

凡被仇敌追上的，必被刺死。凡被捉住的，必被刀杀。
Everyone who is overtaken will have a spear put through him, and everyone who goes in flight will be put to the sword.

他们的婴孩，必在他们眼前摔碎。他们的房屋，必被抢夺。他们的妻子，必被玷污。
Their young children will be broken up before their eyes; their goods will be taken away, and their wives made the property of others.

我必激动玛代人来攻击他们。玛代人不注重银子，也不喜爱金子。
See, I am driving the Medes against them, who put no value on silver and have no pleasure in gold.

他们必用弓击碎少年人，不怜悯妇人所生的，眼也不顾惜孩子。
In their hands are bows and spears; they are cruel, violently putting the young men to death, and crushing the young women; they have no pity for children, and no mercy for the fruit of the body.

巴比伦素来为列国的荣耀，为迦勒底人所矜夸的华美，必像神所倾覆的所多玛蛾摩拉一样。
And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beautiful town which is the pride of the Chaldaeans, will be like God's destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.

其内必永无人烟，世世代代无人居住。亚拉伯人也不在那里支搭帐棚。牧羊的人，也不使羊群卧在那里。
People will never be living in it again, and it will have no more men from generation to generation: the Arab will not put up his tent there; and those who keep sheep will not make it a resting-place for their flocks.

只有旷野的走兽卧在那里。咆哮的兽满了房屋。鸵鸟住在那里。野山羊在那里跳舞。
But the beasts of the waste land will have their holes there; and the houses will be full of crying jackals, and ostriches will have their place there, and evil spirits will be dancing there.

豺狼必在他宫中呼号。野狗必在他华美殿内吼叫。巴比伦受罚的时候临近，他的日子，必不长久。
And wolves will be answering one another in their towers, and jackals in their houses of pleasure: her time is near, and her days of power will quickly be ended.

耶和华要怜恤雅各，必再拣选以色列，将他们安置在本地。寄居的必与他们联合，紧贴雅各家。
For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will again make Israel his special people, and will put them in their land; and the man from a strange country will take his place among them and be joined to the family of Jacob.

外邦人必将他们带回本土。以色列家必在耶和华的地上得外邦人为仆婢。也要掳掠先前掳掠他们的，辖制先前欺压他们的。
And the people will take them with them to their place: and the children of Israel will give them a heritage in the Lord's land as men-servants and women-servants, making them prisoners whose prisoners they were; and they will be rulers over their masters.

当耶和华使你脱离愁苦，烦恼，并人勉强你作的苦工，得享安息的日子，
And it will be, in the day when the Lord gives you rest from your sorrow, and from your trouble, and from the hard yoke which they had put on you,

你必提这诗歌论巴比伦王说，欺压人的何竟息灭，强暴的何竟止息。
That you will take up this bitter song against the king of Babylon, and say, How has the cruel overseer come to an end! He who was lifted up in pride is cut off;

耶和华折断了恶人的杖，辖制人的圭，
The stick of the evil-doers, the rod of the rulers, is broken by the Lord;

就是在忿怒中连连攻击众民的，在怒气中辖制列国，行逼迫无人阻止的。
He whose rod was on the peoples with an unending wrath, ruling the nations in passion, with an uncontrolled rule.

现在全地得安息，享平静。人皆发声欢呼。
All the earth is at rest and is quiet: they are bursting into song.

松树和利巴嫩的香柏树，都因你欢乐，说，自从你仆倒，再无人上来砍伐我们。
Even the trees of the wood are glad over you, the trees of Lebanon, saying, From the time of your fall no wood-cutter has come up against us with an axe.

你下到阴间，阴间就因你震动，来迎接你。又因你惊动在世曾为首领的阴魂，并使那曾为列国君王的，都离位站起。
The underworld is moved at your coming: the shades of the dead are awake before you, even the strong ones of the earth; all the kings of the world have got up from their seats.

他们都要发言对你说，你也变为软弱，像我们一样吗？你也成了我们的样子吗？
They all make answer and say to you, Have you become feeble like us? have you been made even as we are?

你的威势，和你琴瑟的声音，都下到阴间。你下铺的是虫，上盖的是蛆。
Your pride has gone down into the underworld, and the noise of your instruments of music; the worms are under you, and your body is covered with them.

明亮之星，早晨之子阿，你何竟从天坠落。你这攻败列国的，何竟被砍倒在地上。
How great is your fall from heaven, O shining one, son of the morning! How are you cut down to the earth, low among the dead bodies!

你心里曾说，我要升到天上。我要高举我的宝座在神众星以上。我要坐在聚会的山上，在北方的极处，
For you said in your heart, I will go up to heaven, I will make my seat higher than the stars of God; I will take my place on the mountain of the meeting-place of the gods, in the inmost parts of the north.

我要升到高云之上。我要与至上者同等。
I will go higher than the clouds; I will be like the Most High.

然而你必坠落阴间，到坑中极深之处。
But you will come down to the underworld, even to its inmost parts.

凡看见你的，都要定睛看你，留意看你，说，使大地战抖，使列国震动，
Those who see you will be looking on you with care, they will be in deep thought, saying, Is this the troubler of the earth, the shaker of kingdoms?

使世界如同荒野，使城邑倾覆，不释放被掳的人归家，是这个人吗？
Who made the world a waste, overturning its towns; who did not let his prisoners loose from the prison-house.

列国的君王俱各在自己阴宅的荣耀中安睡。
All the kings of the earth are at rest in glory, every man in his house,

惟独你被抛弃，不得入你的坟墓，好像可憎的枝子。以被杀的人为衣，就是被刀刺透，坠落坑中石头那里的。你又像被践踏的尸首一样。
But you, like a birth before its time, are stretched out with no resting-place in the earth; clothed with the bodies of the dead who have been put to the sword, who go down to the lowest parts of the underworld; a dead body, crushed under foot.

你不得与君王同葬，因为你败坏你的国，杀戮你的民。恶人后裔的名，必永不提说。
As for your fathers, you will not be united with them in their resting-place, because you have been the cause of destruction to your land, and of death to your people; the seed of the evil-doer will have no place in the memory of man.

先人既有罪孽，就要预备杀戮他的子孙，免得他们兴起来，得了遍地，在世上修满城邑。
Make ready a place of death for his children, because of the evil-doing of their father; so that they may not come up and take the earth for their heritage, covering the face of the world with waste places.

万军之耶和华说，我必兴起攻击他们，将巴比伦的名号，和所余剩的人，连子带孙一并剪除。这是耶和华说的。
For I will come up against them, says the Lord of armies, cutting off from Babylon name and offspring, son and son's son, says the Lord.

我必使巴比伦为箭猪所得，又变为水池。我要用灭亡的扫帚扫净他。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And I will make you a heritage for the hedgehog, and pools of water: and I will go through it with the brush of destruction, says the Lord of armies.

万军之耶和华起誓，说，我怎样思想，必照样成就。我怎样定意，必照样成立。
The Lord has taken an oath, saying, My design will certainly come about, and my purpose will be effected:

就是在我地上打折亚述人，在我山上将他践踏，他加的轭，必离开以色列人。他加的重担，必离开他们的肩头。
To let the Assyrian be broken in my land, and crushed under foot on my mountains: there will his yoke be taken away from them, and his rule over them come to an end.

这是向全地所定的旨意。这是向万国所伸出的手。
This is the purpose for all the earth: and this is the hand stretched out over all nations.

万军之耶和华既然定意，谁能废弃呢？他的手已经伸出，谁能转回呢？
For it is the purpose of the Lord of armies, and who will make it of no effect? when his hand is stretched out, by whom may it be turned back?

亚哈斯王崩的那年，就有以下的默示。
In the year of the death of King Ahaz this word came to the prophet:

非利士全地阿，不要因击打你的杖折断就喜乐。因为从蛇的根，必生出毒蛇。它所生的，是火焰的飞龙。
Be not glad, O Philistia, all of you, because the rod which was on you is broken: for out of the snake's root will come a poison-snake, and its fruit will be a winged poison-snake.

贫寒人的长子，必有所食，穷乏人必安然躺卧。我必以饥荒，治死你的根，你所余剩的人，必被杀戮。
And the poorest of the land will have food, and those in need will be given a safe resting-place: but your seed will come to an end for need of food, and the rest of you will be put to the sword.

门哪，应当哀号。城阿，应当呼喊。非利士全地阿，你都消化了。因为有烟从北方出来，他行伍中并无乱队的。
Send out a cry, O door! Make sounds of sorrow, O town! All your land has come to nothing, O Philistia; for there comes a smoke out of the north, and everyone keeps his place in the line.

可怎样回答外邦的使者呢？（外邦或指非利士）必说，耶和华建立了锡安，他百姓中的困苦人，必投奔在其中。
What answer, then, will my people give to the representatives of the nation? That the Lord is the builder of Zion, and she will be a safe place for the poor of his people.

论摩押的默示。一夜之间，摩押的亚珥，变为荒废，归于无有。一夜之间，摩押的基珥，变为荒废，归于无有。
The word about Moab. For in a night Ar of Moab has become waste, and is seen no longer; for in a night Kir of Moab has become waste, and is seen no longer.

他们上巴益，又往底本，到高处去哭泣。摩押人因尼波和米底巴哀号，各人头上光秃，胡须剃净。
The daughter of Dibon has gone up to the high places, weeping: Moab is sounding her cry of sorrow over Nebo, and over Medeba: everywhere the hair of the head and of the face is cut off.

他们在街市上都腰束麻布，在房顶上和宽阔处，俱各哀号，眼泪汪汪。
In their streets they are covering themselves with haircloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their public places, there is crying and bitter weeping.

希实本和以利亚利悲哀的声音，达到雅杂。所以摩押带兵器的高声喊嚷。人心战兢。
Heshbon is crying out, and Elealeh; their voice is sounding even to Jahaz: for this cause the heart of Moab is shaking; his soul is shaking with fear.

我心为摩押悲哀，他的贵胄，（或作逃民）逃到琐珥，到伊基拉，施利施亚。他们上鲁希坡随走随哭。在何罗念的路上，因毁灭举起哀声。
My heart is crying out for Moab; her people go in flight to Zoar, and to Eglath-shelishiyah: for they go up with weeping by the slope of Luhith; on the way to Horonaim they send up a cry of destruction.

因为宁林的水成为干涸。青草枯干，嫩草灭没，青绿之物，一无所有。
The waters of Nimrim will become dry: for the grass is burned up, the young grass is coming to an end, every green thing is dead.

因此，摩押人所得的财物，和所积蓄的，都要运过柳树河。
For this cause they will take away their wealth, and the stores they have got together, over the stream of the water-plants.

哀声遍闻摩押的四境。哀号的声音，达到以基莲。哀号的声音，达到比珥以琳。
For the cry has gone round the limits of Moab; as far as to Eglaim and Beer-elim.

底们的水充满了血。我还要加增底们的灾难，叫狮子来追上摩押逃脱的民，和那地上所余剩的人。
For the waters of Dimon are full of blood: and I'm sending even more on Moab, a lion on those of Moab who go in flight, and on the rest of the land.

你们当将羊羔奉给那地掌权的，从西拉往旷野，送到锡安城的山。（城原文作女子）
And they will send ... to the mountain of the daughter of Zion.

摩押的居民，（居民原文作女子）在亚嫩渡口，必像游飞的鸟，如拆窝的雏。
For the daughters of Moab will be like wandering birds, like a place from which the young birds have gone in flight, at the ways across the Arnon.

求你献谋略，行公平，使你的影子在午间如黑夜，隐藏被赶散的人，不可显露逃民。
Give wise directions, make a decision; let your shade be as night in full day: keep safe those who are in flight; do not give up the wandering ones.

求你容我这被赶散的人和你同居。至于摩押，求你作他的隐密处脱离灭命者的面。勒索人的归于无有，毁灭的事止息了，欺压人的从国中除灭了。
Let those who have been forced out of Moab have a resting-place with you; be a cover to them from him who is making waste their land: till the cruel ones are cut off, and wasting has come to an end, and those who take pleasure in crushing the poor are gone from the land.

必有宝座因慈爱坚立。必有一位诚诚实实坐在其上，在大卫帐幕中施行审判，寻求公平，速行公义。
Then a king's seat will be based on mercy, and one will be seated on it in the tent of David for ever; judging uprightly, and quick to do righteousness.

我们听说摩押人骄傲，是极其骄傲，听说他狂妄，骄傲，忿怒，他夸大的话，是虚空的。
We have had word of the pride of Moab, how great it is; how he is lifted up in pride and passion: his high words about himself are false.

因此，摩押人必为摩押哀号，人人都要哀号。你们摩押人要为吉珥哈列设的葡萄饼哀叹，极其忧伤。
For this cause everyone in Moab will give cries of grief for Moab: crushed to the earth, they will be weeping for the men of Kir-hareseth.

因为希实本的田地，和西比玛的葡萄树，都衰残了。列国的君主折断其上美好的枝子。这枝子长到雅谢延到旷野。嫩枝向外探出，直探过盐海。
For the fields of Heshbon are waste, the vine of Sibmah is dead; the lords of nations were overcome by the produce of her vines; her vine-plants went as far as Jazer, and came even to the waste land; her branches were stretched out to the sea.

因此，我要为西比玛的葡萄树哀哭，与雅谢人哀哭一样。希实本，以利亚利阿，我要以眼泪浇灌你。因为有交战呐喊的声音，临到你夏天的果子，并你收割的庄稼。
For this cause my sorrow for the vine of Sibmah will be like the weeping for Jazer: my eyes are dropping water on you, O Heshbon and Elealeh! For they are sounding the war-cry over your summer fruits and the getting in of your grain;

从肥美的田中，夺去了欢喜快乐。在葡萄园里，必无歌唱，也无欢呼的声音。踹酒的在酒榨中不得踹出酒来。我使他欢呼的声音止息。
And all joy is gone; no longer are they glad for the fertile field; and in the vine-gardens there are no songs or sounds of joy: the crushing of grapes has come to an end, and its glad cry has been stopped.

因此我心腹为摩押哀鸣如琴，我心肠为吉珥哈列设，也是如此。
For this cause the cords of my heart are sounding for Moab, and I am full of sorrow for Kir-heres.

摩押人朝见的时候，在高处疲乏，又到他圣所祈祷，也不蒙应允。
And when Moab goes up to the high place, and makes prayer in the house of his god, it will have no effect.

这是耶和华从前论摩押的话。
This is the word which the Lord said about Moab in the past.

但现在耶和华说，三年之内，照雇工的年数，摩押的荣耀，与他的群众，必被藐视，余剩的人，甚少无几。
But now the Lord has said, In three years, the years of a servant working for payment, the glory of Moab, all that great people, will be turned to shame, and the rest of Moab will be very small and without honour.

论大马色的默示。看哪，大马色已被废弃，不再为城，必变作乱堆。
The word about Damascus. See, they have made Damascus a town no longer; it has become a waste place.

亚罗珥的城邑，已被撇弃。必成为牧羊之处，羊在那里躺卧，无人惊吓。
Her towns are unpeopled for ever; there the flocks take their rest in peace, without fear.

以法莲不再有保障。大马色不再有国权，亚兰所剩下的，必像以色列人的荣耀消灭一样。这是万军之耶和华说的。
The strong tower has gone from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus: the rest of Aram will come to destruction, and be made like the glory of the children of Israel, says the Lord of armies.

到那日雅各的荣耀，必至枵薄，他肥胖的身体，必渐瘦弱。
And it will be in that day that the glory of Jacob will be made small, and the strength of his body will become feeble.

就必像收割的人，收敛禾稼，用手割取穗子。又像人在利乏音谷拾取遗落的穗子。
And it will be like a man cutting the growth of his grain, pulling together the heads of the grain with his arm; even as when they get in the grain in the valley of Rephaim.

其间所剩下的不多，好像人打橄榄树，在尽上的枝梢上，只剩两三个果子，在多果树的旁枝上，只剩四五个果子。这是耶和华以色列的神说的。
But it will be like a man shaking an olive-tree, something will still be there, two or three berries on the top of the highest branch, four or five on the outside branches of a fertile tree, says the Lord, the God of Israel.

当那日人必仰望造他们的主，眼目重看以色列的圣者。
In that day a man's heart will be turned to his Maker, and his eyes to the Holy One of Israel.

他们必不仰望祭坛，就是自己手所筑的，也不重看自己指头所作的，无论是木偶，是日像。
He will not be looking to the altars, the work of his hands, or to the wood pillars or to the sun-images which his fingers have made.

在那日他们的坚固城，必像树林中和山顶上所撇弃的地方，就是从前在以色列人面前被人撇弃的。这样，地就荒凉了。
In that day your towns will be like the waste places of the Hivites and the Amorites which the children of Israel took for a heritage, and they will come to destruction.

因你忘记救你的神，不记念你能力的磐石。所以你栽上佳美的树秧子，插上异样的栽子。
For you have not given honour to the God of your salvation, and have not kept in mind the Rock of your strength; for this cause you made a garden of Adonis, and put in it the vine-cuttings of a strange god;

栽种的日子，你周围圈上篱笆，又到早晨使你所种的开花。但在愁苦极其伤痛的日子，所收割的，都飞去了。
In the day of your planting you were watching its growth, and in the morning your seed was flowering: but its fruit is wasted away in the day of grief and bitter sorrow.

唉，多民哄嚷，好像海浪？？訇，列邦奔腾，好像猛水滔滔。
Ah! the voice of peoples, like the loud sounding of the seas, and the thundering of great nations rushing on like the bursting out of waters!

列邦奔腾，好像多水滔滔。但神斥责他们，他们就远远逃避，又被追赶，如同山上的风前糠，又如暴风前的旋风土。
But he will put a stop to them, and make them go in flight far away, driving them like the waste of the grain on the tops of the mountains before the wind, and like the circling dust before the storm.

到晚上有惊吓，未到早晨他们就没有了。这是掳掠我们之人所得的分，是抢夺我们之人的报应。
In the evening there is fear, and in the morning they are gone. This is the fate of those who take our goods, and the reward of those who violently take our property for themselves.

唉，古实河外翅膀刷刷响声之地，
Ho! land of the sounding of wings, on the other side of the rivers of Ethiopia:

差遣使者在水面上，坐蒲草船过海。先知说，你们快行的使者，要到高大光滑的民那里去。自从开国以来那民极其可畏，是分地界践踏人的，他们的地有江河分开。
Which sends its representatives by the sea, even in ships of papyrus on the waters. Go back quickly, O representatives, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people causing fear through all their history; a strong nation, crushing down its haters, whose land is cut through by rivers.

世上一切的居民，和地上所住的人哪，山上竖立大旗的时候，你们要看。吹角的时候，你们要听。
All you peoples of the world, and you who are living on the earth, when a flag is lifted up on the mountains, give attention; and when the horn is sounded, give ear.

耶和华对我这样说，我要安静，在我的居所观看，如同日光中的清热，又如露水的云雾在收割的热天。
For this is what the Lord has said to me: I will be quiet, watching from my place; like the clear heat when the sun is shining, like a mist of dew in the heat of summer.

收割之先，花开已谢，花也成了将熟的葡萄，他必用镰刀削去嫩枝，又砍掉蔓延的枝条。
For before the time of getting in the grapes, after the opening of the bud, when the flower has become a grape ready for crushing, he will take away the small branches with knives, cutting down and taking away the wide-stretching branches.

都要撇给山间的鸷鸟，和地上的野兽。夏天鸷鸟要宿在其上，冬天野兽都卧在其中。
They will be for the birds of the mountains, and for the beasts of the earth: the birds will come down on them in the summer, and the beasts of the earth in the winter.

到那时这高大光滑的民，就是从开国以来极其可畏，分地界践踏人的，他们的地有江河分开，他们必将礼物奉给万军之耶和华，就是奉到锡安山，耶和华安置他名的地方。
In that time an offering will be made to the Lord of armies from a people tall and smooth, causing fear through all their history; a strong nation, crushing down its haters, whose land is cut through by rivers, an offering taken to the place of the name of the Lord of armies, even Mount Zion.

论埃及的默示。看哪，耶和华乘驾快云，临到埃及。埃及的偶像在他面前战兢。埃及人的心在里面消化。
The word about Egypt. See, the Lord is seated on a quick-moving cloud, and is coming to Egypt: and the false gods of Egypt will be troubled at his coming, and the heart of Egypt will be turned to water.

我必激动埃及人攻击埃及人，弟兄攻击弟兄，邻舍攻击邻舍，这城攻击那城，这国攻击那国。
And I will send the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they will be fighting every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; town against town, and kingdom against kingdom.

埃及人的心神，必在里面耗尽。我必败坏他们的谋略。他们必求问偶像，和念咒的，交鬼的，行巫术的。
And the spirit of Egypt will be troubled in her, and I will make her decisions without effect: and they will be turning to the false gods, and to those who make hollow sounds, and to those who have control of spirits, and to those who are wise in secret arts.

我必将埃及人交在残忍主的手中。强暴王必辖制他们。这是主万军之耶和华说的。
And I will give the Egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord; and a hard king will be their ruler, says the Lord, the Lord of armies.

海中的水必绝尽，河也消没干涸。
And the waters of the sea will be cut off, and the river will become dry and waste:

江河要变臭，埃及的河水，都必减少枯干。苇子和芦荻，都必衰残。
And the rivers will have an evil smell; the stream of Egypt will become small and dry: all the water-plants will come to nothing.

靠尼罗河旁的草田，并沿尼罗河所种的田，都必枯干，庄稼被风吹去，归于无有。
The grass-lands by the Nile, and everything planted by the Nile, will become dry, or taken away by the wind, and will come to an end.

打鱼的必哀哭，在尼罗河一切钓鱼的必悲伤，在水上撒网的，必都衰弱。
The fishermen will be sad, and all those who put fishing-lines into the Nile will be full of grief, and those whose nets are stretched out on the waters will have sorrow in their hearts.

用梳好的麻造物的，和织白布的，都必羞愧。
And all the workers in linen thread, and those who make cotton cloth, will be put to shame.

国柱必被打碎，所有佣工的，心必愁烦。
And the makers of twisted thread will be crushed, and those who ... will be sad in heart.

琐安的首领，极其愚昧，法老大有智慧的谋士，所筹画的，成为愚昧。你们怎敢对法老说，我是智慧人的子孙，我是古王的后裔？
The chiefs of Zoan are completely foolish; the wisest guides of Pharaoh have become like beasts: how do you say to Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the offspring of early kings?

你的智慧人在哪里呢？万军之耶和华向埃及所定的旨意，他们可以知道，可以告诉你吧。
Where, then, are your wise men? let them make clear to you, let them give you knowledge of the purpose of the Lord of armies for Egypt.

琐安的首领，都变为愚昧，挪弗的首领，都受了迷惑。当埃及支派房角石的使埃及人走错了路。
The chiefs of Zoan have become foolish, the chiefs of Noph are tricked, the heads of her tribes are the cause of Egypt's wandering out of the way.

耶和华使乖谬的灵，搀入埃及中间。首领使埃及一切所作的都有差错，好像醉酒之人呕吐的时候，东倒西歪一样。
The Lord has sent among them a spirit of error: and by them Egypt is turned out of the right way in all her doings, as a man overcome by wine is uncertain in his steps.

埃及中无论是头与尾，棕枝与芦苇，所作之工，都不成就。
And in Egypt there will be no work for any man, head or tail, high or low, to do.

到那日，埃及人必像妇人一样。他们必因万军之耶和华在埃及以上所抡的手，战兢惧怕。
In that day the Egyptians will be like women: and the land will be shaking with fear because of the waving of the Lord's hand stretched out over it.

犹大地必使埃及惊恐。向谁提起犹大地，谁就惧怕。这是因万军之耶和华向埃及所定的旨意。
And the land of Judah will become a cause of great fear to Egypt; whenever its name comes to mind, Egypt will be in fear before the Lord of armies because of his purpose against it.

当那日埃及地必有五城的人说迦南的方言，又指着万军之耶和华起誓。有一城，必称为灭亡城。
In that day there will be five towns in the land of Egypt using the language of Canaan, and making oaths to the Lord of armies; and one of them will be named, The Town of the Sun.

当那日，在埃及地中必有为耶和华筑的一座坛。在埃及的边界上，必有为耶和华立的一根柱。
In that day there will be an altar to the Lord in the middle of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to the Lord at the edge of the land.

这都要在埃及地为万军之耶和华作记号和证据。埃及人因为受人的欺压哀求耶和华，他就差遣一位救主，作护卫者，拯救他们。
And it will be a sign and a witness to the Lord of armies in the land of Egypt: when they are crying out to the Lord because of their cruel masters, then he will send them a saviour and a strong one to make them free.

耶和华必被埃及人所认识。在那日埃及人必认识耶和华，也要献祭物和供物敬拜他，并向耶和华许愿还愿。
And the Lord will give the knowledge of himself to Egypt, and the Egyptians will give honour to the Lord in that day; they will give him worship with offerings and meal offerings, and will take an oath to the Lord and give effect to it.

耶和华必击打埃及，又击打，又医治，埃及人就归向耶和华。他必应允他们的祷告，医治他们。
And the Lord will send punishment on Egypt, and will make them well again; and when they come back to the Lord he will give ear to their prayer and take away their disease.

当那日必有从埃及通亚述去的大道。亚述人要进入埃及，埃及人也进入亚述。埃及人要与亚述人一同敬拜耶和华。
In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and Assyria will come into Egypt, and Egypt will come into Assyria; and the Egyptians will give worship to the Lord together with the Assyrians.

当那日以色列必与埃及亚述三国一律，使地上的人得福。
In that day Israel will be the third together with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing in the earth:

因为万军之耶和华赐福给他们，说，埃及我的百姓，亚述我手的工作，以色列我的产业，都有福了。
Because of the blessing of the Lord of armies which he has given them, saying, A blessing on Egypt my people, and on Assyria the work of my hands, and on Israel my heritage.

亚述王撒珥根打发他珥探到亚实突的那年，他珥探就攻打亚实突，将城攻取。
In the year when the Tartan came to Ashdod, sent by Sargon, king of Assyria, and made war against it and took it;

那时耶和华晓谕亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚说，你去解掉你腰间的麻布，脱下你脚上的鞋。以赛亚就这样作，露身赤脚行走。
At that time the word of the Lord came to Isaiah, the son of Amoz, saying, Go, and take off your robe, and your shoes from your feet; and he did so, walking unclothed and without shoes on his feet.

耶和华说，我仆人以赛亚怎样露身赤脚行走三年，作为关乎埃及和古实的预兆奇迹。
And the Lord said, As my servant Isaiah has gone unclothed and without shoes for three years as a sign and a wonder to Egypt and Ethiopia,

照样，亚述王也必掳去埃及人，掠去古实人，无论老少，都露身赤脚，现出下体，使埃及蒙羞。
So will the king of Assyria take away the prisoners of Egypt and those forced out of Ethiopia, young and old, unclothed and without shoes, and with backs uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.

以色列人必因所仰望的古实，所夸耀的埃及，惊惶羞愧。
And they will be full of fear, and will no longer have faith in Ethiopia which was their hope, or in Egypt which was their glory.

那时这沿海一带的居民必说，看哪，我们素所仰望的，就是我们为脱离亚述王逃往求救的，不过是如此。我们怎能逃脱呢？
And those living by the sea will say in that day, See the fate of our hope to whom we went for help and salvation from the king of Assyria: what hope have we then of salvation?

论海旁旷野的默示。有仇敌从旷野，从可怕之地而来，好像南方的旋风，猛然扫过。
The word about the waste land. As storm-winds in the South go rushing through, it comes from the waste land, from the land greatly to be feared.

令人凄惨的异象，已默示于我。诡诈的行诡诈，毁灭的行毁灭。以拦哪，你要上去。玛代阿，你要围困。主说，我使一切叹息止住。
A vision of fear comes before my eyes; the worker of deceit goes on in his false way, and the waster goes on making waste. Up! Elam; to the attack! Media; I have put an end to her sorrow.

所以我满腰疼痛。痛苦将我抓住，好像产难的妇人一样。我疼痛甚至不能听。我惊惶甚至不能看。
For this cause I am full of bitter grief; pains like the pains of a woman in childbirth have come on me: I am bent down with sorrow at what comes to my ears; I am shocked by what I see.

我心慌张，惊恐威吓我，我所羡慕的黄昏，变为我的战兢。
My mind is wandering, fear has overcome me: the evening of my desire has been turned into shaking for me.

他们摆设筵席，派人守望，又吃又喝。首领阿，你们起来，用油抹盾牌。
They make ready the table, they put down the covers, they take food and drink. Up! you captains; put oil on your breastplates.

主对我如此说，你去设立守望的，使他将所看见的述说。
For so has the Lord said to me, Go, let a watchman be placed; let him give word of what he sees:

他看见军队，就是骑马的一对一对地来，又看见驴队，骆驼队，就要侧耳细听。
And when he sees war-carriages, horsemen by twos, war-carriages with asses, war-carriages with camels, let him give special attention.

他像狮子吼叫，说，主阿，我白日常站在望楼上，整夜立在我守望所。
And the watchman gave a loud cry, O my lord, I am on the watchtower all day, and am placed in my watch every night:

看哪，有一队军兵骑着马，一对一对地来。他就说，巴比伦倾倒了。倾倒了，他一切雕刻的神像，都打碎于地。
See, here come war-carriages with men, horsemen by twos: and in answer he said, Babylon is made low, is made low, and all her images are broken on the earth.

我被打的禾稼，我场上的谷阿，我从万军之耶和华以色列的神那里所听见的，都告诉你们了。
O my crushed ones, the grain of my floor! I have given you the word which came to me from the Lord of armies, the God of Israel.

论度玛的默示。有人声从西珥呼问我，说，守望的阿，夜里如何。守望的阿，夜里如何。
The word about Edom. A voice comes to me from Seir, Watchman, how far gone is the night? how far gone is the night?

守望的说，早晨将到，黑夜也来。你们若要问，就可以问，可以回头再来。
The watchman says, The morning has come, but night is still to come: if you have questions to put, put them, and come back again.

论亚拉伯的默示。底但结伴的客旅阿，你们必在亚拉伯的树林中住宿。
The word about Arabia. In the thick woods of Arabia will be your night's resting-place, O travelling bands of Dedanites!

提玛地的居民拿水来，送给口渴的，拿饼来迎接逃避的。
Give water to him who is in need of water; give bread, O men of the land of Tema, to those in flight.

因为他们逃避刀剑，和出了鞘的刀，并上了弦的弓，与刀兵的重灾。
For they are in flight from the sharp sword, and the bent bow, and from the trouble of war.

主对我这样说，一年之内，照雇工的年数，基达的一切荣耀必归于无有。
For so has the Lord said to me, In a year, by the years of a servant working for payment, all the glory of Kedar will come to an end:

弓箭手所余剩的，就是基达人的勇士，必然稀少。因为这是耶和华以色列的神说的。
And the rest of the bowmen, the men of war of the children of Kedar, will be small in number: for the Lord, the God of Israel, has said it.

论异象谷的默示。有什么事使你这满城的人都上房顶呢？
The word about the valley of vision. Why have all your people gone up to the house-tops?

你这满处呐喊，大有喧哗的城，欢乐的邑阿，你中间被杀的，并不是被刀杀，也不是因打仗死亡。
You, who are full of loud voices, a town of outcries, given up to joy; your dead men have not been put to the sword, or come to their death in war.

你所有的官长一同逃跑，都为弓箭手所捆绑。你中间一切被找到的都一同被捆绑。他们本是逃往远方的。
All your rulers ... have gone in flight; all your strong ones have gone far away.

所以我说，你们转眼不看我，我要痛哭。不要因我众民（原文作民女）的毁灭，就竭力安慰我。
For this cause I have said, Let your eyes be turned away from me in my bitter weeping; I will not be comforted for the wasting of the daughter of my people.

因为主万军之耶和华使异象谷有溃乱，践踏，烦扰的日子。城被攻破，哀声达到山间。
For it is a day of trouble and of crushing down and of destruction from the Lord, the Lord of armies, in the valley of vision; ...

以拦带着箭袋，还有坐战车的和马兵，吉珥揭开盾牌。
And Elam was armed with arrows, and Aram came on horseback; and the breastplate of Kir was uncovered.

你嘉美的谷遍满战车，也有马兵在城门前排列。
And your most fertile valleys were full of war-carriages, and the horsemen took up their positions in front of the town.

他去掉犹大的遮盖。那日，你就仰望林库内的军器。
He took away the cover of Judah; and in that day you were looking with care at the store of arms in the house of the woods.

你们看见大卫城的破口很多，便聚积下池的水。
And you saw all the broken places in the wall of the town of David: and you got together the waters of the lower pool.

又数点耶路撒冷的房屋，将房屋拆毁，修补城墙。
And you had the houses of Jerusalem numbered, pulling down the houses to make the wall stronger.

又在两道城墙中间挖一个聚水池，可盛旧池的水。却不仰望作这事的主，也不顾念从古定这事的。
And you made a place between the two walls for storing the waters of the old pool: but you gave no thought to him who had done this, and were not looking to him by whom it had been purposed long before.

当那日，主万军之耶和华叫人哭泣哀号，头上光秃，身披麻布。
And in that day the Lord, the Lord of armies, was looking for weeping, and cries of sorrow, cutting off of the hair, and putting on the clothing of grief:

谁知，人倒欢喜快乐，宰牛杀羊，吃肉喝酒，说，我们吃喝吧，因为明天要死了。
But in place of these there was joy and delight, oxen and sheep were being made ready for food, there was feasting and drinking: men said, Now is the time for food and wine, for tomorrow death comes.

万军之耶和华亲自默示我，说，这罪孽直到你们死，断不得赦免。这是主万军之耶和华说的。
And the Lord of armies said to me secretly, Truly, this sin will not be taken from you till your death, says the Lord, the Lord of armies.

主万军之耶和华这样说，你去见掌银库的，就是家宰舍伯那，对他说，
The Lord, the Lord of armies, says, Go to this person in authority, this Shebna, who is over the house; who has made himself a resting-place on high, cutting out a place for himself in the rock, and say,

你在这里作什么呢？有什么人竟在这里凿坟墓，就是在高处为自己凿坟墓，在磐石中为自己凿出安身之所。
Who are you, and by what right have you made for yourself a resting-place here?

看哪，耶和华必像大有力的人，将你紧紧缠裹，竭力抛去。
See, O strong man, the Lord will send you violently away, gripping you with force,

他必将你滚成一团，抛在宽阔之地，好像抛球一样。你这主人家的羞辱，必在那里坐你荣耀的车，也必在那里死亡。
Twisting you round and round like a ball he will send you out into a wide country: there you will come to your end, and there will be the carriages of your pride, O shame of your lord's house!

我必赶逐你离开官职。你必从你的原位撤下。
And I will have you forced out of your place of authority, and pulled down from your position.

到那日我必召我仆人希勒家的儿子以利亚敬来。
And in that day I will send for my servant, Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah:

将你的外袍给他穿上，将你的腰带给他系紧，将你的政权交在他手中。他必作耶路撒冷居民和犹大家的父。
And I will put your robe on him, and put your band about him, and I will give your authority into his hand: and he will be a father to the men of Jerusalem, and to the family of Judah.

我必将大卫家的钥匙放在他肩头上。他开，无人能关。他关，无人能开。
And I will give the key of the family of David into his care; and what he keeps open will be shut by no one, and what he keeps shut no one will make open.

我必将他安稳，像钉子钉在坚固处。他必作为他父家荣耀的宝座。
And I will put him like a nail in a safe place; and he will be for a seat of glory to his father's family.

他父家所有的荣耀，连儿女带子孙，都挂在他身上，好像一切小器皿，从杯子到酒瓶挂上一样。
And all the glory of his father's family will be hanging on him, all their offspring, every small vessel, even the cups and the basins.

万军之耶和华说，当那日，钉在坚固处的钉子必压斜，被砍断落地。挂在其上的重担必被剪断。因为这是耶和华说的。
In that day, says the Lord of armies, will the nail fixed in a safe place give way; and it will be cut down, and in its fall the weight hanging on it will be cut off, for the Lord has said it.

论推罗的默示。他施的船只，都要哀号。因为推罗变为荒场，甚至没有房屋，没有可进之路。这消息是从基提地得来的。
The word about Tyre. Let a cry of sorrow go up, O ships of Tarshish, because your strong place is made waste; on the way back from the land of Kittim the news is given to them.

沿海的居民，就是素来靠航海西顿的商家得丰盛的，你们当静默无言。
Send out a cry of grief, you men of the sea-land, traders of Zidon, who go over the sea, whose representatives are on great waters;

在大水之上，西曷的粮食，尼罗河的庄稼，是推罗的进项。他作列国的大码头。
Who get in the seed of Shihor, whose wealth is the trade of the nations.

西顿哪，你当惭愧。因为大海说，就是海中的保障说，我没有劬劳，也没有生产，没有养育男子，也没有抚养童女。
Be shamed, O Zidon: for the sea, the strong place of the sea has said, I have not been with child, or given birth; I have not taken care of young men, or kept watch over the growth of virgins.

这风声传到埃及，埃及人为推罗的风声，极其疼痛。
When the news comes to Egypt they will be bitterly pained at the fate of Tyre.

推罗人哪，你们当过到他施去。沿海的居民哪，你们都当哀号。
Go over to Tarshish; give cries of sorrow, O men of the sea-land.

这是你们欢乐的城，从上古而有的吗？其中的居民，往远方寄居。
Is this the town which was full of joy, whose start goes back to times long past, whose wanderings took her into far-off countries?

推罗本是赐冠冕的。他的商家是王子，他的买卖人，是世上的尊贵人。遭遇如此，是谁定的呢？
By whom was this purposed against Tyre, the crowning town, whose traders are chiefs, whose business men are honoured in the land?

是万军之耶和华所定的，为要污辱一切高傲的荣耀，使地上一切的尊贵人被藐视。
It was the purpose of the Lord of armies to put pride to shame, to make sport of the glory of those who are honoured in the earth.

他施的民哪，（民原文作女）可以流行你的地，好像尼罗河，不再有腰带拘紧你。
Let your land be worked with the plough, O daughter of Tarshish; there is no longer any harbour.

耶和华已经向海伸手，震动列国。至于迦南，他已经吩咐拆毁其中的保障。
His hand is stretched out over the sea, the kingdoms are shaking: the Lord has given orders about Canaan, to make waste its strong places.

他又说，受欺压西顿的居民哪，（居民原文作处女）你必不得再欢乐，起来，过到基提去。就是在那里，也不得安歇。
And he said, There is no more joy for you, O crushed virgin daughter of Zidon: up! go over to Kittim; even there you will have no rest.

看哪，迦勒底人之地向来没有这民。这国是亚述人为住旷野的人所立的。现在他们建筑戍楼，拆毁推罗的宫殿，使它成为荒凉。
...

他施的船只都要哀号。因为你们的保障变为荒场。
Let a cry of sorrow go up, O ships of Tarshish: because your strong place is made waste.

到那时推罗必被忘记七十年，照着一王的年日。七十年后，推罗的景况，必像妓女所唱的歌。
And it will be in that day that Tyre will go out of mind for seventy years, that is, the days of one king: after the end of seventy years it will be for Tyre as in the song of the loose woman.

你这被忘记的妓女阿，拿琴周流城内，巧弹多唱，使人再想念你。
Take an instrument of music, go about the town, O loose woman who has gone out from the memory of man; make sweet melody with songs, so that you may come back to men's minds.

七十年后，耶和华必眷顾推罗，他就仍得利息，（原文作雇价下同）与地上的万国交易。（原文作行淫）
And it will be after the end of seventy years, that the Lord will have mercy on Tyre, and she will go back to her trade, acting as a loose woman with all the kingdoms of the world on the face of the earth.

他的货财和利息，要归耶和华为圣，必不积攒存留。因为他的货财必为住在耶和华面前的人所得，使他们吃饱，穿耐久的衣服。
And her goods and her trade will be holy to the Lord: they will not be kept back or stored up; for her produce will be for those living in the Lord's land, to give them food for their needs, and fair clothing.

看哪，耶和华使地空虚，变为荒凉。又翻转大地，将居民分散。
See, the Lord is making the earth waste and unpeopled, he is turning it upside down, and sending the people in all directions.

那时百姓怎样，祭司也怎样。仆人怎样，主人也怎样。婢女怎样，主母也怎样。买物的怎样，卖物的也怎样。放债的怎样，借债的也怎样。取利的怎样，出利的也怎样。
And it will be the same for the people as for the priest; for the servant as for his master; and for the woman-servant as for her owner; the same for the one offering goods for a price as for him who takes them; the same for him who gives money at interest and for him who takes it; the same for him who lets others have the use of his property as for those who make use of it.

地必全然空虚，尽都荒凉。因为这话是耶和华说的。
The earth will be completely waste and without men; for this is the word of the Lord.

地上悲哀衰残，世界败落衰残，地上居高位的人也败落了。
The earth is sorrowing and wasting away, the world is full of grief and wasting away, the high ones of the earth come to nothing.

地被其上的居民污秽。因为他们犯了律法，废了律例，背了永约。
The earth has been made unclean by those living in it; because the laws have not been kept by them, the orders have been changed, and the eternal agreement has been broken.

所以地被咒诅吞灭，住在其上的显为有罪。地上的居民被火焚烧，剩下的人稀少。
For this cause the earth is given up to the curse, and those in it are judged as sinners: for this cause those living on the earth are burned up, and the rest are small in number.

新酒悲哀，葡萄树衰残，心中欢乐的，俱都叹息。
The new wine is thin, the vine is feeble, and all the glad-hearted make sounds of grief.

击鼓之乐止息，宴乐人的声音完毕，弹琴之乐也止息了。
The pleasing sound of all instruments of music has come to an end, and the voices of those who are glad.

人必不得饮酒唱歌。喝浓酒的，必以为苦。
There is no more drinking of wine with a song; strong drink will be bitter to those who take it.

荒凉的城拆毁了。各家关门闭户，使人都不得进去。
The town is waste and broken down: every house is shut up, so that no man may come in.

在街上因酒有悲叹的声音。一切喜乐变为昏暗。地上的欢乐归于无有。
There is a crying in the streets because of the wine; there is an end of all delight, the joy of the land is gone.

城中只有荒凉，城门拆毁净尽。
In the town all is waste, and in the public place is destruction.

在地上的万民中，必像打过的橄榄树，又像已摘的葡萄所剩无几。
For it will be in the heart of the earth among the peoples, like the shaking of an olive-tree, as the last of the grapes after the getting-in is done.

这些人要高声欢呼。他们为耶和华的威严，从海那里扬起声来。
But those will be making sounds of joy; they will be crying loudly from the sea for the glory of the Lord.

因此你们要在东方荣耀耶和华，在众海岛荣耀耶和华以色列神的名。
Give praise to the Lord in the east, to the name of the Lord, the God of Israel, in the sea-lands.

我们听见从地极有人歌唱，说，荣耀归于义人。我却说，我消灭了，我消灭了，我有祸了。诡诈的行诡诈，诡诈的大行诡诈。
From the farthest part of the earth comes the sound of songs, glory to the upright. But I said, I am wasting away, wasting away, the curse is on me! The false ones go on in their false way, yes, they go on acting falsely.

地上的居民哪，恐惧，陷坑，网罗，都临近你。
Fear, and death, and the net, are come on you, O people of the earth.

躲避恐惧声音的必坠入陷坑。从陷坑上来的必被网罗缠住。因为天上的窗户都开了，地的根基也震动了。
And it will be that he who goes in flight from the sound of fear will be overtaken by death; and he who gets free from death will be taken in the net: for the windows on high are open, and the bases of the earth are shaking.

地全然破坏，尽都崩裂，大大地震动了。
The earth is completely broken, it is parted in two, it is violently moved.

地要东倒西歪，好像醉酒的人。又摇来摇去，好像吊床。罪过在其上沉重，必然塌陷，不能复起。
The earth will be moving uncertainly, like a man overcome by drink; it will be shaking like a tent; and the weight of its sin will be on it, crushing it down so that it will not get up again.

到那日耶和华在高处必惩罚高处的众军，在地上必惩罚地上的列王，
And in that day the Lord will send punishment on the army of the high ones on high, and on the kings of the earth on the earth.

他们必被聚集，像囚犯被聚在牢狱中，并要囚在监牢里，多日之后便被讨罪。（或作眷顾）
And they will be got together, like prisoners in the prison-house; and after a long time they will have their punishment.

那时月亮要蒙羞，日头要惭愧。因为万军之耶和华必在锡安山，在耶路撒冷作王。在敬畏他的长老面前，必有荣耀。
Then the moon will be veiled, and the sun put to shame; for the Lord of armies will be ruling in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his judges he will let his glory be seen.

耶和华阿，你是我的神。我要尊崇你，我要称赞你的名。因为你以忠信诚实行过奇妙的事。成就你古时所定的。
O Lord, you are my God; I will give praise to you, I will give honour to your name; for you have done great acts of power; your purposes in the past have been made true and certain in effect.

你使城变为乱堆，使坚固城变为荒场，使外邦人宫殿的城，不再为城，永远不再建造。
For you have made a town a waste place: a strong town a mass of broken walls; the tower of the men of pride has come to an end; it will never be put up again.

所以刚强的民，必荣耀你。强暴之国的城，必敬畏你。
For this cause will the strong people give glory to you, the town of the cruel ones will be in fear of you.

因为当强暴人催逼人的时候，如同暴风直吹墙壁，你就作贫穷人的保障，作困乏人急难中的保障，作躲暴风之处，作避炎热的阴凉。
For you have been a strong place for the poor and the crushed in their trouble, a safe place from the storm, a shade from the heat, when the wrath of the cruel ones is like a winter storm.

你要压制外邦人的喧哗，好像干燥地的热气下落，禁止强暴人的凯歌，好像热气被云影消化。
As heat by the shade of a cloud, the noise of the men of pride has been made quiet by you; as heat by the shade of a cloud, the song of the cruel ones has been stopped.

在这山上万军之耶和华，必为万民用肥甘设摆筵席，用陈酒和满髓的肥甘，并澄清的陈酒，设摆筵席。
And in this mountain will the Lord of armies make for all peoples a feast of good things, a feast of wines long stored, of good things sweet to the taste, of wines long kept and tested.

他又必在这山上，除灭遮盖万民之物，和遮蔽万国蒙脸的帕子。
And in this mountain he will put an end to the shade covering the face of all peoples, and the veil which is stretched over all nations.

他已经吞灭死亡直到永远。主耶和华必擦去各人脸上的眼泪，又除掉普天下他百姓的羞辱。因为这是耶和华说的。
He has put an end to death for ever; and the Lord God will take away all weeping; and he will put an end to the shame of his people in all the earth: for the Lord has said it.

到那日人必说，看哪，这是我们的神。我们素来等候他，他必拯救我们，这是耶和华，我们素来等候他，我们必因他的救恩。欢喜快乐。
And in that day it will be said, See, this is our God; we have been waiting for him, and he will be our saviour: this is the Lord in whom is our hope; we will be glad and have delight in his salvation.

耶和华的手，必按在这山上。摩押人在所居之地必被践踏，好像干草被践踏在粪池的水中。
For in this mountain will the hand of the Lord come to rest, and Moab will be crushed down in his place, even as the dry stems of the grain are crushed under foot in the waste place.

他必在其中伸开手，好像？？水的伸开手？？水一样。但耶和华必使他的骄傲，和他手所行的诡计，一并败落。
And if he puts out his hands, like a man stretching out his hands in swimming, the Lord will make low his pride, however expert his designs.

耶和华使你城上的坚固高台倾倒，拆平直到尘埃。
And the strong tower of your walls has been broken by him, made low, and crushed even to the dust.

当那日在犹大地人必唱这歌，说，我们有坚固的城。耶和华要将救恩定为城墙，为外郭。
In that day will this song be made in the land of Judah: We have a strong town; he will make salvation our walls and towers.

敞开城门，使守信的义民得以进入。
Let the doors be open, so that the upright nation which keeps faith may come in.

坚心倚赖你的，你必保守他十分平安，因为他倚靠你。
The man whose heart is unmoved you will keep in peace, because his hope is in you.

你们当倚靠耶和华直到永远。因为耶和华是永久的磐石。
Let your hope be in the Lord for ever: for the Lord Jah is an unchanging Rock.

他使住高处的，与高城一并败落，将城拆毁，拆平直到尘埃。
For he has made low those who are lifted up, all the people of the town of pride: he makes it low, crushing it down to the earth; he makes it low in the dust.

要被脚践踏，就是被困苦人的脚，和穷乏人的脚践踏。
It will be crushed under the feet of the poor and the steps of those who are in need.

义人的道，是正直的，你为正直的主，必修平义人的路。
The way of the good man is straight; the road of the upright is made smooth by you.

耶和华阿，我们在你行审判的路上等候你。我们心里所羡慕的是你的名，就是你那可记念的名。
We have been waiting for you, O Lord; the desire of our soul is for the memory of your name.

夜间我心中羡慕你。我里面的灵切切寻求你。因为你在世上行审判的时候，地上的居民就学习公义。
In the night the desire of my soul has been for you; early will my spirit be searching for you; for when your punishments come on the earth, the people of the world will get the knowledge of righteousness.

以恩惠待恶人，他仍不学习公义。在正直的地上，他必行事不义，也不注意耶和华的威严。
Even if you are kind to the evil-doer, he will not go after righteousness; even in the land of the upright he will still go on in his wrongdoing, and will not see the glory of the Lord.

耶和华阿，你的手高举，他们仍然不看。却要看你为百姓发的热心，因而抱愧。并且有火烧灭你的敌人。
Lord, your hand is lifted up, but they do not see: let them see ... yes, your haters will be burned up in the fire.

耶和华阿，你必派定我们得平安。因为我们所作的事，都是你给我们成就的。
Lord, you will give us peace: for all our works are the outcome of your purpose.

耶和华我们的神阿，在你以外曾有别的主管辖我们，但我们专要倚靠你，提你的名。
O Lord, our God, other lords than you have had rule over us; but in you only is our salvation, and no other name will we take on our lips.

他们死了，必不能再活。他们去世，必不能再起。因为你刑罚他们，毁灭他们，他们的名号就全然消灭。
The dead will not come back to life: their spirits will not come back to earth; for this cause you have sent destruction on them, so that the memory of them is dead.

耶和华阿，你增添国民，你增添国民。你得了荣耀，又扩张地的四境。
You have made the nation great, O Lord, you have made it great; glory is yours: you have made wide the limits of the land.

耶和华阿，他们在急难中寻求你。你的惩罚临到他们身上，他们就倾心吐胆祷告你。
Lord, in trouble our eyes have been turned to you, we sent up a prayer when your punishment was on us.

妇人怀孕，临产疼痛，在痛苦之中喊叫，耶和华阿，我们在你面前，也是如此。
As a woman with child, whose time is near, is troubled, crying out in her pain; so have we been before you, O Lord.

我们也曾怀孕疼痛，所产的竟像风一样，我们在地上未曾行什么拯救的事。世上的居民也未曾败落。
We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have given birth to wind; no salvation has come to the earth through us, and no children have come into the world.

死人（原文作你的死人）要复活。尸首（原文作我的尸首）要兴起。睡在尘埃的阿，要醒起歌唱。因你的甘露好像菜蔬上的甘露，地也要交出死人来。
Your dead will come back; their dead bodies will come to life again. Those in the dust, awaking from their sleep, will send out a song; for your dew is a dew of light, and the earth will give birth to the shades.

我的百姓阿，你们要来进入内室，关上门，隐藏片时，等到忿怒过去。
Come, my people, into your secret places, and let your doors be shut: keep yourself safe for a short time, till his wrath is over.

因为耶和华从他的居所出来，要刑罚地上居民的罪孽。地也必露出其中的血，不再掩盖被杀的人。
For the Lord is coming out of his place to send punishment on the people of the earth for their evil-doing: the earth will let the blood drained out on her be seen, and will keep her dead covered no longer.

到那日，耶和华必用他刚硬有力的大刀，刑罚鳄鱼，就是那快行的蛇，刑罚鳄鱼，就是那曲行的蛇。并杀海中的大鱼。
In that day the Lord, with his great and strong and cruel sword, will send punishment on Leviathan, the quick-moving snake, and on Leviathan, the twisted snake; and he will put to death the dragon which is in the sea.

当那日有出酒的葡萄园。你们要指这园唱歌，说，
In that day it will be said, A vine-garden of delight, make a song about it.

我耶和华是看守葡萄园的，我必时刻浇灌，昼夜看守，免得有人损害。
I, the Lord, am watching it; I will give it water at all times: I will keep it night and day, for fear that any damage comes to it.

我心中不存忿怒。惟愿荆棘蒺藜与我交战，我就勇往直前，把他一同焚烧。
My passion is over: if the thorns were fighting against me, I would make an attack on them, and they would be burned up together.

不然，让他持住我的能力，使他与我和好。愿他与我和好。
Or let him put himself under my power, and make peace with me.

将来雅各要扎根，以色列要发芽开花。他们的果实，必充满世界。
In days to come Jacob will take root: Israel will put out buds and flowers; and the face of the world will be full of fruit.

主击打他们，岂像击打那些击打他们的人吗？他们被杀戮，岂像被他们所杀戮的吗？
Is his punishment like the punishment of those who overcame him? or are his dead as great in number as those he put to the sword?

你打发他们去，是相机宜与他们相争。刮东风的日子，就用暴风将他们逐去。
Your anger against her has been made clear by driving her away; he has taken her away with his storm-wind in the day of his east wind.

所以雅各的罪孽得赦免，他的罪过得除掉的果效，全在乎此。就是他叫祭坛的石头，变为打碎的灰石，以致木偶和日像，不再立起。
So by this will the sin of Jacob be covered, and this is all the fruit of taking away his punishment; when all the stones of the altar are crushed together, so that the wood pillars and the sun-images will not be put up again.

因为坚固城变为凄凉，成了撇下离弃的居所，像旷野一样，牛犊必在那里吃草，在那里躺卧，并吃尽其中的树枝。
For the strong town is without men, an unpeopled living-place; and she has become a waste land: there the young ox will take his rest, and its branches will be food for him.

枝条枯干，必被折断。妇女要来，点火烧着，因为这百姓蒙昧无知，所以创造他们的，必不怜恤他们，造成他们的，也不施恩与他们。
When its branches are dry they will be broken off; the women will come and put fire to them: for it is a foolish people; for this cause he who made them will have no mercy on them, and he whose work they are will not have pity on them.

以色列人哪，到那日，耶和华必从大河，直到埃及小河，将你们一一地收集，如同人打树拾果一样。
And it will be in that day that the Lord will get together his grain, from the River to the stream of Egypt, and you will be got together with care, O children of Israel.

当那日，必大发角声。在亚述地将要灭亡的，并在埃及地被赶散的，都要来。他们就在耶路撒冷圣山上敬拜耶和华。
And it will be in that day that a great horn will be sounded; and those who were wandering in the land of Assyria, and those who had been sent away into the land of Egypt, will come; and they will give worship to the Lord in the holy mountain at Jerusalem.

祸哉，以法莲的酒徒，住在肥美谷的山上，他们心里高傲，以所夸的为冠冕，犹如将残之花。
Ho! crown of pride of those who are given up to wine in Ephraim, and the dead flower of his glory which is on the head of those who are overcome by strong drink!

看哪，主有一大能大力者，像一阵冰雹，像毁灭的暴风，像涨溢的大水，他必用手将冠冕摔落于地。
See, the Lord has a strong and cruel one; like a rain of ice, a storm of destruction, like the overflowing of a strong river, he will violently overcome them.

以法莲高傲的酒徒，他的冠冕，必被踏在脚下。
The crown of pride of those who are given up to wine in Ephraim will be crushed under foot;

那荣美将残之花，就是在肥美谷山上的，必像夏令以前初熟的无花果。看见这果的就注意，一到手中就吞吃了。
And the dead flower of his glory, which is on the head of the fertile valley, will be like the first early fruit before the summer; which a man takes and puts in his mouth the minute he sees it.

到那日，万军之耶和华必作他余剩之民的荣冠华冕。
In that day will the Lord of armies be a crown of glory, and a fair ornament, to the rest of his people;

也作了在位上行审判者公平之灵，并城门口打退仇敌者的力量。
And a spirit of wisdom to the judge, and strength to those who keep back the attackers at the door of the town.

就是这地的人，也因酒摇摇晃晃，因浓酒东倒西歪。祭司和先知因浓酒摇摇晃晃，被酒所困，因浓酒东倒西歪。他们错解默示，谬行审判。
And further, these are uncertain through wine, and have gone out of the right way through strong drink: the priest and the prophet are uncertain through strong drink, they are overcome by wine, they have gone out of the way through strong drink; their vision is false, they go wrong in their decisions.

因为各席上满了呕吐的污秽，无一处干净。
For all the tables are covered with coughed-up food, so that there is not a clean place.

讥诮先知的说，他要将知识指教谁呢？要使谁明白传言呢？是那刚断奶离怀的吗？
To whom will he give knowledge? and to whom will he make clear the word? Will it be to those who have newly given up milk, and who have only now been taken from the breast?

他竟命上加命，令上加令，律上加律，例上加例，这里一点，那里一点。
For it is one rule after another; one line after another; here a little, there a little.

先知说，不然，主要借异邦人的嘴唇，和外邦人的舌头，对这百姓说话。
No, but with broken talk, and with a strange tongue, he will give his word to this people:

他曾对他们说，你们要使疲乏人得安息。这样才得安息，才得舒畅。他们却不肯听。
To whom he said, This is the rest, give rest to him who is tired; and by this you may get new strength; but they would not give ear.

所以耶和华向他们说的话，是命上加命，令上加令，律上加律，例上加例，这里一点，那里一点，以致他们前行仰面跌倒，而且跌碎，并陷入网罗，被缠住。
For this cause the word of the Lord will be to them rule after rule, line after line, here a little, there a little; so that they may go on their way, and falling back may be broken, and taken in the net.

所以你们这些亵慢的人，就是辖管住在耶路撒冷这百姓的，要听耶和华的话。
Give ear then to the word of the Lord, you men of pride, the rulers of this people in Jerusalem:

你们曾说，我们与死亡立约，与阴间结盟。敌军（原文作鞭子）如水涨漫经过的时候，必不临到我们。因我们以谎言为避所，在虚假以下藏身。
Because you have said, We have made death our friend, and with the underworld we have made an agreement; when the overflowing waters come through they will not come near us; for we are looking to false words for help, taking cover in what is untrue:

所以主耶和华如此说，看哪，我在锡安放一块石头，作为根基，是试验过的石头，是稳固根基，宝贵的房角石，信靠的人必不着急。
For this cause says the Lord God, See, I am placing in Zion as a base, a stone, a tested stone, an angle-stone which is certain and of great value: and he who has faith will not give way.

我必以公平为准绳，以公义为线铊。冰雹必冲去谎言的避所，大水必漫过藏身之处。
And I will make right decision the measuring-line, and righteousness the weight: and the ice-storm will take away the safe place of false words, and the secret place will be covered by the flowing waters.

你们与死亡所立的约，必然废掉，与阴间所结的盟，必立不住。敌军（原文作鞭子）如水涨漫经过的时候，你们必被他践踏。
And the help you were looking for from death will come to nothing, and your agreement with the underworld will be broken; when the overflowing waters come through, then you will be overcome by them.

每逢经过必将你们掳去。因为每早晨他必经过，白昼黑夜都必如此。明白传言的，必受惊恐。
Whenever they come through they will overtake you; for they will come through morning after morning, by day and by night: and the news will be nothing but fear.

原来床榻短，使人不能舒身。被窝窄，使人不能遮体。
For the bed is not long enough for a man to be stretched out on: and the cover is not wide enough for him to be covered with.

耶和华必兴起，像在毗拉心山，他必发怒，像在基遍谷，好作成他的工，就是非常的工，成就他的事，就是奇异的事。
For the Lord will come up as on Mount Perazim, he will be moved to wrath as in the valley of Gibeon; so that he may do his work--strange is his work; and give effect to his act--unnatural is his act.

现在你们不可亵慢，恐怕捆你们的绑索更结实了。因为我从主万军之耶和华那里听见已经决定，在全地上施行灭绝的事。
And now, take care that you do not make sport of him, or your bands will be made strong; for I have had word from the Lord, the Lord of armies, of an end, of a complete end, which is to come on all the land.

你们当侧耳听我的声音，留心听我的言语。
Let your ears be open to my voice; give attention to what I say.

那耕地为要撒种的，岂是常常耕地呢？岂是常常开垦耙地呢？
Is the ploughman for ever ploughing? does he not get the earth ready and broken up for the seed?

他拉平了地面，岂不就撒种小茴香，播种大茴香，按行列种小麦，在定处种大麦，在田边种粗麦呢？
When the face of the earth has been levelled, does he not put in the different sorts of seed, and the grain in lines, and the barley in its place, and the spelt at the edge?

因为他的神教导他务农相宜，并且指教他。
For his God is his teacher, giving him the knowledge of these things.

原来打小茴香，不用尖利的器具，轧大茴香，也不用碌碡。（原文作车轮下同）但用杖打小茴香，用棍打大茴香。
For the fitches are not crushed with a sharp instrument, and a cart-wheel is not rolled over the cummin; but the grain of the fitches is hammered out with a stick, and of the cummin with a rod.

作饼的粮食是用磨磨碎，因它不必常打。虽用碌碡和马打散，却不磨它。
Is the grain for bread crushed? He does not go on crushing it for ever, but he lets his cart-wheels and his horses go over it without crushing it.

这也是出于万军之耶和华。他的谋略奇妙，他的智慧广大。
This comes from the Lord of armies, purposing wonders, and wise in all his acts.

唉，亚利伊勒，亚利伊勒，大卫安营的城。任凭你年上加年，节期照常周流。
Ho! Ariel, Ariel, the town against which David made war; put year to year, let the feasts come round:

我终必使亚利伊勒困难。他必悲伤哀号，我却仍以他为亚利伊勒。
And I will send trouble on Ariel, and there will be weeping and cries of grief; and she will be to me as Ariel.

我必四围安营攻击你，屯兵围困你，筑垒攻击你。
And I will make war on you like David, and you will be shut in by earthworks, and I will make towers round you.

你必败落，从地中说话。你的言语必微细出于尘埃。你的声音必像那交鬼者的声音出于地。你的言语低低微微出于尘埃。
And you will be made low, and your voice will come out of the earth, and your words will be low out of the dust; and your voice will come out of the earth like that of a spirit, making bird-like noises out of the dust.

你仇敌的群众，却要像细尘，强暴人的群众，也要像飞糠。这事必顷刻之间忽然临到。
And the army of your attackers will be like small dust, and all the cruel ones like dry stems gone before the wind; suddenly it will come about.

万军之耶和华必用雷轰，地震，大声，旋风，暴风，并吞灭的火焰，向他讨罪。
The Lord of armies will come in with thunder and earth-shaking and great noise, with rushing wind and storm, and the flame of burning fire.

那时，攻击亚利伊勒列国的群众，就是一切攻击亚利伊勒和他的保障，并使他困难的，必如梦景，如夜间的异象。
And all the nations making war on Ariel, and all those who are fighting against her and shutting her in with their towers, will be like a dream, like a vision of the night.

又必像饥饿的人，梦中吃饭，醒了仍觉腹空。或像口渴的人，梦中喝水，醒了仍觉发昏，心里想喝。攻击锡安山列国的群众，也必如此。
And it will be like a man desiring food, and dreaming that he is feasting; but when he is awake there is nothing in his mouth: or like a man in need of water, dreaming that he is drinking; but when he is awake he is feeble and his soul is full of desire: so will all the nations be which make war on Mount Zion.

你们等候惊奇吧。你们宴乐昏迷吧。他们醉了，却非因酒。他们东倒西歪，却非因浓酒。
Be surprised and full of wonder; let your eyes be covered and be blind: be overcome, but not with wine; go with uncertain steps, but not because of strong drink.

因为耶和华将沉睡的灵，浇灌你们，封闭你们的眼，蒙盖你们的头。你们的眼，就是先知。你们的头，就是先见。
For the Lord has sent on you a spirit of deep sleep; and by him your eyes, the prophets, are shut, and your heads, the seers, are covered.

所有的默示你们看如封住的书卷。人将这书卷交给识字的，说，请念吧。他说，我不能念，因为是封住了。
And the vision of all this has become to you like the words of a book which is shut, which men give to one who has knowledge of writing, saying, Make clear to us what is in the book: and he says, I am not able to, for the book is shut:

又将这书卷交给不识字的人，说，请念吧。他说，我不识字。
And they give it to one without learning, saying, Make clear to us what is in the book: and he says, I have no knowledge of writing.

主说，因为这百姓亲近我，用嘴唇尊敬我，心却远离我。他们敬畏我，不过是领受人的吩咐。
And the Lord said, because this people come near to me with their mouths, and give honour to me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, and their fear of me is false, a rule given them by the teaching of men;

所以我在这百姓中要行奇妙的事，就是奇妙又奇妙的事。他们智慧人的智慧，必然消灭，聪明人的聪明，必然隐藏。
For this cause I will again do a strange thing among this people, a thing to be wondered at: and the wisdom of their wise men will come to nothing, and the sense of their guides will no longer be seen.

祸哉，那些向耶和华深藏谋略的，又在暗中行事，说，谁看见我们呢？谁知道我们呢？
Cursed are those who go deep to keep their designs secret from the Lord, and whose works are in the dark, and who say, Who sees us? and who has knowledge of our acts?

你们把事颠倒了，岂可看窑匠如泥吗？被制作的物，岂可论制作物的说，他没有制作我。或是被创造的物论造物的说，他没有聪明？
You are turning things upside down! Is the wet earth the same to you as the one who is forming it? will the thing made say of him who made it, He made me not: or the thing formed say of him who gave it form, He has no knowledge?

利巴嫩变为肥田，肥田看如树林，不是只有一点点时候吗？
In a very short time Lebanon will become a fertile field, and the fertile field will seem like a wood.

那时，聋子必听见这书上的话。瞎子的眼，必从迷蒙黑暗中得以看见。
And in that day those whose ears are stopped will be hearing the words of the book; and the eyes of the blind will see through the mist and the dark.

谦卑人，必因耶和华增添欢喜。人间贫穷的，必因以色列的圣者快乐。
And the poor will have their joy in the Lord increased, and those in need will be glad in the Holy One of Israel.

因为强暴人已归无有。亵慢人已经灭绝。一切找机会作孽的，都被剪除。
For the cruel one has come to nothing; and those who make sport of the Lord are gone; and those who are watching to do evil are cut off:

他们在争讼的事上，定无罪的为有罪，为城门口责备人的，设下网罗，用虚无的事，屈枉义人。
Who give help to a man in a wrong cause, and who put a net for the feet of him who gives decisions in the public place, taking away a man's right without cause.

所以救赎亚伯拉罕的耶和华，论雅各家如此说，雅各必不再羞愧，面容也不至变色。
For this reason the Lord, the saviour of Abraham, says about the family of Jacob, Jacob will not now be put to shame, or his face be clouded with fear.

但他看见他的众子，就是我手的工作，在他那里，他们必尊我的名为圣，必尊雅各的圣者为圣，必敬畏以色列的神。
But when they, the children of Jacob, see the work of my hands among them, they will give honour to my name; yes, they will give honour to the Holy One of Jacob, and go in fear of the God of Israel.

心中迷糊的，必得明白，发怨言的，必受训诲。
Those whose hearts were turned away from him will get knowledge, and those who made an outcry against him will give attention to his teaching.

耶和华说，祸哉，这悖逆的儿女。他们同谋，却不由于我，结盟，却不由于我的灵，以至罪上加罪。
Ho! uncontrolled children, says the Lord, who give effect to a purpose which is not mine, and who make an agreement, but not by my spirit, increasing their sin:

起身下埃及去，并没有求问我。要靠法老的力量，加添自己的力量，并投在埃及的荫下。
Who make a move to go down into Egypt, without authority from me; who are looking to the strength of Pharaoh for help, and whose hope is in the shade of Egypt.

所以法老的力量，必作你们的羞辱，投在埃及的荫下，要为你们的惭愧。
And the strength of Pharaoh will be your shame, and your hope in the shade of Egypt will come to nothing.

他们的首领已在琐安，他们的使臣到了哈内斯。
For his chiefs are at Zoan, and his representatives have come to Hanes.

他们必因那不利于他们的民蒙羞。那民并非帮助，也非利益，只作羞耻凌辱。
For they have all come with offerings to a people of no use to them, in whom is no help or profit, but only shame and a bad name.

论南方牲畜的默示。他们把财物驮在驴驹的脊背上，将宝物驮在骆驼的肉鞍上，经过艰难困苦之地，就是公狮，母狮，蝮蛇，火焰的飞龙之地，往那不利于他们的民那里去。
The word about the Beasts of the South. Through the land of trouble and grief, the land of the she-lion and the voice of the lion, of the snake and the burning winged snake, they take their wealth on the backs of young asses, and their stores on camels, to a people in whom is no profit.

埃及的帮助是徒然无益的。所以我称他为坐而不动的拉哈伯。
For there is no use or purpose in the help of Egypt: so I have said about her, She is Rahab, who has come to an end.

现今你去，在他们面前将这话刻在版上，写在书上，以便传留后世，直到永永远远。
Now go, put it in writing before them on a board, and make a record of it in a book, so that it may be for the future, a witness for all time to come.

因为他们是悖逆的百姓，说谎的儿女，不肯听从耶和华训诲的儿女。
For they are an uncontrolled people, false-hearted, who will not give ear to the teaching of the Lord:

他们对先见说，不要望见不吉利的事，对先知说，不要向我们讲正直的话，要向我们说柔和的话，言虚幻的事。
Who say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Do not give us word of what is true, but say false things to give us pleasure:

你们要离弃正道，偏离直路。不要在我们面前，再提说以色列的圣者。
Get out of the good way, turning from the right road; do not keep the Holy One of Israel before our minds.

所以以色列的圣者如此说，因为你们藐视这训诲的话，倚赖欺压和乖僻，以此为可靠的。
For this cause the Holy One of Israel says, Because you will not give ear to this word, and are looking for help in ways of deceit and evil, and are putting your hope in them:

故此，这罪孽在你们身上，好像将要破裂凸出来的高墙，顷刻之间，忽然坍塌。
This sin will be to you like a crack in a high wall, causing its fall suddenly and in a minute.

要被打碎，好像把窑匠的瓦器打碎，毫不顾惜，甚至碎块中找不到一片，可用以从炉内取火，从池中舀水。
And he will let it be broken as a potter's vessel is broken: it will be smashed to bits without mercy; so that there will not be a bit in which one may take fire from the fireplace, or water from the spring.

主耶和华以色列的圣者曾如此说，你们得救在乎归回安息。你们得力在乎平静安稳。你们竟自不肯。
For the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, said, In quiet and rest is your salvation: peace and hope are your strength: but you would not have it so.

你们却说，不然，我们要骑马奔走。所以你们必然奔走。又说，我们要骑飞快的牲口。所以追赶你们的，也必飞快。
Saying, No, for we will go in flight on horses; so you will certainly go in flight: and, We will go on the backs of quick-running beasts; so those who go after you will be quick-footed.

一人叱喝，必令千人逃跑。五人叱喝，你们都必逃跑。以致剩下的，好像山顶的旗杆，冈上的大旗。
A thousand will go in fear before one; even before five you will go in flight: till you are like a pillar by itself on the top of a mountain, and like a flag on a hill.

耶和华必然等候，要施恩给你们。必然兴起，好怜悯你们。因为耶和华是公平的神。凡等候他的，都是有福的。
For this cause the Lord will be waiting, so that he may be kind to you; and he will be lifted up, so that he may have mercy on you; for the Lord is a God of righteousness: there is a blessing on all whose hope is in him.

百姓必在锡安在耶路撒冷居住。你不再哭泣。主必因你哀求的声音施恩给你。他听见的时候，就必应允你。
O people, living in Zion, at Jerusalem, your weeping will be ended; he will certainly have mercy on you at the sound of your cry; when it comes to his ear, he will give you an answer.

主虽然以艰难给你当饼，以困苦给你当水，你的教师却不再隐藏，你眼必看见你的教师。
And though the Lord will give you the bread of trouble and the water of grief, you will no longer put your teacher on one side, but you will see your teacher:

你或向左，或向右，你必听见后边有声音说，这是正路，要行在其间。
And at your back, when you are turning to the right hand or to the left, a voice will be sounding in your ears, saying, This is the way in which you are to go.

你雕刻偶像所包的银子，和铸造偶像所镀的金子，你要玷污，要抛弃，好像污秽之物，对偶像说，去吧。
And you will make unclean what is covering your pictured images of silver, and the plating of your images of gold: you will send them away as an unclean thing, saying, Be gone!

你将种子撒在地里，主必降雨在其上。并使地所出的粮肥美丰盛。到那时你的牲畜，必在宽阔的草场吃草。
And he will give rain for your seed, so that you may put it in the earth; and you will have bread from the produce of the earth, good and more than enough for your needs: in that day the cattle will get their food in wide grass-lands.

耕地的牛和驴驹，必吃加盐的料。这料是用木锨和杈子扬净的。
And the oxen and the young asses which are used for ploughing, will have salted grain which has been made free from the waste with fork and basket.

在大行杀戮的日子，高台倒塌的时候，各高山冈陵，必有川流河涌。
And there will be rivers and streams of water on every tall mountain and on every high hill, in the day when great numbers are put to the sword, when the towers come down.

当耶和华缠裹他百姓的损处，医治他民鞭伤的日子，月光必像日光，日光必加七倍，像七日的光一样。
And the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times greater, as the light of seven days, in the day when the Lord puts oil on the wounds of his people, and makes them well from the blows they have undergone.

看哪，耶和华的名从远方来，怒气烧起，密烟上腾。他的嘴唇满有忿恨，他的舌头像吞灭的火。
See, the name of the Lord is coming from far, burning with his wrath, with thick smoke going up: his lips are full of passion, and his tongue is like a burning fire:

他的气如涨溢的河水，直涨到颈项，要用毁灭的筛箩，筛净列国。并且在众民的口中，必有使人错行的嚼环。
And his breath is as an overflowing stream, coming up even to the neck, shaking the nations for their destruction, like the shaking of grain in a basket: and he will put a cord in the mouths of the people, turning them out of their way.

你们必唱歌，像守圣节的夜间一样。并且心中喜乐，像人吹笛，上耶和华的山，到以色列的磐石那里。
You will have a song, as in the night when a holy feast is kept; and you will be glad in heart, as when they go with music of the pipe to the mountain of the Lord, the Rock of Israel.

耶和华必使人听他威严的声音，又显他降罚的膀臂，和他怒中的忿恨，并吞灭的火焰，与霹雷，暴风，冰雹。
And the Lord will send out the sound of his great voice, and they will see his arm stretched out, with the heat of his wrath, and the flame of a burning fire; with a cloud-burst, and storm, and a rain of ice.

亚述人必因耶和华的声音惊惶。耶和华必用杖击打他。
For through the voice of the Lord the Assyrian will be broken, and the Lord's rod will be lifted up against him.

耶和华必将命定的杖，加在他身上，每打一下，人必击鼓弹琴。打仗的时候，耶和华必抡起手来，与他交战。
And every blow of the rod of his punishment, which the Lord will send on him, will be with the sound of music: and with the waving of his sword the Lord will make war against him.

原来陀斐特又深又宽，早已为王预备好了，其中堆的是火，与许多木柴。耶和华的气如一股硫磺火，使它着起来。
For a place of fire has long been ready; yes, it has been made ready for the king; he has made it deep and wide: it is massed with fire and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of fire, puts a light to it.

祸哉，那些下埃及求帮助的，是因仗赖马匹，倚靠甚多的车辆，并倚靠强壮的马兵，却不仰望以色列的圣者，也不求问耶和华。
Cursed are those who go down to Egypt for help, and who put their faith in horses; looking to war-carriages for salvation, because of their numbers; and to horsemen, because they are very strong; but they are not looking to the Holy One of Israel, or turning their hearts to the Lord;

其实耶和华有智慧。他必降灾祸，并不反悔自己的话，却要兴起攻击那作恶之家，又攻击那作孽帮助人的。
Though he is wise, and able to send evil, and his purpose will not be changed; but he will go against the house of the evil-doers, and against those to whom they are looking for help.

埃及人不过是人，并不是神。他们的马不过是血肉，并不是灵。耶和华一伸手，那帮助人的必绊跌，那受帮助的也必跌倒，都一同灭亡。
For the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses are flesh, and not spirit: and when the Lord's hand is stretched out, the helper and he who is helped will come down together.

耶和华对我如此说，狮子和少壮狮子，获食咆哮，就是喊许多牧人来攻击它，它总不因他们的声音惊惶，也不因他们的喧哗缩伏。如此万军之耶和华，也必降临在锡安山冈上争战。
For the Lord has said to me, As a lion, or a young lion, makes an angry noise over his food, and if a band of herdsmen come out against him, he will not be in fear of their voices, or give up his food for their noise: so the Lord of armies will come down to make war against Mount Zion and its hill.

雀鸟怎样扇翅覆雏，万军之耶和华也要照样保护耶路撒冷，他必保护拯救，要越门保守。
Like birds with outstretched wings, so will the Lord of armies be a cover to Jerusalem; he will be a cover and salvation for it, going over it he will keep it from danger.

以色列人哪，你们深深地悖逆耶和华，现今要归向他。
Come back to him who has been so deeply sinned against by the children of Israel.

到那日各人必将他金偶像，银偶像，就是亲手所造陷自己在罪中的，都抛弃了。
For in that day they will all give up their images of silver and of gold, the sin which they made for themselves.

亚述人必倒在刀下，并非人的刀。有刀要将他吞灭，并非人的刀。他必逃避这刀，他的少年人，必成为服苦的。
Then the Assyrian will come down by the sword, but not of man; the sword, not of men, will be the cause of his destruction: and he will go in flight from the sword, and his young men will be put to forced work.

他的磐石，必因惊吓挪去，他的首领，必因大旗惊惶。这是那有火在锡安，有炉在耶路撒冷的耶和华说的。
And his rock will come to nothing because of fear, and his chiefs will go in flight from the flag, says the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his altar in Jerusalem.

看哪，必有一王凭公义行政。必有首领借公平掌权。
See, a king will be ruling in righteousness, and chiefs will give right decisions.

必有一人像避风所，和避暴雨的隐密处，又像河流在干旱之地，像大磐石的影子在疲乏之地。
And a man will be as a safe place from the wind, and a cover from the storm; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shade of a great rock in a waste land.

那能看的人，眼不再昏迷，能听的人，耳必得听闻。
And the eyes of those who see will not be shut, and those who have hearing will give ear to the word.

冒失人的心，必明白知识，结吧人的舌，必说话通快。
The man of sudden impulses will become wise in heart, and he whose tongue is slow will get the power of talking clearly.

愚顽人不再称为高明，吝啬人不再称为大方。
The foolish man will no longer be named noble, and they will not say of the false man that he is a man of honour.

因为愚顽人，必说愚顽话，心里想作罪孽，惯行亵渎的事，说错谬的话，攻击耶和华，使饥饿的人，无食可吃，使口渴的人，无水可喝。
For the foolish man will say foolish things, having evil thoughts in his heart, working what is unclean, and talking falsely about the Lord, to keep food from him who is in need of it, and water from him whose soul is desiring it.

吝啬人所用的法子是恶的。他图谋恶计，用谎言毁灭谦卑人。穷乏人讲公理的时候，他也是这样行。
The designs of the false are evil, purposing the destruction of the poor man by false words, even when he is in the right.

高明人却谋高明事，在高明事上，也必永存。
But the noble-hearted man has noble purposes, and by these he will be guided.

安逸的妇女阿，起来听我的声音。无虑的女子阿，侧耳听我的言语。
Give ear to my voice, you women who are living in comfort; give attention to my words, you daughters who have no fear of danger.

无虑的女子阿，再过一年多，必受骚扰。因为无葡萄可摘，无果子（或作禾稼）可收。
In not much more than a year, you, who are not looking for evil, will be troubled: for the produce of the vine-gardens will be cut off, and there will be no getting in of the grapes.

安逸的妇女阿，要战兢。无虑的女子阿，要受骚扰。脱去衣服，赤着身体，腰束麻布。
Be shaking with fear, you women who are living in comfort; be troubled, you who have no fear of danger: take off your robes and put on clothing of grief.

她们必为美好的田地，和多结果的葡萄树，捶胸哀哭。
Have sorrow for the fields, the pleasing fields, the fertile vine;

荆棘蒺藜必长在我百姓的地上，又长在欢乐的城中，和一切快乐的房屋上。
And for the land of my people, where thorns will come up; even for all the houses of joy in the glad town.

因为宫殿必被撇下。多民的城必被离弃。山冈望楼永为洞穴，作野驴所喜乐的，为羊群的草场。
For the fair houses will have no man living in them; the town which was full of noise will become a waste; the hill and the watchtower will be unpeopled for ever, a joy for the asses of the woods, a place of food for the flocks;

等到圣灵从上浇灌我们，旷野就变为肥田，肥田看如树林。
Till the spirit comes on us from on high, and the waste land becomes a fertile field, and the fertile field is changed into a wood.

那时，公平要居在旷野，公义要居在肥田。
Then in the waste land there will be an upright rule, and righteousness will have its place in the fertile field.

公义的果效，必是平安。公义的效验，必是平稳，直到永远。
And the work of righteousness will be peace; and the effect of an upright rule will be to take away fear for ever.

我的百姓，必住在平安的居所，安稳的住处，平静的安歇所。
And my people will be living in peace, in houses where there is no fear, and in quiet resting-places.

但要降冰雹打倒树林。城必全然拆平。
But the tall trees will come down with a great fall, and the town will be low in a low place.

你们在各水边撒种牧放牛驴的有福了。
Happy are you who are planting seed by all the waters, and sending out the ox and the ass.

祸哉，你这毁灭人的，自己倒不被毁灭。行事诡诈的，人倒不以诡诈待你。你毁灭罢休了，自己必被毁灭。你行完了诡诈，人必以诡诈待你。
Ho! you who make waste those who did not make you waste; acting falsely to those who were not false to you. When you have come to an end of wasting, you will be made waste, and after your false acts, they will do the same to you.

耶和华阿，求你施恩于我们。我们等候你。求你每早晨作我们的膀臂。遭难的时候，为我们的拯救。
O Lord, have mercy on us; for we have been waiting for your help: be our strength every morning, our salvation in time of trouble.

喧嚷的响声一发，众民奔逃。你一兴起，列国四散。
At the loud noise the peoples have gone in flight; at your coming up the nations have gone in all directions.

你们所掳的，必被敛尽，好像蚂蚱吃（原文作敛）尽禾稼。人要蹦在其上，好像蝗虫一样。
And the goods taken in war will be got together like the massing of young locusts; men will be rushing on them like the rushing of locusts.

耶和华被尊崇，因他居在高处。他以公平公义充满锡安。
The Lord is lifted up; his place is on high: he has made Zion full of righteousness and true religion.

你一生一世必得安稳，有丰盛的救恩，并智慧，和知识。你以敬畏耶和华为至宝。
And she will have no more fear of change, being full of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge: the fear of the Lord is her wealth.

看哪，他们的豪杰在外头哀号。求和的使臣，痛痛哭泣。
See, the men of war are sorrowing outside the town: those who came looking for peace are weeping bitterly.

大路荒凉，行人止息。敌人背约，藐视城邑，不顾人民。
The highways are waste, no man is journeying there: the agreement is broken, he has made sport of the towns, he has no thought for man.

地上悲哀衰残。利巴嫩羞愧枯干。沙仑像旷野。巴珊和迦密的树林凋残。
The earth is sorrowing and wasting away; Lebanon is put to shame and has become waste; Sharon is like the Arabah; and in Bashan and Carmel the leaves are falling.

耶和华说，现在我要起来。我要兴起。我要勃然而兴。
Now will I come forward, says the Lord; now will I be lifted up; now will my power be seen.

你们要怀的是糠秕。要生的是碎秸。你们的气就是吞灭自己的火。
Your designs will be without profit, and their effect will be nothing: you will be burned up by the fire of my breath.

列邦必像已烧的石灰，像已割的荆棘，在火中焚烧。
And the peoples will be like the burning of chalk: as thorns cut down, which are burned in the fire.

你们远方的人，当听我所行的，你们近处的人，当承认我的大能。
Give ear, you who are far off, to what I have done: see my power, you who are near.

锡安中的罪人都惧怕。不敬虔的人被战兢抓住。我们中间谁能与吞灭的火同住？我们中间谁能与永火同住呢？
The sinners in Zion are full of fear; the haters of God are shaking with wonder. Who among us may keep his place before the burning fire? who among us may see the eternal burnings?

行事公义，说话正直，憎恶欺压的财利，摆手不受贿赂，塞耳不听流血的话，闭眼不看邪恶事的，
He whose ways are true, and whose words are upright; he who gives no thought to the profits of false acts, whose hands have not taken rewards, who will have no part in putting men to death, and whose eyes are shut against evil;

他必居高处。他的保障是磐石的坚垒。他的粮必不缺乏，（原文作赐给）他的水必不断绝。
He will have a place on high: he will be safely shut in by the high rocks: his bread will be given to him; his waters will be certain.

你的眼必见王的荣美，必见辽阔之地。
Your eyes will see the king in his glory: they will be looking on a far-stretching land.

你的心必思想那惊吓的事，自问说，记数目的在哪里呢？平贡银的在哪里呢？数戍楼的在哪里呢？
Your heart will give thought to the cause of your fear: where is the scribe, where is he who made a record of the payments, where is he by whom the towers were numbered?

你必不见那强暴的民，就是说话深奥，你不能明白，言语呢喃，你不能懂得的。
Never again will you see the cruel people, a people whose tongue has no sense for you; whose language is strange to you.

你要看锡安我们守圣节的城。你的眼必见耶路撒冷为安静的居所，为不挪移的帐幕，橛子永不拔出，绳索一根也不折断。
Let your eyes be resting on Zion, the town of our holy feasts: you will see Jerusalem, a quiet resting-place, a tent which will not be moved, whose tent-pins will never be pulled up, and whose cords will never be broken.

在那里耶和华必显威严与我们同在，当作江河宽阔之地。其中必没有荡桨摇橹的船来往，也没有威武的船经过。
But there the Lord will be with us in his glory, ... wide rivers and streams; where no boat will go with blades, and no fair ship will be sailing.

因为耶和华是审判我们的，耶和华是给我们设律法的，耶和华是我们的王。他必拯救我们。
For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our law-giver, the Lord is our king; he will be our saviour.

你的绳索松开不能栽稳桅杆，也不能扬起篷来，那时许多掳来的物被分了。瘸腿的把掠物夺去了。
Your cords have become loose; they were not able to make strong the support of their sails, the sail was not stretched out: then the blind will take much property, the feeble-footed will make division of the goods of war.

城内居民必不说，我病了。其中居住的百姓，罪孽都赦免了。
And the men of Zion will not say, I am ill: for its people will have forgiveness for their sin.

列国阿，要近前来听。众民哪，要侧耳而听。地和其上所充满的，世界和其中一切所出的，都应当听。
Come near, you nations, and give ear; take note, you peoples: let the earth and everything in it give ear; the world and all those living in it.

因为耶和华向万国发忿恨，向他们的全军发烈怒，将他们灭尽，交出他们受杀戮。
For the Lord is angry with all the nations, and his wrath is burning against all their armies: he has put them to the curse, he has given them to destruction.

被杀的必然抛弃，尸首臭气上腾。诸山被他们的血融化。
Their dead bodies will be thick on the face of the earth, and their smell will come up, and the mountains will be flowing with their blood, and all the hills will come to nothing.

天上的万象都要消没，天被卷起，好像书卷。其上的万象要残败，像葡萄树的叶子残败，又像无花果树的叶子残败一样
And the heavens will be rolled together like the roll of a book: and all their army will be gone, like a dead leaf from the vine, or a dry fruit from the fig-tree.

因为我的刀在天上已经喝足。这刀必临到以东，和我所咒诅的民，要施行审判。
For my sword in heaven is full of wrath: see, it is coming down on Edom, in punishment on the people of my curse.

耶和华的刀满了血，用脂油和羊羔公山羊的血，并公绵羊腰子的脂油滋润的。因为耶和华在波斯拉有献祭的事，在以东地大行杀戮。
The sword of the Lord is full of blood, it is fat with the best of the meat, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the best parts of the sheep: for the Lord has a feast in Bozrah, and much cattle will be put to death in the land of Edom.

野牛，牛犊，和公牛，要一同下来。他们的地喝醉了血，他们的尘土因脂油肥润。
And the strong oxen will go down to death together with the smaller cattle.

因耶和华有报仇之日，为锡安的争辩，有报应之年。
For it is the day of the Lord's punishment, when he gives payment for the wrongs done to Zion.

以东的河水要变为石油，尘埃要变为硫磺，地土成为烧着的石油。
And its streams will be turned into boiling oil, and its dust into burning stone, and all the land will be on fire.

昼夜总不熄灭，烟气永远上腾，必世世代代成为荒废，永永远远无人经过。
It will not be put out day or night; its smoke will go up for ever: it will be waste from generation to generation; no one will go through it for ever.

鹈鹕，箭猪，却要得为业。猫头鹰，乌鸦，要住在其间。耶和华必将空虚的准绳，混沌的线铊，拉在其上。
But the birds of the waste land will have their place there; it will be a heritage for the bittern and the raven: and it will be measured out with line and weight as a waste land.

以东人要召贵胄来治国，那里却无一个。首领也都归于无有。
The jackals will be there, and her great ones will be gone; they will say, There is no longer a kingdom there, and all her chiefs will have come to an end.

以东的宫殿要长荆棘，保障要长蒺藜和刺草。要作野狗的住处，鸵鸟的居所。
And thorns will come up in her fair houses, and waste plants in her strong towers: and foxes will make their holes there, and it will be a meeting-place for ostriches.

旷野的走兽，要和豺狼相遇。野山羊，要与伴偶对叫。夜间的怪物，必在那里栖身，自找安歇之处。
And the beasts of the waste places will come together with the jackals, and the evil spirits will be crying to one another, even the night-spirit will come and make her resting-place there.

箭蛇要在那里作窝，下蛋，抱蛋，生子，聚子在其影下。鹞鹰，各与伴偶聚集在那里。
The arrowsnake will make her hole and put her eggs there, and get her young together under her shade: there the hawks will come together by twos.

你们要查考宣读耶和华的书。这都无一缺少，无一没有伴偶，因为我的口已经吩咐，他的灵将他们聚集。
See what is recorded in the book of the Lord: all these will be there, not one without the other: the mouth of the Lord has given the order, and his spirit has made them come together.

他也为他们拈阄，又亲手用准绳给他们分地，他们必永得为业，世世代代住在其间。
And he has given them their heritage, and by his hand it has been measured out to them: it will be theirs for ever, their resting-place from generation to generation.

旷野和干旱之地，必然欢喜。沙漠也必快乐。又像玫瑰开花。
The waste land and the dry places will be glad; the lowland will have joy and be full of flowers.

必开花繁盛，乐上加乐，而且欢呼。利巴嫩的荣耀，并迦密与沙仑的华美，必赐给他。人必看见耶和华的荣耀，我们神的华美。
It will be flowering like the rose; it will be full of delight and songs; the glory of Lebanon will be given to it; the pride of Carmel and Sharon: they will see the glory of the Lord, the power of our God.

你们要使软弱的手坚壮，无力的膝稳固。
Make strong the feeble hands, give support to the shaking knees.

对胆怯的人说，你们要刚强，不要惧怕。看哪，你们的神必来报仇，必来施行极大的报应，他必来拯救你们。
Say to those who are full of fear, Be strong and take heart: see, your God will give punishment; the reward of God will come; he himself will come to be your saviour.

那时瞎子的眼必睁开，聋子的耳必开通。
Then the eyes of the blind will see, and the ears which are stopped will be open.

那时瘸子必跳跃像鹿，哑吧的舌头必能歌唱。在旷野必有水发出，在沙漠必有河涌流。
Then will the feeble-footed be jumping like a roe, and the voice which was stopped will be loud in song: for in the waste land streams will be bursting out, and waters in the dry places.

发光的沙，（或作蜃楼）要变为水池，干渴之地，要变为泉源。在野狗躺卧之处，必有青草，芦苇，和蒲草。
And the burning sand will become a pool, and the dry earth springs of waters: the fields where the sheep take their food will become wet land, and water-plants will take the place of grass.

在那里必有一条大道，称为圣路。污秽人不得经过，必专为赎民行走，行路的人虽愚昧，也不至失迷。
And a highway will be there; its name will be, The Holy Way; the unclean and the sinner may not go over it, and those who go on it will not be turned out of the way by the foolish.

在那里必没有狮子，猛兽也不登这路，在那里都遇不见。只有赎民在那里行走。
No lion will be there, or any cruel beast; they will not be seen there; but those for whom the Lord has given a price,

并且耶和华救赎的民必归回，歌唱来到锡安。永乐必归到他们的头上，他们必得着欢喜快乐，忧愁叹息尽都逃避。
Even those whom he has made free, will come back again; they will come with songs to Zion; on their heads will be eternal joy; delight and joy will be theirs, and sorrow and sounds of grief will be gone for ever.

希西家王十四年，亚述王西拿基立，上来攻击犹大的一切坚固城，将城攻取。
And it came about in the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah that Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up against all the walled towns of Judah and took them.

亚述王从拉吉差遣拉伯沙基，率领大军，往耶路撒冷到希西家王那里去。他就站在上池的水沟旁，在漂布地的大路上。
And the king of Assyria sent the Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem to King Hezekiah with a strong force, and he took up his position by the stream of the higher pool, by the highway of the washerman's

于是希勒家的儿子家宰以利亚敬，并书记舍伯那，和亚萨的儿子史官约亚，出来见拉伯沙基。
And there came out to him Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder.

拉伯沙基对他们说，你们去告诉希西家说，亚述大王如此说，你所倚靠的有什么可仗赖的呢？
And the Rab-shakeh said to them, Say now to Hezekiah, These are the words of the great king, the king of Assyria: In what are you placing your hope?

你说，有打仗的计谋和能力。我看不过是虚话，你到底倚靠谁，才背叛我呢？
You say you have a design and strength for war, but these are only words: now to whom are you looking for support, that you have gone against my authority?

看哪，你所倚靠的埃及，是那压伤的苇杖，人若靠这杖，就必刺透他的手。埃及王法老向一切倚靠他的人，也是这样。
See, you are basing your hope on that broken rod of Egypt, which will go into a man's hand if he makes use of it for a support; for so is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all who put their faith in him.

你若对我说，我们倚靠耶和华我们的神。希西家岂不是将神的丘坛，和祭坛废去，且对犹大和耶路撒冷的人说，你们当在这坛前敬拜吗？
And if you say to me, Our hope is in the Lord our God; is it not he whose high places and altars Hezekiah has taken away, saying to Judah and Jerusalem that worship may only be given before this altar?

现在你把当头给我主亚述王，我给你二千匹马，看你这一面骑马的人够不够。
And now, take a chance with my master, the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able to put horsemen on them.

若不然，怎能打败我主臣仆中最小的军长呢？你竟倚靠埃及的战车马兵吗？
How then may you put to shame the least of my master's servants? and you have put your hope in Egypt for war-carriages and horsemen:

现在我上来攻击毁灭这地，岂没有耶和华的意思吗？耶和华吩咐我说，你上去攻击毁灭这地吧。
And have I now come to send destruction on this land without the Lord's authority? It was the Lord himself who said to me, Go up against this land and make it waste.

以利亚敬，舍伯那，约亚，对拉伯沙基说，求你用亚兰言语和仆人说话，因为我们懂得，不要用犹大言语和我们说话达到城上百姓的耳中。
Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to the Rab-shakeh, Please make use of the Aramaean language in talking to your servants, for we are used to it, and do not make use of the Jews' language in the hearing of the people on the wall.

拉伯沙基说，我主差遣我来，岂是单对你和你的主说这些话吗？不也是对这些坐在城上，要与你们一同吃自己粪喝自己尿的人说吗？
But the Rab-shakeh said, Is it to your master or to you that my master has sent me to say these words? has he not sent me to the men seated on the wall? for they are the people who will be short of food with you when the town is shut in.

于是拉伯沙基站着，用犹大言语，大声喊着说，你们当听亚述大王的话。
Then the Rab-shakeh got up and said with a loud voice in the Jews' language, Give ear to the words of the great king, the king of Assyria:

王如此说，你们不要被希西家欺哄了，因他不能拯救你们。
This is what the king says: Do not be tricked by Hezekiah, for there is no salvation for you in him.

也不要听希西家使你们倚靠耶和华说，耶和华必要拯救我们，这城必不交在亚述王的手中。
And do not let Hezekiah make you put your faith in the Lord, saying, The Lord will certainly keep us safe, and this town will not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.

不要听希西家的话，因亚述王如此说，你们要与我和好，出来投降我，各人就可以吃自己葡萄树和无花果树的果子，喝自己井里的水。
Do not give ear to Hezekiah, for this is what the king of Assyria says, Make peace with me, and come out to me; and everyone will be free to take the fruit of his vine and of his fig-tree, and the water of his spring;

等我来领你们到一个地方，与你们本地一样，就是有五谷和新酒之地，有粮食和葡萄园之地。
Till I come and take you away to a land like yours, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vine-gardens.

你们要谨防，恐怕希西家劝导你们说，耶和华必拯救我们。列国的神有哪一个救他本国脱离亚述王的手呢？
Give no attention to Hezekiah when he says to you, The Lord will keep us safe. Has any one of the gods of the nations kept his land from falling into the hands of the king of Assyria?

哈马和亚珥拔的神在哪里呢？西法瓦音的神在哪里呢？他们曾救撒玛利亚脱离我的手吗？
Where are the gods of Hamath and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? where are the gods of Samaria? and have they kept Samaria out of my hand?

这些国的神，有谁曾救自己的国脱离我的手呢？难道耶和华能救耶路撒冷脱离我的手吗？
Who among all the gods of these countries have kept their country from falling into my hand, to give cause for the thought that the Lord will keep Jerusalem from falling into my hand?

百姓静默不言，并不回答一句，因为王曾吩咐说，不要回答他。
But they kept quiet and gave him no answer: for the king's order was, Give him no answer.

当下希勒家的儿子家宰以利亚敬，和书记舍伯那，并亚萨的儿子史官约亚，都撕裂衣服，来到希西家那里，将拉伯沙基的话告诉了他。
Then Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothing parted as a sign of grief, and gave him an account of what the Rab-shakeh had said.

希西家王听见，就撕裂衣服，披上麻布，进了耶和华的殿。
And on hearing it Hezekiah took off his robe and put on haircloth and went into the house of the Lord.

使家宰以利亚敬，和书记舍伯那，并祭司中的长老，都披上麻布，去见亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚。
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and the chief priests, dressed in haircloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.

对他说，希西家如此说，今日是急难，责罚，凌辱的日子，就如妇人将要生产婴孩，却没有力量生产。
And they said to him, Hezekiah says, This day is a day of trouble and punishment and shame: for the children are ready to come to birth, but there is no strength to give birth to them.

或者耶和华你的神，听见拉伯沙基的话，就是他主人亚述王打发他来辱骂永生神的话。耶和华你的神，听见这话就发斥责，故此求你为余剩的民，扬声祷告。
It may be that the Lord your God will give ear to the words of the Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria, his master, has sent to say evil things against the living God, and will make his words come to nothing: so make your prayer for the rest of the people.

希西家王的臣仆，就去见以赛亚，
So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

以赛亚对他们说，要这样对你们的主人说，耶和华如此说，你听见亚述王的仆人亵渎我的话，不要惧怕。
And Isaiah said to them, This is what you are to say to your master: The Lord says, Be not troubled by the words which the servants of the king of Assyria have said against me in your hearing.

我必惊动（原文作使灵进入）他的心，他要听见风声就归回本地，我必使他在那里倒在刀下。
See, I will put a spirit into him, and bad news will come to his ears, and he will go back to his land; and there I will have him put to death.

拉伯沙基回去，正遇见亚述王攻打立拿。原来他早听见亚述王拔营离开拉吉。
So the Rab-shakeh went back, and when he got there the king of Assyria was making war against Libnah: for it had come to his ears that the king of Assyria had gone away from Lachish.

亚述王听见人论古实王特哈加说，他出来要与你争战。亚述王一听见，就打发使者去见希西家，吩咐他们说。
And when news came to him that Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, had made an attack on him, ... And he sent representatives to Hezekiah, king of Judah, saying,

你们对犹大王希西家如此说，不要听你所倚靠的神欺哄你，说，耶路撒冷必不交在亚述王的手中。
This is what you are to say to Hezekiah, king of Judah: Let not your God, in whom is your faith, give you a false hope, saying, Jerusalem will not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.

你总听说亚述诸王向列国所行的，乃是尽行灭绝，难道你还能得救吗？
No doubt the story has come to your ears of what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, putting them to the curse: and will you be kept safe from their fate?

我列祖所毁灭的，就是歌散，哈兰，利色，和属提拉撒的伊甸人。这些国的神，何曾拯救这些国呢？
Did the gods of the nations keep safe those on whom my fathers sent destruction, Gozan and Haran and Rezeph, and the children of Eden who were in Telassar?

哈马的王，亚珥拔的王，西法瓦音城的王，希拿和以瓦的王，都在哪里呢？
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the town of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivva?

希西家从使者手里接过书信来，看完了，就上耶和华的殿，将书信在耶和华面前展开。
And Hezekiah took the letter from the hands of those who had come with it; and after reading it, Hezekiah went up to the house of the Lord, opening the letter there before the Lord,

希西家向耶和华祷告说，
And he made prayer to the Lord, saying,

坐在二基路伯上万军之耶和华以色列的神阿，你，惟有你，是天下万国的神。你曾创造天地。
O Lord of armies, the God of Israel, seated between the winged ones, you only are the God of all the kingdoms of the earth; you have made heaven and earth.

耶和华阿，求你侧耳而听。耶和华阿，求你睁眼而看。要听西拿基立的一切话，他是打发使者来辱骂永生神的。
Let your ear be turned to us, O Lord; let your eyes be open, O Lord, and see: take note of all the words of Sennacherib who has sent men to say evil against the living God.

耶和华阿，亚述诸王果然使列国，和列国之地变为荒凉。
Truly, O Lord, the kings of Assyria have made waste all the nations and their lands,

将列国的神像都扔在火里，因为它本不是神，乃是人手所造的，是木头，石头的，所以灭绝它。
And have given their gods to the fire: for they were no gods, but wood and stone, the work of men's hands; so they have given them to destruction.

耶和华我们的神阿，现在求你救我们脱离亚述王的手，使天下万国都知道惟有你是耶和华。
But now, O Lord our God, give us salvation from his hand, so that it may be clear to all the kingdoms of the earth that you, and you only, are the Lord.

亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚，就打发人去见希西家说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，你既然求我攻击亚述王西拿基立，
Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent to Hezekiah, saying, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, The prayer you have made to me against Sennacherib, king of Assyria, has come to my ears.

所以耶和华论他这样说，锡安的处女藐视你，嗤笑你，耶路撒冷的女子向你摇头。
This is the word which the Lord has said about him: In the eyes of the virgin daughter of Zion you are shamed and laughed at; the daughter of Jerusalem has made sport of you.

你辱骂谁？亵渎谁？扬起声来，高举眼目攻击谁呢？乃是攻击以色列的圣者。
Against whom have you said evil and bitter things? and against whom has your voice been loud and your eyes lifted up? even against the Holy One of Israel.

你借你的臣仆辱骂主，说，我率领许多战车上山顶，到利巴嫩极深之处，我要砍伐其中高大的香柏树，和佳美的松树，我必上极高之处，进入肥田的树林。
You have sent your servants with evil words against the Lord, and have said, With all my war-carriages I have come up to the top of the mountains, to the inmost parts of Lebanon; and its tall cedars will be cut down, and the best trees of its woods: I will come up into his highest places, into his thick woods.

我已经挖井喝水，我必用脚掌踏干埃及的一切河。
I have made water-holes and taken their waters, and with my foot I have made all the rivers of Egypt dry.

耶和华说，你岂没有听见我早先所作的古时所立的吗？现在借你使坚固城荒废，变为乱堆。
Has it not come to your ears how I did it long before, purposing it in times long past? Now I have given effect to my design, so that by you strong towns might be turned into masses of broken walls.

所以其中的居民力量甚小，惊惶羞愧。他们像野草，像青菜，如房顶上的草，又如田间未长成的禾稼。
This is why their townsmen had no power, they were broken and put to shame; they were like the grass of the field, or a green plant; like the grass on the house-tops, which a cold wind makes waste.

你坐下，你出去，你进来，你向我发烈怒，我都知道。
But I have knowledge of your getting up and your resting, of your going out and your coming in.

因你向我发烈怒，又因你狂傲的话达到我耳中，我就要用钩子钩上你的鼻子，把嚼环放在你口里，使你从原路转回去。
Because your wrath against me and your pride have come to my ears, I will put my hook in your nose and my cord in your lips, and I will make you go back by the way you came.

以色列人哪，我赐你们一个证据，你们今年要吃自生的，明年也要吃自长的，至于后年，你们要耕种收割，栽植葡萄园，吃其中的果子。
And this will be the sign to you: you will get your food this year from what comes up of itself, and in the second year from the produce of the same; and in the third year you will put in your seed, and get in the grain, and make vine-gardens, and take of their fruit.

犹大家所逃脱余剩的，仍要往下扎根，向上结果。
And those of Judah who are still living will again take root in the earth, and give fruit.

必有余剩的民，从耶路撒冷而出，必有逃脱的人，从锡安山而来。万军之耶和华的热心必成就这事。
For from Jerusalem those who have been kept safe will go out, and those who are still living will go out of Mount Zion: by the fixed purpose of the Lord of armies this will be done.

所以耶和华论亚述王如此说，他必不得来到这城，也不在这里射箭，不得拿盾牌到城前，也不筑垒攻城。
For this cause the Lord says about the king of Assyria, He will not come into this town, or send an arrow against it; he will not come before it with arms, or put up an earthwork against it.

他从那条路来，必从那条路回去，必不得来到这城。这是耶和华说的。
By the way he came he will go back, and he will not get into this town.

因我为自己的缘故，又为我仆人大卫的缘故，必保护拯救这城。
For I will keep this town safe, for my honour, and for the honour of my servant David.

耶和华的使者出去，在亚述营中杀了十八万五千人。清早有人起来一看，都是死尸了。
And the angel of the Lord went out and put to death in the army of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand men: and when the people got up early in the morning, there was nothing to be seen but dead bodies.

亚述王西拿基立，就拔营回去，住在尼尼微。
Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went back to his place at Nineveh.

一日在他的神，尼斯洛庙里叩拜，他儿子亚得米勒，和沙利色，用刀杀了他，就逃到亚拉腊地。他儿子以撒哈顿接续他作王。
And it came about, when he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer put him to death with the sword, and they went in flight into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon, his son, became king in his place.

那时希西家病得要死，亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚去见他，对他说，耶和华如此说，你当留遗命与你的家，因为你必死不能活了。
In those days Hezekiah was ill and near death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to him, The Lord says, Put your house in order; for your death is near.

希西家就转脸朝墙，祷告耶和华说，
And Hezekiah, turning his face to the wall, made his prayer to the Lord, saying,

耶和华阿，求你记念我在你面前怎样存完全的心，按诚实行事，又作你眼中所看为善的。希西家就痛哭了。
O Lord, keep in mind how I have been true to you with all my heart, and have done what is good in your eyes. And Hezekiah gave way to bitter weeping.

耶和华的话临到以赛亚说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Isaiah, saying,

你去告诉希西家说，耶和华你祖大卫的神如此说，我听见了你的祷告，看见了你的眼泪，我必加增你十五年的寿数。
Go to Hezekiah, and say, The Lord, the God of David, your father, says, Your prayer has come to my ears, and I have seen your weeping: see, I will give you fifteen more years of life.

并且我要救你和这城脱离亚述王的手，也要保护这城。
And I will keep you and this town safe from the hands of the king of Assyria: and I will keep watch over this town.

我耶和华必成就我所说的，我先给你一个兆头。
And Isaiah said, This is the sign the Lord will give you, that he will do what he has said:

就是叫亚哈斯的日晷，向前进的日影往后退十度。于是前进的日影，果然在日晷上往后退了十度。
See, I will make the shade which has gone down on the steps of Ahaz with the sun, go back ten steps. So the shade went back the ten steps by which it had gone down.

犹大王希西家患病，已经痊愈，就作诗说，
The writing of Hezekiah, king of Judah, after he had been ill, and had got better from his disease.

我说，正在我中年（或作晌午）之日，必进入阴间的门。我余剩的年岁不得享受。
I said, In the quiet of my days I am going down into the underworld: the rest of my years are being taken away from me.

我说，我必不得见耶和华，就是在活人之地不见耶和华。我与世上的居民不再见面。
I said, I will not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living: I will not see man again or those living in the world.

我的住处被迁去离开我，好像牧人的帐棚一样。我将性命卷起，像织布的卷布一样。耶和华必将我从机头剪断，从早到晚，他要使我完结。
My resting-place is pulled up and taken away from me like a herdsman's tent: my life is rolled up like a linen-worker's thread; I am cut off from the cloth on the frame: from day even to night you give me up to pain.

我使自己安静直到天亮。他像狮子折断我一切的骨头，从早到晚，他要使我完结。
I am crying out with pain till the morning; it is as if a lion was crushing all my bones.

我像燕子呢喃。像白鹤鸣叫。又像鸽子哀鸣。我因仰观，眼睛困倦。耶和华阿，我受欺压。求你为我作保。
I make cries like a bird; I give out sounds of grief like a dove: my eyes are looking up with desire; O Lord, I am crushed, take up my cause.

我可说什么呢？他应许我的，也给我成就了。我因心里的苦楚，在一生的年日，必悄悄而行。
What am I to say? seeing that it is he who has done it: all my time of sleeping I am turning from side to side without rest.

主阿，人得存活，乃在乎此。我灵存活，也全在此。所以求你使我痊愈，仍然存活。
O Lord, for this cause I am waiting for you, give rest to my spirit: make me well again, and let me come back to life.

看哪，我受大苦，本为使我得平安，你因爱我的灵魂，（或作生命）便救我脱离败坏的坑。因为你将我一切的罪，扔在你的背后。
See, in place of peace my soul had bitter sorrow. but you have kept back my soul from the underworld; for you have put all my sins out of your memory.

原来阴间不能称谢你，死亡不能颂扬你，下坑的人不能盼望你的诚实。
For the underworld is not able to give you praise, death gives you no honour: for those who go down into the underworld there is no hope in your mercy.

只有活人，活人必称谢你，像我今日称谢你一样。为父的，必使儿女知道你的诚实。
The living, the living man, he will give you praise, as I do this day: the father will give the story of your mercy to his children.

耶和华肯救我，所以我们要一生一世，在耶和华殿中用丝弦的乐器，唱我的诗歌。
O Lord, quickly be my saviour; so we will make my songs to corded instruments all the days of our lives in the house of the Lord.

以赛亚说，当取一块无花果饼来，贴在疮上，王必痊愈。
And Isaiah said, Let them take a cake of figs, and put it on the diseased place, and he will get well.

希西家问说，我能上耶和华的殿，有什么兆头呢？
And Hezekiah said, What is the sign that I will go up to the house of the Lord?

那时巴比伦王巴拉但的儿子米罗达巴拉但，听见希西家病而痊愈，就送书信和礼物给他。
At that time Merodach-baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters with an offering to Hezekiah, because he had news that Hezekiah had been ill, and was well again.

希西家喜欢见使者，就把自己宝库的金子，银子，香料，贵重的膏油，和他武库的一切军器，并所有的财宝都给他们看。他家中和全国之内，希西家没有一样不给他们看的。
And Hezekiah was glad at their coming, and let them see all his store of wealth, the silver and the gold and the spices and the oil, and all the house of his arms, and everything there was in his stores: there was nothing in all his house or his kingdom which he did not let them see.

于是先知以赛亚来见希西家王，问他说，这些人说什么？他们从哪里来见你？希西家说，他们从远方的巴比伦来见我。
Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah, and said to him, What did these men say, and where did they come from? And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country, even from Babylon.

以赛亚说，他们在你家里看见了什么？希西家说，凡我家中所有的，他们都看见了，我财宝中没有一样不给他们看的。
And he said, What have they seen in your house? And Hezekiah said in answer, They saw everything in my house: there is nothing among my stores which I did not let them see.

以赛亚对希西家说，你要听万军之耶和华的话。
Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Give ear to the word of the Lord of armies:

日子必到，凡你家里所有的，并你列祖积蓄到如今的，都要被掳到巴比伦去，不留下一样，这是耶和华说的。
Truly, the days are coming when everything in your house, and whatever your fathers have put in store till this day, will be taken away to Babylon: all will be gone.

并且从你本身所生的众子，其中必有被掳去，在巴比伦王宫里当太监的。
And your sons, even your offspring, will they take away to be unsexed servants in the house of the king of Babylon.

希西家对以赛亚说，你所说耶和华的话甚好，因为在我的年日中，必有太平和稳固的景况。
Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which you have said. And he said in his heart, There will be peace and quiet in my days.

你们的神说，你们要安慰，安慰我的百姓。
Give comfort, give comfort, to my people, says your God.

要对耶路撒冷说安慰的话，又向他宣告说，他争战的日子已满了，他的罪孽赦免了，他为自己的一切罪，从耶和华手中加倍受罚。
Say kind words to the heart of Jerusalem, crying out to her that her time of trouble is ended, that her punishment is complete; that she has been rewarded by the Lord's hand twice over for all her sins.

有人声喊着说，在旷野预备耶和华的路，（或作在旷野有人声喊着说，当预备耶和华的路），在沙漠地修平我们神的道。
A voice of one crying, Make ready in the waste land the way of the Lord, make level in the lowland a highway for our God.

一切山洼都要填满，大小山冈都要削平，高高低低的要改为平坦，崎崎岖岖的必成为平原。
Let every valley be lifted up, and every mountain and hill be made low, and let the rough places become level, and the hilltops become a valley,

耶和华的荣耀必然显现，凡有血气的，必一同看见，因为这是耶和华亲口说的。
And the glory of the Lord will be made clear, and all flesh will see it together, for the mouth of the Lord has said it.

有人声说，你喊叫吧。有一个说，我喊叫什么呢？说，凡有血气的，尽都如草，他的美容，都像野地的花。
A voice of one saying, Give a cry! And I said, What is my cry to be? All flesh is grass, and all its strength like the flower of the field.

草必枯干，花必凋残，因为耶和华的气吹在其上。百姓诚然是草。
The grass becomes dry, the flower is dead; because the breath of the Lord goes over it: truly the people is grass.

草必枯干，花必凋残，惟有我们神的话，必永远立定。
The grass is dry, the flower is dead; but the word of our God is eternal.

报好信息给锡安的阿，你要登高山。报好信息给耶路撒冷的阿，你要极力扬声。扬声不要惧怕，对犹大的城邑说，看哪，你们的神。
You who give good news to Zion, get up into the high mountain; you who give good news to Jerusalem, let your voice be strong; let it be sounding without fear; say to the towns of Judah, See, your God!

主耶和华必像大能者临到，他的膀臂必为他掌权。他的赏赐在他那里，他的报应在他面前。
See, the Lord God will come as a strong one, ruling in power: see, those made free by him are with him, and those whom he has made safe go before him.

他必像牧人牧养自己的羊群，用膀臂聚集羊羔抱在怀中，慢慢引导那乳养小羊的。
He will give food to his flock like a keeper of sheep; with his arm he will get it together, and will take up the lambs on his breast, gently guiding those which are with young.

谁曾用手心量诸水，用手虎口量苍天，用升斗盛大地的尘土，用秤称山岭，用天平平岗陵呢？
In the hollow of whose hand have the waters been measured? and who is able to take the heavens in his stretched-out fingers? who has got together the dust of the earth in a measure? who has taken the weight of the mountains, or put the hills into the scales?

谁曾测度耶和华的心（或作谁曾指示耶和华的灵），或作他的谋士指教他呢？
By whom has the spirit of the Lord been guided, or who has been his teacher?

他与谁商议，谁教导他，谁将公平的路指示他，又将知识教训他，将通达的道指教他呢？
Who gave him suggestions, and made clear to him the right way? who gave him knowledge, guiding him in the way of wisdom?

看哪，万民都像水桶的一滴，又算如天平上的微尘。他举起众海岛，好像极微之物。
See, the nations are to him like a drop hanging from a bucket, and like the small dust in the scales: he takes up the islands like small dust.

利巴嫩的树林不够当柴烧，其中的走兽也不够作燔祭。
And Lebanon is not enough to make a fire with, or all its cattle enough for a burned offering.

万民在他面前好像虚无，被他看为不及虚无，乃为虚空。
All the nations are as nothing before him; even less than nothing, a thing of no value.

你们究竟将谁比神，用什么形像与神比较呢？
Whom then is God like, in your opinion? or what will you put forward as a comparison with him?

偶像是匠人铸造，银匠用金包裹，为它铸造银链。
The workman makes an image, and the gold-worker puts gold plates over it, and makes silver bands for it.

穷乏献不起这样供物的，就拣选不能朽坏的树木，为自己寻找巧匠，立起不能摇动的偶像。
The wise workman makes selection of the mulberry-tree of the offering, a wood which will not become soft; so that the image may be fixed to it and not be moved.

你们岂不曾知道吗？你们岂不曾听见吗？从起初岂没有人告诉你们吗？自从立地的根基，你们岂没有明白吗？
Have you no knowledge of it? has it not come to your ears? has not news of it been given to you from the first? has it not been clear to you from the time when the earth was placed on its base?

神坐在地球大圈之上，地上的居民好像蝗虫。他铺张穹苍如幔子，展开诸天如可住的帐棚。
It is he who is seated over the arch of the earth, and the people in it are as small as locusts; by him the heavens are stretched out like an arch, and made ready like a tent for a living-place.

他使君王归于虚无，使地上的审判官成为虚空。
He makes rulers come to nothing; the judges of the earth are of no value.

他们是刚才栽上，（刚才或作不曾下同）刚才种上，根也刚才扎在地里，他一吹在其上，便都枯干，旋风将他们吹去，像碎秸一样。
They have only now been planted, and their seed put into the earth, and they have only now taken root, when he sends out his breath over them and they become dry, and the storm-wind takes them away like dry grass.

那圣者说，你们将谁比我，叫他与我相等呢？
Who then seems to you to be my equal? says the Holy One.

你们向上举目，看谁创造这万象，按数目领出，他一一称其名。因他的权能，又因他的大能大力，连一个都不缺。
Let your eyes be lifted up on high, and see: who has made these? He who sends out their numbered army: who has knowledge of all their names: by whose great strength, because he is strong in power, all of them are in their places.

雅各阿，你为何说，我的道路向耶和华隐藏？以色列阿，你为何言，我的冤屈神并不查问？
Why do you say, O Jacob, such words as these, O Israel, The Lord's eyes are not on my way, and my God gives no attention to my cause?

你岂不曾知道吗？你岂不曾听见吗？永在的神耶和华，创造地极的主，并不疲乏，也不困倦。他的智慧无法测度。
Have you no knowledge of it? has it not come to your ears? The eternal God, the Lord, the Maker of the ends of the earth, is never feeble or tired; there is no searching out of his wisdom.

疲乏的，他赐能力。软弱的，他加力量。
He gives power to the feeble, increasing the strength of him who has no force.

就是少年人也要疲乏困倦，强壮的也必全然跌倒。
Even the young men will become feeble and tired, and the best of them will come to the end of his strength;

但那等候耶和华的，必从新得力，他们必如鹰展翅上腾，他们奔跑却不困倦，行走却不疲乏。
But those who are waiting for the Lord will have new strength; they will get wings like eagles: running, they will not be tired, and walking, they will have no weariness.

众海岛阿，当在我面前静默，众民当从新得力，都要近前来才可以说话。我们可以彼此辩论。
Come quietly before me, O sea-lands, and let the peoples get together their strength: let them come near; then let them say what they have to say: let us put forward our cause against one another.

谁从东方兴起一人，凭公义召他来到脚前呢？耶和华将列国交给他，使他管辖君王，把他们如灰尘交与他的刀，如风吹的碎秸交与他的弓。
Who sent out from the east one who is right wherever he goes? he gives the nations into his hands, and makes him ruler over kings; he gives them as the dust to his sword, as dry stems before the wind to his bow.

他追赶他们，走他所未走的道，坦然前行。
He goes after them safely, not touching the road with his feet.

谁行作成就这事，从起初宣召历代呢？就是我耶和华，我是首先的。也与末后的同在。
Whose purpose and work was it? His who sent out the generations from the start. I the Lord, the first, and with the last, I am he.

海岛看见就都害怕，地极也都战兢，就近前来。
The sea-lands saw it, and were in fear; the ends of the earth were shaking: they came near.

他们各人帮助邻舍，各人对弟兄说，壮胆吧。
They gave help everyone to his neighbour; and everyone said to his brother, Take heart!

木匠勉励银匠，用锤打光的勉励打砧的，论焊工说，焊得好。又用钉子钉稳，免得偶像动摇。
So the metal-worker put heart into the gold-worker, and he who was hammering the metal smooth said kind words to the iron-worker, saying of the plate, It is ready: and he put it together with nails, so that there might be no slipping.

惟你以色列我的仆人，雅各我所拣选的，我朋友亚伯拉罕的后裔，
But as for you, Israel, my servant, and you, Jacob, whom I have taken for myself, the seed of Abraham my friend:

你是我从地极所领（原文作抓）来的，从地角所召来的，且对你说，你是我的仆人，我拣选你并不弃绝你。
You whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and sent for from its farthest parts, saying to you, You are my servant, whom I have taken for myself, and whom I have not given up:

你不要害怕，因为我与你同在。不要惊惶，因为我是你的神。我必坚固你，我必帮助你，我必用我公义的右手扶持你。
Have no fear, for I am with you; do not be looking about in trouble, for I am your God; I will give you strength, yes, I will be your helper; yes, my true right hand will be your support.

凡向你发怒的，必都抱愧蒙羞。与你相争的，必如无有，并要灭亡。
Truly, all those who are angry with you will be made low and put to shame: those desiring to do you wrong will come to nothing and never again be seen.

与你争竞的，你要找他们也找不着。与你争战的，必如无有，成为虚无。
You will make search for your haters but they will not be there; those who make war against you will be as nothing and will come to destruction.

因为我耶和华你的神，必搀扶你的右手，对你说，不要害怕，我必帮助你。
For I, the Lord your God, have taken your right hand in mine, saying to you, Have no fear; I will be your helper.

你这虫雅各，和你们以色列人，不要害怕。耶和华说，我必帮助你。你的救赎主，就是以色列的圣者。
Have no fear, you worm Jacob, and you men of Israel; I will be your helper, says the Lord, even he who takes up your cause, the Holy One of Israel.

看哪，我已使你成为有快齿打粮的新器具，你要把山岭打得粉碎，使冈陵如同糠秕。
See, I will make you like a new grain-crushing instrument with teeth, crushing the mountains small, and making the hills like dry stems.

你要把他簸扬风要吹去，旋风要把他刮散。你倒要以耶和华为喜乐，以以色列的圣者为夸耀。
You will send the wind over them, and it will take them away; they will go in all directions before the storm-wind: you will have joy in the Lord, and be glad in the Holy One of Israel.

困苦穷乏人寻求水却没有，他们因口渴，舌头干燥。我耶和华必应允他们，我以色列的神必不离弃他们。
The poor and crushed are looking for water where no water is, and their tongue is dry for need of it: I the Lord will give ear to their prayer, I the God of Israel will not give them up.

我要在净光的高处开江河，在谷中开泉源，我要使沙漠变为水池，使干地变为涌泉。
I will make rivers on the dry mountain-tops, and fountains in the valleys: I will make the waste land a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.

我要在旷野种上香柏树，皂荚树，番石榴树，和野橄榄树。我在沙漠要把松树，杉树，并黄杨树，一同栽植。
I will put in the waste land the cedar, the acacia, the myrtle, and the olive-tree; and in the lowland will be planted the fir-tree, the plane, and the cypress together:

好叫人看见，知道，思想，明白，这是耶和华的手所作的，是以色列的圣者所造的。
So that they may see and be wise and give their mind to it, and that it may be clear to them all that the hand of the Lord has done this, and that the Holy One of Israel has made it.

耶和华对假神说，你们要呈上你们的案件，雅各的君说，你们要声明你们确实的理由。
Put forward your cause, says the Lord; let your strong argument come out, says the King of Jacob.

可以声明，指示我们将来必遇的事，说明先前的是什么事，好叫我们思索，得知事的结局，或者把将来的事指示我们。
Let the future be made clear to us: give us news of the past things, so that we may give thought to them; or of the things to come, so that we may see if they are true.

要说明后来的事，好叫我们知道你们是神，你们或降福，或降祸，使我们惊奇，一同观看。
Give us word of what will be after this, so that we may be certain that you are gods: yes, do good or do evil, so that we may all see it and be surprised.

看哪，你们属乎虚无，你们的作为也属乎虚空。那选择你们的是可憎恶的。
But you are nothing, and your work is of no value: foolish is he who takes you for his gods.

我从北方兴起一人，他是求告我名的，从日出之地而来。他必临到掌权的，好像临到灰泥，仿佛窑匠踹泥一样。
I have sent for one from the north, and from the dawn he has come; in my name he will get rulers together and go against them; they will be like dust, even as the wet earth is stamped on by the feet of the potter.

谁从起初指明这事，使我们知道呢？谁从先前说明，使我们说，他不错呢？谁也没有指明，谁也没有说明。谁也没有听见你们的话。
Who has given knowledge of it from the first, so that we may be certain of it? and from the start, so that we may say, His word is true? There is no one who gives news, or says anything, or who gives ear to your words.

我首先对锡安说，看哪，我要将一位报好信息的赐给耶路撒冷。
I was the first to give word of it to Zion, and I gave the good news to Jerusalem.

我看的时候并没有人，我问的时候他们中间也没有谋士，可以回答一句。
And I saw that there was no man, even no wise man among them, who might give an answer to my questions.

看哪，他们和他们的工作，都是虚空，且是虚无。他们所铸的偶像都是风，都是虚的。
Truly they are all nothing, their works are nothing and of no value: their metal images are of no more use than wind.

看哪，我的仆人，我所扶持，所拣选，心里所喜悦的，我已将我的灵赐给他，他必将公理传给外邦。
See my servant, whom I am supporting, my loved one, in whom I take delight: I have put my spirit on him; he will give the knowledge of the true God to the nations.

他不喧嚷，不扬声，也不使街上听见他的声音。
He will make no cry, his voice will not be loud: his words will not come to men's ears in the streets.

压伤的芦苇，他不折断。将残的灯火，他不吹灭。他凭真实将公理传开。
He will not let a crushed stem be quite broken, and he will not let a feebly burning light be put out: he will go on sending out the true word to the peoples.

他不灰心，也不丧胆，直到他在地上设立公理。海岛都等候他的训诲。
His light will not be put out, and he will not be crushed, till he has given the knowledge of the true God to the earth, and the sea-lands will be waiting for his teaching.

创造诸天，铺张穹苍，将地和地所出的一并铺开，赐气息给地上的众人，又赐灵性给行在其上之人的神耶和华，他如此说，
God the Lord, even he who made the heavens, measuring them out on high; stretching out the earth, and giving its produce; he who gives breath to the people on it, and life to those who go about on it, says:

我耶和华凭公义召你，必搀扶你的手，保守你，使你作众民的中保，（中保原文作约）作外邦人的光，
I the Lord have made you the vessel of my purpose, I have taken you by the hand, and kept you safe, and I have given you to be an agreement to the people, and a light to the nations:

开瞎子的眼，领被囚的出牢狱，领坐黑暗的出监牢。
To give eyes to the blind, to make free the prisoners from the prison, to let out those who are shut up in the dark.

我是耶和华，这是我的名。我必不将我的荣耀归给假神，也不将我的称赞归给雕刻的偶像。
I am the Lord; that is my name: I will not give my glory to another, or my praise to pictured images.

看哪，先前的事已经成就，现在我将新事说明，这事未发以先，我就说给你们听。
See, the things said before have come about, and now I give word of new things: before they come I give you news of them.

航海的，和海中所有的，海岛，和其上的居民，都当向耶和华唱新歌，从地极赞美他。
Make a new song to the Lord, and let his praise be sounded from the end of the earth; you who go down to the sea, and everything in it, the sea-lands and their people.

旷野和其中的城邑，并基达人居住的村庄，都当扬声。西拉的居民当欢呼，在山顶上呐喊。
Let the waste land and its flocks be glad, the tent-circles of Kedar; let the people of the rock give a glad cry, from the top of the mountains let them make a sound of joy.

他们当将荣耀归给耶和华，在海岛中传扬他的颂赞。
Let them give glory to the Lord, sounding his praise in the sea-lands.

耶和华必像勇士出去，必像战士激动热心，要喊叫，大声呐喊，要用大力攻击仇敌。
The Lord will go out as a man of war, he will be moved to wrath like a fighting-man: his voice will be strong, he will give a loud cry; he will go against his attackers like a man of war.

我许久闭口不言，静默不语，现在我要喊叫像产难的妇人，我要急气而喘哮。
I have long been quiet, I have kept myself in and done nothing: now I will make sounds of pain like a woman in childbirth, breathing hard and quickly.

我要使大山小冈变为荒场，使其上的花草都枯干，我要使江河变为洲岛，使水池都干涸。
I will make waste mountains and hills, drying up all their plants; and I will make rivers dry, and pools dry land.

我要引瞎子行不认识的道，领他们走不知道的路。在他们面前使黑暗变为光明，使弯曲变为平直。这些事我都要行，并不离弃他们。
And I will take the blind by a way of which they had no knowledge, guiding them by roads strange to them: I will make the dark places light before them, and the rough places level. These things will I do and will not give them up.

倚靠雕刻的偶像，对铸造的偶像说，你是我们的神，这等人要退后，全然蒙羞。
They will be turned back and be greatly shamed who put their hope in pictured images, who say to metal images, You are our gods.

你们这耳聋的听吧。你们这眼瞎的看吧。使你们能看见。
Give ear, you whose ears are shut; and let your eyes be open, you blind, so that you may see.

谁比我的仆人眼瞎呢？谁比我差遣的使者耳聋呢？谁瞎眼像那与我和好的，谁瞎眼像耶和华的仆人呢？
Who is blind, but my servant? who has his ears stopped, but he whom I send? who is blind as my true one, or who has his ears shut like the Lord's servant?

你看见许多事却不领会。耳朵开通却不听见。
Seeing much, but keeping nothing in mind; his ears are open, but there is no hearing.

耶和华因自己公义的缘故，喜欢使律法（或作训诲）为大，为尊。
It was the Lord's pleasure, because of his righteousness, to make the teaching great and give it honour.

但这百姓是被抢被夺的，都牢笼在坑中，隐藏在狱里，他们作掠物，无人拯救，作掳物，无人说交还。
But this is a people whose property has been taken away from them by force; they are all taken in holes, and shut up in prisons: they are made prisoners, and no one makes them free; they are taken by force and no one says, Give them back.

你们中间谁肯侧耳听此，谁肯留心而听，以防将来呢？
Who is there among you who will give ear to this? who will give attention to it for the time to come?

谁将雅各交出当作掳物，将以色列交给抢夺的呢？岂不是耶和华吗？就是我们所得罪的那位。他们不肯遵行他的道，也不听从他的训诲。
Who gave up Jacob to those who took away his goods, and Israel to his attackers? Did not the Lord? he against whom they did wrong, and in whose ways they would not go, turning away from his teaching.

所以他将猛烈的怒气，和争战的勇力，倾倒在以色列的身上。在他四围如火着起，他还不知道，烧着他，他也不介意。
For this reason he let loose on him the heat of his wrath, and his strength was like a flame; and it put fire round about him, but he did not see it; he was burned, but did not take it to heart.

雅各阿，创造你的耶和华，以色列阿，造成你的那位，现在如此说，你不要害怕，因为我救赎了你。我曾提你的名召你，你是属我的。
But now, says the Lord your Maker, O Jacob, and your life-giver, O Israel: have no fear, for I have taken up your cause; naming you by your name, I have made you mine.

你从水中经过，我必与你同在。你趟过江河，水必不漫过你。你从火中行过，必不被烧，火焰也不着在你身上。
When you go through the waters, I will be with you; and through the rivers, they will not go over you: when you go through the fire, you will not be burned; and the flame will have no power over you.

因为我是耶和华你的神，是以色列的圣者你的救主。我已经使埃及作你的赎价，使古实和西巴代替你。
For I am the Lord your God, the Holy One of Israel, your saviour; I have given Egypt as a price for you, Ethiopia and Seba for you.

因我看你为宝为尊，又因我爱你，所以我使人代替你，使列邦人替换你的生命。
Because of your value in my eyes, you have been honoured, and loved by me; so I will give men for you, and peoples for your life.

不要害怕，因我与你同在。我必领你的后裔从东方来，又从西方招聚你。
Have no fear, for I am with you: I will take your seed from the east, and get you together from the west;

我要对北方说，交出来。对南方说，不要拘留。将我的众子从远方带来，将我的众女从地极领回，
I will say to the north, Give them up; and to the south, Do not keep them back; send back my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth;

就是凡称为我名下的人，是我为自己的荣耀创造的，是我所作成，所造作的。
Every one who is named by my name, and whom I have made for my glory, who has been formed and designed by me.

你要将有眼而瞎，有耳而聋的民都带出来。
Send out the blind people who have eyes, and those who have ears, but they are shut.

任凭万国聚集，任凭众民会合，其中谁能将此声明，并将先前的事说给我们听呢？他们可以带出见证来，自显为是，或者他们听见便说，这是真的。
Let all the nations come together, and let the peoples be present: who among them is able to make this clear, and give us word of earlier things? let their witnesses come forward, so that they may be seen to be true, and that they may give ear, and say, It is true.

耶和华说，你们是我的见证，我所拣选的仆人。既是这样，便可以知道，且信服我，又明白我就是耶和华，在我以前没有真神，（真原文作造作的）在我以后也必没有。
You are my witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant whom I have taken for myself: so that you may see and have faith in me, and that it may be clear to you that I am he; before me there was no God formed, and there will not be after me.

惟有我是耶和华，除我以外没有救主。
I, even I, am the Lord; and there is no saviour but me.

我曾指示，我曾拯救，我曾说明。并且在你们中间没有别神，所以耶和华说，你们是我的见证，我也是神。
I gave the word, and made it clear, and there was no strange god among you: for this reason you are my witnesses, says the Lord.

自从有日子以来，我就是神。谁也不能救人脱离我手，我要行事，谁能阻止呢？
From time long past I am God, and from this day I am he: there is no one who is able to take you out of my hand: when I undertake a thing, by whom will my purpose be changed?

耶和华你们的救赎主，以色列的圣者如此说，因你们的缘故，我已经打发人到巴比伦去，并且我要使迦勒底人如逃民，都坐自己喜乐的船下来。
The Lord, who has taken up your cause, the Holy One of Israel, says, Because of you I have sent to Babylon, and made all their seers come south, and the Chaldaeans whose cry is in the ships.

我是耶和华你们的圣者，是创造以色列的，是你们的君王。
I am the Lord, your Holy One, the Maker of Israel, your King.

耶和华在沧海中开道，在大水中开路。
This is the word of the Lord, who makes a way in the sea, and a road through the deep waters;

使车辆，马匹，军兵，勇士都出来，一同躺下不再起来，他们灭没好像熄灭的灯火。
Who sends out the war-carriages and the horses, the army with all its force; they have come down, they will not get up again; like a feebly burning light they are put out.

耶和华如此说，你们不要记念从前的事，也不要思想古时的事。
Give no thought to the things which are past; let the early times go out of your minds.

看哪，我要做一件新事，如今要发现，你们岂不知道吗？我必在旷野开道路，在沙漠开江河。
See, I am doing a new thing; now it is starting; will you not take note of it? I will even make a way in the waste land, and rivers in the dry country.

野地的走兽必尊重我，野狗和鸵鸟也必如此，因我使旷野有水，使沙漠有河，好赐给我的百姓我的选民喝。
The beasts of the field will give me honour, the jackals and the ostriches: because I send out waters in the waste land, and rivers in the dry country, to give drink to the people whom I have taken for myself:

这百姓是我为自己所造的，好述说我的美德。
Even the people whom I made to be the witnesses of my praise.

雅各阿，你并没有求告我。以色列阿，你倒厌烦我。
But you have made no prayer to me, O Jacob: and you have given no thought to me, O Israel.

你没有将你的羊带来给我作燔祭，也没有用祭物尊敬我。我没有因供物使你服劳，也没有因乳香使你厌烦。
You have not made me burned offerings of sheep, or given me honour with your offerings of beasts; I did not make you servants to give me an offering, and I did not make you tired with requests for perfumes.

你没有用银子为我买菖蒲，也没有用祭物的脂油使我饱足，倒使我因你的罪恶服劳，使我因你的罪孽厌烦。
You have not got me sweet-smelling plants with your money, or given me pleasure with the fat of your offerings: but you have made me a servant to your sins, and you have made me tired with your evil doings.

惟有我为自己的缘故涂抹你的过犯，我也不记念你的罪恶。
I, even I, am he who takes away your sins; and I will no longer keep your evil doings in mind.

你要提醒我，你我可以一同辩论，你可以将你的理陈明，自显为义。
Put me in mind of this; let us take up the cause between us: put forward your cause, so that you may be seen to be in the right.

你的始祖犯罪，你的师傅违背我。
Your first father was a sinner, and your guides have gone against my word.

所以我要辱没圣所的首领，使雅各成为咒诅，使以色列成为辱骂。
Your chiefs have made my holy place unclean, so I have made Jacob a curse, and Israel a thing of shame.

我的仆人雅各，我所拣选的以色列阿，现在你当听。
And now, give ear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have taken for myself:

造作你，又从你出胎造就你，并要帮助你的耶和华如此说，我的仆人雅各，我所拣选的耶书仑哪，不要害怕。
The Lord who made you, forming you in your mother's body, the Lord, your helper, says, Have no fear, O Jacob my servant, and you, Jeshurun, whom I have taken for myself.

因为我要将水浇灌口渴的人，将河浇灌干旱之地。我要将我的灵浇灌你的后裔，将我的福浇灌你的子孙。
For I will send water on the land needing it, and streams on the dry earth: I will let my spirit come down on your seed, and my blessing on your offspring.

他们要发生在草中，像溪水旁的柳树。
And they will come up like grass in a well-watered field, like water-plants by the streams.

这个要说，我是属耶和华的。那个要以雅各的名自称。又一个要亲手写归耶和华的（或作在手上写归耶和华）并自称为以色列。
One will say, I am the Lord's; and another will give himself the name, Jacob; another will put a mark on his hand, I am the Lord's, and another will take the name of Israel for himself.

耶和华以色列的君，以色列的救赎主万军之耶和华如此说，我是首先的，我是末后的，除我以外，再没有真神。
The Lord, the King of Israel, even the Lord of armies who has taken up his cause, says, I am the first and the last, and there is no God but me.

自从我设立古时的民，谁能像我宣告，并且指明，又为自己陈说呢？让他将未来的事，和必成的事说明。
If there is one like me, let him come forward and say it, let him make it clear and put it in order before me: who has made clear in the past the things to come? let him make clear the future to me.

你们不要恐惧，也不要害怕。我岂不是从上古就说明指示你们吗？并且你们是我的见证，除我以外，岂有真神吗？诚然没有磐石，我不知道一个。
Have no fear, be strong in heart; have I not made it clear to you in the past, and let you see it? and you are my witnesses. Is there any God but me, or a Rock of whom I have no knowledge?

制造雕刻偶像的，尽都虚空。他们所喜悦的，都无益处。他们的见证，无所看见，无所知晓，他们便觉羞愧。
Those who make a pictured image are all of them as nothing, and the things of their desire will be of no profit to them: and their servants see not, and have no knowledge; so they will be put to shame.

谁制造神像，铸造无益的偶像？
Whoever makes a god, makes nothing but a metal image in which there is no profit.

看哪，他的同伴都必羞愧，工匠也不过是人。任他们聚会，任他们站立，都必惧怕，一同羞愧。
Truly, all those who make use of secret arts will be put to shame, and their words of power are only words of men: let them all come forward together; they will all be in fear and be put to shame.

铁匠把铁在火炭中烧热，用锤打铁器，用他有力的臂膀锤成。他饥饿而无力，不喝水而发倦。
The iron-worker is heating the metal in the fire, giving it form with his hammers, and working on it with his strong arm: then for need of food his strength gives way, and for need of water he becomes feeble.

木匠拉线，用笔划出样子。用刨子刨成形状，用圆尺划了模样，仿照人的体态，作成人形，好住在房屋中。
The woodworker is measuring out the wood with his line, marking it out with his pencil: after smoothing it with his plane, and making circles on it with his instrument, he gives it the form and glory of a man, so that it may be placed in the house.

他砍伐香柏树，又取柞（或作青桐）树和橡树，在树林中选定了一棵。他栽种松树得雨长养，
He has cedars cut down for himself, he takes an oak and lets it get strong among the trees of the wood; he has an ash-tree planted, and the rain gives it growth.

这树，人可用以烧火，他自己取些烤火，又烧着烤饼。而且作神像跪拜，作雕刻的偶像向它叩拜。
Then it will be used to make a fire, so that a man may get warm; he has the oven heated with it and makes bread: he makes a god with it, to which he gives worship: he makes a pictured image out of it, and goes down on his face before it.

他把一分烧在火中，把一分烤肉吃饱。自己烤火说，阿哈，我暖和了，我见火了。
With part of it he makes a fire, and on the fire he gets meat cooked and takes a full meal: he makes himself warm, and says, Aha! I am warm, I have seen the fire:

他用剩下的作了一神，就是雕刻的偶像，他向这偶像俯伏叩拜，祷告它说，求你拯救我，因你是我的神。
And the rest of it he makes into a god, even his pictured image: he goes down on his face before it, giving worship to it, and making prayer to it, saying, Be my saviour; for you are my god.

他们不知道，也不思想，因为耶和华闭住他们的眼不能看见，塞住他们的心不能明白。
They have no knowledge or wisdom; for he has put a veil over their eyes, so that they may not see; and on their hearts, so that they may not give attention.

谁心里也不醒悟，也没有知识，没有聪明，能说，我曾拿一分在火中烧了，在炭火上烤过饼，我也烤过肉吃，这剩下的，我岂要作可憎的物吗？我岂可向木？？子叩拜呢？
And no one takes note, no one has enough knowledge or wisdom to say, I have put part of it in the fire, and made bread on it; I have had a meal of the flesh cooked with it: and am I now to make the rest of it into a false god? am I to go down on my face before a bit of wood?

他以灰为食，心中昏迷，使他偏邪，他不能自救，也不能说，我右手中岂不是有虚谎吗？
As for him whose food is the dust of a dead fire, he has been turned from the way by a twisted mind, so that he is unable to keep himself safe by saying, What I have here in my hand is false.

雅各以色列阿，你是我的仆人，要记念这些事。以色列阿，你是我的仆人，我造就你必不忘记你。
Keep these things in mind, O Jacob; and you Israel, for you are my servant: I have made you; you are my servant; O Israel, I will not let you go out of my memory.

我涂抹了你的过犯，像厚云消散。我涂抹了你的罪恶，如薄云灭没。你当归向我，因我救赎了你。
I have put your evil doings out of my mind like a thick cloud, and your sins like a mist: come back to me; for I have taken up your cause.

诸天哪，应当歌唱，因为耶和华作成这事。地的深处阿，应当欢呼，众山应当发声歌唱，树林和其中所有的树，都当如此，因为耶和华救赎了雅各，并要因以色列荣耀自己。
Make a song, O heavens, for the Lord has done it: give a loud cry, you deep parts of the earth: let your voices be loud in song, you mountains, and you woods with all your trees: for the Lord has taken up the cause of Jacob, and will let his glory be seen in Israel.

从你出胎，造就你的救赎主耶和华如此说，我耶和华是创造万物的，是独自铺张诸天，铺开大地的。（谁与我同在呢）
The Lord, who has taken up your cause, and who gave you life in your mother's body, says, I am the Lord who makes all things; stretching out the heavens by myself, and giving the earth its limits; who was with me?

使说假话的兆头失效，使占卜的癫狂，使智慧人退后，使他的知识变为愚拙。
Who makes the signs of those who give word of the future come to nothing, so that those who have knowledge of secret arts go off their heads; turning the wise men back, and making their knowledge foolish:

使我仆人的话语立定，我使者的谋算成就。论到耶路撒冷说，必有人居住。论到犹大的城邑说，必被建造。其中的荒场我也必兴起。
Who makes the word of his servants certain, and gives effect to the purposes of his representatives; who says of Jerusalem, Her people will come back to her; and of the towns of Judah, I will give orders for their building, and will make her waste places fertile again:

对深渊说，你干了吧。我也要使你的江河干涸。
Who says to the deep, Be dry, and I will make your rivers dry:

论古列说，他是我的牧人，必成就我所喜悦的，必下令建造耶路撒冷，发命立稳圣殿的根基。
Who says of Cyrus, He will take care of my sheep, and will do all my pleasure: who says of Jerusalem, I will give the word for your building; and of the Temple, Your bases will be put in place.

我耶和华所膏的古列，我搀扶他的右手，使列国降伏在他面前，我也要放松列王的腰带，使城门在他面前敞开，不得关闭，我对他如此说，
The Lord says to the man of his selection, to Cyrus, whom I have taken by the right hand, putting down nations before him, and taking away the arms of kings; making the doors open before him, so that the ways into the towns may not be shut;

我必在你前面行，修平崎岖之地。我必打破铜门，砍断铁闩。
I will go before you, and make the rough places level: the doors of brass will be broken, and the iron rods cut in two:

我要将暗中的宝物，和隐密的财宝赐给你，使你知道提名召你的，就是我耶和华以色列的神。
And I will give you the stores of the dark, and the wealth of secret places, so that you may be certain that I am the Lord, who gave you your name, even the God of Israel.

因我仆人雅各，我所拣选以色列的缘故，我就提名召你。你虽不认识我，我也加给你名号。
Because of Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have taken for myself, I have sent for you by name, giving you a name of honour, though you had no knowledge of me.

我是耶和华，在我以外并没有别神，除了我以外再没有神。你虽不认识我，我必给你束腰，
I am the Lord, and there is no other; there is no God but me: I will make you ready for war, though you had no knowledge of me:

从日出之地到日落之处，使人都知道除了我以外，没有别神，我是耶和华，在我以外并没有别神。
So that they may see from the east and from the west that there is no God but me: I am the Lord, and there is no other.

我造光，又造暗。我施平安，又降灾祸。造作这一切的是我耶和华。
I am the giver of light and the maker of the dark; causing blessing, and sending troubles; I am the Lord, who does all these things.

诸天哪，自上而滴。穹苍降下公义，地面开裂，产出救恩，使公义一同发生，这都是我耶和华所造的。
Let righteousness come down, O heavens, from on high, and let the sky send it down like rain: let the earth be open to give the fruit of salvation, causing righteousness to come up with it; I the Lord have made it come about.

祸哉，那与造他的主争论的，他不过是地上瓦片中的一块瓦片。泥土岂可对抟弄他的说，你作什么呢？所作的物，岂可说，你没有手呢？
Cursed is he who has an argument with his Maker, the pot which has an argument with the Potter! Will the wet earth say to him who is working with it, What are you doing, that your work has nothing by which it may be gripped?

祸哉，那对父亲说，你生的是什么呢？或对母亲（原文作妇人）说，你产的是什么呢？
Cursed is he who says to a father, To what are you giving life? or to a woman, What are you in birth-pains with?

耶和华以色列的圣者，就是造就以色列的，如此说，将来的事你们可以问我。至于我的众子，并我手的工作，你们可以求我命定。（求我命定原文作吩咐我）
The Lord, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, says, Will you put a question to me about the things which are to come, or will you give me orders about my sons, and the work of my hands?

我造地，又造人在地上，我亲手铺张诸天，天上万象也是我所命定的。
I have made the earth, forming man on it: by my hands the heavens have been stretched out, and all the stars put in their ordered places.

我凭公义兴起古列，（古列原文作他）又要修直他一切道路。他必建造我的城，释放我被掳的民，不是为工价，也不是为赏赐。这是万军之耶和华说的。
I have sent him out to overcome the nations, and I will make all his ways straight: I will give him the work of building my town, and he will let my prisoners go free, without price or reward, says the Lord of armies.

耶和华如此说，埃及劳碌得来的，和古实的货物必归你，身量高大的西巴人，必投降你，也要属你，他们必带着锁链过来随从你。又向你下拜祈求你说，神真在你们中间，此外再没有别神；再没有别的神。
The Lord says, The workmen of Egypt, and the traders of Ethiopia, and the tall Sabaeans, will come over the sea to you, and they will be yours; they will go after you; in chains they will come over: and they will go down on their faces before you, and will make prayer to you, saying, Truly, God is among you; and there is no other God.

救主以色列的神阿，你实在是自隐的神。
Truly, you have a secret God, the God of Israel is a Saviour!

凡制造偶像的，都必抱愧蒙羞，都要一同归于惭愧。
All those who have gone against him will be put to shame; the makers of images will be made low.

惟有以色列必蒙耶和华的拯救，得永远的救恩。你们必不蒙羞，也不抱愧，直到永世无尽。
But the Lord will make Israel free with an eternal salvation: you will not be put to shame or made low for ever and ever.

创造诸天的耶和华，制造成全大地的神，他创造坚定大地，并非使地荒凉，是要给人居住。他如此说，我是耶和华，再没有别神。
For this is the word of the Lord who made the heavens; he is God; the maker and designer of the earth; who made it not to be a waste, but as a living-place for man: I am the Lord, and there is no other.

我没有在隐密黑暗之地说话，我没有对雅各的后裔说，你们寻求我是徒然的，我耶和华所讲的是公义，所说的是正直。
I have not given my word in secret, in a place in the underworld; I did not say to the seed of Jacob, Go into a waste land to make request of me: I the Lord say what is true, my word is righteousness.

你们从列国逃脱的人，要一同聚集前来。那些抬着雕刻木偶，祷告不能救人之神的，毫无知识。
Come together, even come near, you nations who are still living: they have no knowledge who take up their image of wood, and make prayer to a god in whom is no salvation.

你们要述说陈明你们的理，让他们彼此商议。谁从古时指明，谁从上古述说，不是我耶和华吗？除了我以外，再没有神。我是公义的神，又是救主，除了我以外，再没有别神。
Give the word, put forward your cause, let us have a discussion together: who has given news of this in the past? who made it clear in early times? did not I, the Lord? and there is no God but me; a true God and a saviour; there is no other.

地极的人都当仰望我，就必得救。因为我是神，再没有别神。
Let your hearts be turned to me, so that you may have salvation, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is no other.

我指着自己起誓，我口所出的话是凭公义，并不反回，万膝必向我跪拜，万口必凭我起誓。
By myself have I taken an oath, a true word has gone from my mouth, and will not be changed, that to me every knee will be bent, and every tongue will give honour.

人论我说，公义，能力，惟独在乎耶和华。人都必归向他，凡向他发怒的，必至蒙羞。
Only in the Lord will Jacob overcome and be strong: together all those who were angry with him will be put to shame and come to destruction.

以色列的后裔，都必因耶和华得称为义，并要夸耀。
In the Lord will all the seed of Israel get their rights, and they will give glory to him.

彼勒屈身，尼波弯腰。巴比伦的偶像驮在兽和牲畜上，他们所抬的如今成了重驮，使牲畜疲乏。
Bel is bent down, Nebo is falling; their images are on the beasts and on the cattle: the things which you took about have become a weight to the tired beast.

都一同弯腰屈身，不能保全重驮，自己倒被掳去。
They are bent down, they are falling together: they were not able to keep their images safe, but they themselves have been taken prisoner.

雅各家，以色列家一切余剩的，要听我言，你们自从生下，就蒙我保抱，自从出胎，便蒙我怀搋。
Give ear to me, O family of Jacob, and all the rest of the people of Israel, who have been supported by me from their birth, and have been my care from their earliest days:

直到你们年老，我仍这样，直到你们发白，我仍怀搋，我已造作，也必保抱，我必怀抱，也必拯救。
Even when you are old I will be the same, and when you are grey-haired I will take care of you: I will still be responsible for what I made; yes, I will take you and keep you safe.

你们将谁与我相比，与我同等，可以与我比较，使我们相同呢？
Who in your eyes is my equal? or what comparison will you make with me?

那从囊中抓金子，用天平平银子的人，雇银匠制造神像，他们又俯伏，又叩拜。
As for those who take gold out of a bag, and put silver in the scales, they give payment to a gold-worker, to make it into a god; they go down on their faces and give it worship.

他们将神像抬起，扛在肩上，安置在定处，它就站立，不离本位，人呼求它，它不能答应，也不能救人脱离患难。
They put him on their backs, and take him up, and put him in his fixed place, from which he may not be moved; if a man gives a cry for help to him, he is unable to give an answer, or get him out of his trouble.

你们当想念这事，自己作大丈夫。悖逆的人哪，要心里思想。
Keep this in mind and be shamed; let it come back to your memory, you sinners.

你们要追念上古的事，因为我是神，并无别神，我是神，再没有能比我的。
Let the things which are past come to your memory: for I am God, and there is no other; I am God, and there is no one like me;

我从起初指明末后的事，从古时言明未成的事，说，我的筹算必立定，凡我所喜悦的，我必成就。
Making clear from the first what is to come, and from past times the things which have not so far come about; saying, My purpose is fixed, and I will do all my pleasure;

我召鸷鸟从东方来，召那成就我筹算的人从远方来。我已说出，也必成就，我已谋定，也必作成。
Sending for a bird of strong flight from the east, the man of my purpose from a far country; I have said it, and I will give effect to it; the thing designed by me will certainly be done.

你们这些心中顽梗，远离公义的，当听我言。
Give ear to me, you feeble-hearted, who have no faith in my righteousness:

我使我的公义临近，必不远离，我的救恩必不迟延，我要为以色列我的荣耀，在锡安施行救恩。
My righteousness is near, it is not far off; salvation will come quickly; and I will make Zion free, and give Israel my glory.

巴比伦的处女阿，下来坐在尘埃，迦勒底的闺女阿，没有宝座，要坐在地上，因为你不再称为柔弱娇嫩的。
Come and take your seat in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon; come down from your seat of power, and take your place on the earth, O daughter of the Chaldaeans: for you will never again seem soft and delicate.

要用磨磨面。揭去帕子，脱去长衣，露腿趟河。
Take the crushing-stones and get the meal crushed: take off your veil, put away your robe, let your legs be uncovered, go through the rivers.

你的下体必被露出，你的丑陋必被看见。我要报仇，谁也不宽容。
The shame of your unclothed condition will be seen by all: I will give punishment without mercy,

我们救赎主的名是万军之耶和华以色列的圣者。
Says the Lord who takes up our cause; the Lord of armies is his name, the Holy One of Israel.

迦勒底的闺女阿，你要默然静坐，进入暗中，因为你不再称为列国的主母。
Be seated in the dark without a word, O daughter of the Chaldaeans: for you will no longer be named, The Queen of Kingdoms.

我向我的百姓发怒，使我的产业被亵渎，将他们交在你手中，你毫不怜悯他们，把极重的轭加在老年人身上。
I was angry with my people, I put shame on my heritage, and gave them into your hands: you had no mercy on them; you put a cruel yoke on those who were old;

你自己说，我必永为主母，所以你不将这事放在心上，也不思想这事的结局。
And you said, I will be a queen for ever: you did not give attention to these things, and did not keep in mind what would come after.

你这专好宴乐，安然居住的，现在当听这话，你心中说，惟有我，除我以外再没有别的，我必不至寡居，也不遭丧子之事。
So now take note of this, you who are given up to pleasure, living without fear of evil, saying in your heart, I am, and there is no one like me; I will never be a widow, or have my children taken from me.

哪知丧子，寡居，这两件事，在一日转眼之间必临到你，正在你多行邪术，广施符咒的时候，这两件事必全然临到你身上。
But these two things will come on you suddenly in one day, the loss of children and of husband: in full measure they will come on you, for all your secret arts, and all your wonders.

你素来倚仗自己的恶行，说，无人看见我。你的智慧，聪明，使你偏邪，并且你心里说，惟有我，除我以外再没有别的。
For you had faith in your evil-doing; you said, No one sees me; by your wisdom and knowledge you have been turned out of the way: and you have said in your heart, I am, and there is no other.

因此，祸患要临到你身，你不知何时发现。（何时发现或作如何驱逐）灾害落在你身上，你也不能除掉。所不知道的毁灭，也必忽然临到你身。
Because of this evil will come on you, which may not be turned away for any price: and trouble will overtake you, from which no money will give salvation: destruction will come on you suddenly, without your knowledge.

站起来吧，用你从幼年劳神施行的符咒，和你许多的邪术，或者可得益处，或者可得强胜。
Go on now with your secret arts, and all your wonder-working, to which you have given yourself up from your earliest days; it may be that they will be of profit to you, or by them you may put fear into your attackers.

你筹划太多，以致疲倦。让那些观天象的，看星宿的，在月朔说预言的，都站起来，救你脱离所要临到你的事。
But your mind is troubled by the number of your guides: let them now come forward for your salvation: the measurers of the heavens, the watchers of the stars, and those who are able to say from month to month what things are coming on you.

他们要像碎秸被火焚烧，不能救自己脱离火焰之力，这火并非可烤的炭火，也不是可以坐在其前的火。
Truly, they have become like dry stems, they have been burned in the fire; they are not able to keep themselves safe from the power of the flame: it is not a coal for warming them, or a fire by which a man may be seated.

你所劳神的事，都要这样与你无益。从幼年与你贸易的，也都各奔各乡，无人救你。
Small profit have you had from those who, from your earliest days, got great profit out of you; they have gone in flight, every one straight before him, and you have no saviour.

雅各家，称为以色列名下，从犹大水源出来的，当听我言。你们指着耶和华的名起誓，提说以色列的神，却不凭诚实，不凭公义。
Give ear to this, O family of Jacob, you who are named by the name of Israel, and have come out of the body of Judah; who take oaths by the name of the Lord, and make use of the name of the God of Israel, but not truly and not in good faith.

（他们自称为圣城的人，所倚靠的是名为万军之耶和华以色列的神）
For they say that they are of the holy town, and put their faith in the God of Israel: the Lord of armies is his name.

主说，早先的事我从古时说明，已经出了我的口，也是我所指示的，我忽然行作，事便成就。
I gave word in the past of the things which came about; they came from my mouth, and I made them clear: suddenly I did them, and they came about.

因为我素来知道你是顽梗的，你的颈项是铁的，你的额是铜的，
Because I saw that your heart was hard, and that your neck was an iron cord, and your brow brass;

所以我从古时将这事给你说明，在未成以先指示你，免得你说，这些事是我的偶像所行的，是我雕刻的偶像，和我铸造的偶像所命定的。
For this reason I made it clear to you in the past, before it came I gave you word of it: for fear that you might say, My god did these things, and my pictured and metal images made them come about.

你已经听见，现在要看见这一切，你不说明吗？从今以后，我将新事就是你所不知道的隐密事，指示你。
All this has come to your ears and you have seen it; will you not give witness to it? I am now making clear new things, even secret things, of which you had no knowledge.

这事是现今造的，并非从古就有，在今日以先，你也未曾听见，免得你说，这事我早已知道了。
They have only now been effected, and not in the past: and before this day they had not come to your ears; for fear that you might say, I had knowledge of them.

你未曾听见，未曾知道，你的耳朵从来未曾开通。我原知道你行事极其诡诈，你自从出胎以来，便称为悖逆的。
Truly you had no word of them, no knowledge of them; no news of them in the past had come to your ears; because I saw how false was your behaviour, and that your heart was turned against me from your earliest days.

我为我的名，暂且忍怒，为我的颂赞，向你容忍，不将你剪除。
Because of my name I will put away my wrath, and for my praise I will keep myself from cutting you off.

我熬炼你，却不像熬炼银子。你在苦难的炉中，我拣选你。
See, I have been testing you for myself like silver; I have put you through the fire of trouble.

我为自己的缘故必行这事，我焉能使我的名被亵渎，我必不将我的荣耀归给假神。
For myself, even because of my name, I will do it; for I will not let my name be shamed; and my glory I will not give to another.

雅各，我所选召的以色列阿，当听我言。我是耶和华，我是首先的，也是末后的。
Give ear to me, Jacob, and Israel, my loved one; I am he, I am the first and I am the last.

我手立了地的根基，我右手铺张诸天，我一招呼便都立住。
Yes, by my hand was the earth placed on its base, and by my right hand the heavens were stretched out; at my word they take up their places.

你们都当聚集而听，他们（或作偶像）内中谁说过这些事。耶和华所爱的人，必向巴比伦行他所喜悦的事，他的膀臂也要加在迦勒底人身上。
Come together, all of you, and give ear; who among you has given news of these things? the Lord's loved one will do his pleasure with Babylon, and with the seed of the Chaldaeans.

惟有我曾说过，我又选召他，领他来，他的道路就必亨通。
I, even I, have given the word; I have sent for him: I have made him come, and have given effect to his undertakings.

你们要就近我来听这话。我从起头并未曾在隐密处说话，自从有这事，我就在那里。现在主耶和华差遣我和他的灵来。（或作耶和华和他的灵差遣我来）
Come near to me, and give ear to this; from the start I did not keep it secret; from the time of its coming into existence I was there: and now the Lord God has sent me, and given me his spirit.

耶和华你的救赎主，以色列的圣者如此说，我是耶和华你的神，教训你使你得益处，引导你所当行的路。
The Lord who takes up your cause, the Holy One of Israel, says, I am the Lord your God, who is teaching you for your profit, guiding you by the way in which you are to go.

甚愿你素来听从我的命令，你的平安就如河水，你的公义就如海浪。
If only you had given ear to my orders, then your peace would have been like a river, and your righteousness as the waves of the sea:

你的后裔也必多如海沙，你腹中所生的也必多如沙粒。他的名在我面前必不剪除，也不灭绝。
Your seed would have been like the sand, and your offspring like the dust: your name would not be cut off or come to an end before me.

你们要从巴比伦出来，从迦勒底人中逃脱，以欢呼的声音传扬说，耶和华救赎了他的仆人雅各，你们要将这事宣扬到地极。
Go out of Babylon, go in flight from the Chaldaeans; with the sound of song make it clear, give the news, let the word go out even to the end of the earth: say, The Lord has taken up the cause of his servant Jacob.

耶和华引导他们，经过沙漠，他们并不干渴，他为他们使水从磐石而流，分裂磐石水就涌出。
They had no need of water when he was guiding them through the waste lands: he made water come out of the rock for them: the rock was parted and the waters came flowing out.

耶和华说，恶人必不得平安。
There is no peace, says the Lord, for the evil-doers.

众海岛阿，当听我言。远方的众民哪，留心而听。自我出胎，耶和华就选召我，自出母腹，他就提我的名。
Give ear, O sea-lands, to me; and take note, you peoples from far: I have been marked out by the Lord from the first; when I was still in my mother's body, he had my name in mind:

他使我的口如快刀，将我藏在他手荫之下。又使我成为磨亮的箭，将我藏在他箭袋之中。
And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shade of his hand he has kept me; and he has made me like a polished arrow, keeping me in his secret place;

对我说，你是我的仆人以色列，我必因你得荣耀。
And he said to me, You are my servant, Israel, in whom my glory will be seen;

我却说，我劳碌是徒然，我尽力是虚无虚空，然而我当得的理必在耶和华那里，我的赏赐必在我神那里。
And I said, I have undergone weariness for nothing, I have given my strength for no purpose or profit: but still the Lord will take up my cause, and my God will give me my reward.

耶和华从我出胎造就我作他的仆人，要使雅各归向他，使以色列到他那里聚集。（原来耶和华看我为尊贵，我的神也成为我的力量）
And now, says the Lord, who made me his servant when I was still in my mother's body, so that I might make Jacob come back to him, and so that Israel might come together to him: and I was honoured in the eyes of the Lord, and my God became my strength.

现在他说，你作我的仆人，使雅各众支派复兴，使以色列中得保全的归回，尚为小事，我还要使你作外邦人的光，叫你施行我的救恩，直到地极。
It is not enough for one who is my servant to put the tribes of Jacob again in their place, and to get back those of Israel who have been sent away: my purpose is to give you as a light to the nations, so that you may be my salvation to the end of the earth.

救赎主以色列的圣者耶和华，对那被人所藐视，本国所憎恶，官长所虐待的，如此说，君王要看见就站起，首领也要下拜，都因信实的耶和华，就是拣选你以色列的圣者。
The Lord who takes up Israel's cause, even his Holy One, says to him whom men make sport of, who is hated by the nations, a servant of rulers: Kings will see and get up from their places, and chiefs will give worship: because of the Lord who keeps faith; even the Holy One of Israel who has taken you for himself.

耶和华如此说，在悦纳的时候我应允了你，在拯救的日子我济助了你，我要保护你，使你作众民的中保，（中保原文作约）复兴遍地，使人承受荒凉之地为业。
This is the word of the Lord: I have given ear to you at a good time, and I have been your helper in a day of salvation: and I will keep you safe, and will make you a glory for the people, putting the land in order, and giving them the heritages which now are waste;

对那被捆绑的人说，出来吧。对那在黑暗的人说，显露吧。他们在路上必得饮食，在一切净光的高处必有食物。
Saying to those who are in chains, Go free; to those who are in the dark, Come out into the light. They will get food by the way wherever they go, and have grass-lands on all the dry mountain-tops.

不饥不渴，炎热和烈日必不伤害他们，因为怜恤他们的，必引导他们，领他们到水泉旁边。
They will not be in need of food or drink, or be troubled by the heat or the sun: for he who has mercy on them will be their guide, taking them by the springs of water.

我必使我的众山成为大道，我的大路也被修高。
And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways will be lifted up.

看哪，这些从远方来，这些从北方，从西方来，这些从秦国来。（秦原文作希尼）
See, these are coming from far; and these from the north and the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

诸天哪，应当欢呼。大地阿，应当快乐。众山哪，应当发声歌唱。因为耶和华已经安慰他的百姓，也要怜恤他困苦之民。
Let your voice be loud in song, O heavens; and be glad, O earth; make sounds of joy, O mountains, for the Lord has given comfort to his people, and will have mercy on his crushed ones.

锡安说，耶和华离弃了我，主忘记了我。
But Zion said, The Lord has given me up, I have gone from his memory.

妇人焉能忘记她吃奶的婴孩，不怜恤她所生的儿子。即或有忘记的，我却不忘记你。
Will a woman give up the child at her breast, will she be without pity for the fruit of her body? yes, these may, but I will not let you go out of my memory.

看哪，我将你铭刻在我掌上，你的墙垣常在我眼前。
See, your name is marked on my hands; your walls are ever before me.

你的儿女必急速归回，毁坏你的，使你荒废的，必都离你出去。
Your builders are coming quickly; your haters and those who made you waste will go out of you.

你举目向四方观看，他们都聚集来到你这里。耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，你必要以他们为妆饰佩戴，以他们为华带束腰，像新妇一样。
Let your eyes be lifted up round about, and see: they are all coming together to you. By my life, says the Lord, truly you will put them all on you as an ornament, and be clothed with them like a bride.

至于你荒废凄凉之处，并你被毁坏之地，现今众民居住必显为太窄。吞灭你的必离你遥远。
For though the waste places of your land have been given to destruction, now you will not be wide enough for your people, and those who made you waste will be far away.

你必听见丧子之后所生的儿女说，这地方我居住太窄，求你给我地方居住。
The children to whom you gave birth in other lands will say in your ears, The place is not wide enough for me: make room for me to have a resting-place.

那时你心里必说，我既丧子独居，是被掳的，漂流在外，谁给我生这些，谁将这些养大呢？撇下我一人独居的时候，这些在哪里呢？
Then you will say in your heart, Who has given me all these children? when my children had been taken from me, and I was no longer able to have others, who took care of these? when I was by myself, where then were these?

主耶和华如此说，我必向列国举手，向万民竖立大旗，他们必将你的众子怀中抱来，将你的众女肩上扛来。
This is the word of the Lord God: See, I will make a sign with my hand to the nations, and put up my flag for the peoples; and they will take up your sons on their beasts, and your daughters on their backs.

列王必作你的养父，王后必作你的乳母。他们必将脸伏地，向你下拜，并舔你脚上的尘土。你便知道我是耶和华，等候我的必不至羞愧。
And kings will take care of you, and queens will give you their milk: they will go down on their faces before you, kissing the dust of your feet; and you will be certain that I am the Lord, and that those who put their hope in me will not be shamed.

勇士抢去的岂能夺回，该掳掠的岂能解救吗？
Will the goods of war be taken from the strong man, or the prisoners of the cruel one be let go?

但耶和华如此说，就是勇士所掳掠的，也可以夺回，强暴人所抢的，也可以解救，与你相争的我必与他相争，我要拯救你的儿女。
But the Lord says, Even the prisoners of the strong will be taken from him, and the cruel made to let go his goods: for I will take up your cause against your haters, and I will keep your children safe.

并且我必使那欺压你的吃自己的肉，也要以自己的血喝醉，好像喝甜酒一样。凡有血气的，必都知道我耶和华是你的救主，是你的救赎主，是雅各的大能者。
And the flesh of your attackers will be taken by themselves for food; and they will take their blood for drink, as if it was sweet wine: and all men will see that I the Lord am your saviour, even he who takes up your cause, the Strong One of Jacob.

耶和华如此说，我休你们的母亲，休书在哪里呢？我将你们卖给我哪一个债主呢？你们被卖，是因你们的罪孽。你们的母亲被休，是因你们的过犯。
This is the word of the Lord: Where is the statement which I gave your mother when I put her away? or to which of my creditors have I given you for money? It was for your sins that you were given into the hands of others, and for your evil-doing was your mother put away.

我来的时候，为何无人等候呢？我呼唤的时候，为何无人答应呢？我的膀臂岂是缩短，不能救赎吗？我岂无拯救之力吗？看哪，我一斥责，海就干了，我使江河变为旷野。其中的鱼因无水腥臭，干渴而死。
Why, then, when I came, was there no man? and no one to give answer to my voice? has my hand become feeble, so that it is unable to take up your cause? or have I no power to make you free? See, at my word the sea becomes dry, I make the rivers a waste land: their fish are dead for need of water, and make an evil smell.

我使诸天以黑暗为衣服，以麻布为遮盖。
By me the heavens are clothed with black, and I make haircloth their robe.

主耶和华赐我受教者的舌头，使我知道怎样用言语扶助疲乏的人。主每早晨提醒，提醒我的耳朵，使我能听，像受教者一样。
The Lord God has given me the tongue of those who are experienced, so that I may be able to give the word a special sense for the feeble: every morning my ear is open to his teaching, like those who are experienced:

主耶和华开通我的耳朵，我并没有违背，也没有退后。
And I have not put myself against him, or let my heart be turned back from him.

人打我的背，我任他打。人拔我腮颊的胡须，我由他拔。人辱我吐我，我并不掩面。
I was offering my back to those who gave me blows, and my face to those who were pulling out my hair: I did not keep my face covered from marks of shame.

主耶和华必帮助我，所以我不抱愧。我硬着脸面好像坚石，我也知道我必不至蒙羞。
For the Lord God is my helper; I will not be put to shame: so I have made my face like a rock, and I am certain that he will give me my right.

称我为义的与我相近。谁与我争论，可以与我一同站立。谁与我作对，可以就近我来。
He who takes up my cause is near; who will go to law with me? let us come together before the judge: who is against me? let him come near to me.

主耶和华要帮助我。谁能定我有罪呢？他们都像衣服渐渐旧了，为蛀虫所咬。
See, the Lord God is my helper; who will give a decision against me? truly, all of them will become old like a robe; they will be food for the worm.

你们中间谁是敬畏耶和华听从他仆人之话的。这人行在暗中，没有亮光，当倚靠耶和华的名，仗赖自己的神。
Who among you has the fear of the Lord, giving ear to the voice of his servant who has been walking in the dark and has no light? Let him put his faith in the name of the Lord, looking to his God for support.

凡你们点火用火把围绕自己的。可以行在你们的火焰里，并你们所点的火把中。这是我手所定的。你们必躺在悲惨之中。
See, all you who make a fire, arming yourselves with burning branches: go in the flame of your fire, and among the branches you have put a light to. This will you have from my hand, you will make your bed in sorrow.

你们这追求公义寻求耶和华的，当听我言。你们要追想被凿而出的磐石，被挖而出的岩穴。
Give ear to me, you who are searching for righteousness, who are looking for the Lord: see the rock from which you were cut out, and the hole out of which you were taken.

要追想你们的祖宗亚伯拉罕，和生养你们的撒拉。因为亚伯拉罕独自一人的时候，我选召他，赐福与他，使他人数增多。
Let your thoughts be turned to Abraham, your father, and to Sarah, who gave you birth: for when he was but one, my voice came to him, and I gave him my blessing, and made him a great people.

耶和华已经安慰锡安，和锡安一切的荒场，使旷野像伊甸，使沙漠像耶和华的园囿。在其中必有欢喜，快乐，感谢和歌唱的声音。
For the Lord has given comfort to Zion: he has made glad all her broken walls; making her waste places like Eden, and changing her dry land into the garden of the Lord; joy and delight will be there, praise and the sound of melody.

我的百姓阿，要向我留心。我的国民哪，要向我侧耳。因为训诲必从我而出，我必坚定我的公理为万民之光。
Give attention to me, O my people; and give ear to me, O my nation; for teaching will go out from me, and the knowledge of the true God will be a light to the peoples.

我的公义临近，我的救恩发出，我的膀臂要审判万民。海岛都要等候我，倚赖我的膀臂。
Suddenly will my righteousness come near, and my salvation will be shining out like the light; the sea-lands will be waiting for me, and they will put their hope in my strong arm.

你们要向天举目，观看下地。因为天必像烟云消散，地必如衣服渐渐旧了。其上的居民，也要如此死亡。（如此死亡或作像蠓虫死亡）惟有我的救恩永远长存，我的公义也不废掉。
Let your eyes be lifted up to the heavens, and turned to the earth which is under them: for the heavens will go in flight like smoke, and the earth will become old like a coat, and its people will come to destruction like insects: but my salvation will be for ever, and my righteousness will not come to an end.

知道公义，将我训诲存在心中的民，要听我言不要怕人的辱骂，也不要因人的毁谤惊惶。
Give ear to me, you who have knowledge of righteousness, in whose heart is my law; have no fear of the evil words of men, and give no thought to their curses.

因为蛀虫必咬他们，好像咬衣服，虫子必咬他们，如同咬羊绒。惟有我的公义永远长存，我的救恩直到万代。
For like a coat they will be food for the insect, the worm will make a meal of them like wool: but my righteousness will be for ever, and my salvation to all generations.

耶和华的膀臂阿，兴起，兴起，以能力为衣穿上，像古时的年日，上古的世代兴起一样。从前砍碎拉哈伯，刺透大鱼的，不是你吗？
Awake! awake! put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake! as in the old days, in the generations long past. Was it not by you that Rahab was cut in two, and the dragon Wounded?

使海与深渊的水干涸，使海的深处变为赎民经过之路的，不是你吗？
Did you not make the sea dry, the waters of the great deep? did you not make the deep waters of the sea a way for the Lord's people to go through?

耶和华救赎的民必归回，歌唱来到锡安。永乐必归到他们的头上，他们必得着欢喜快乐，忧愁叹息尽都逃避。
Those whom the Lord has made free will come back with songs to Zion; and on their heads will be eternal joy: delight and joy will be theirs, and sorrow and sounds of grief will be gone for ever.

惟有我，是安慰你们的。你是谁？竟怕那必死的人，怕那要变如草的世人。
I, even I, am your comforter: are you so poor in heart as to be in fear of man who will come to an end, and of the son of man who will be like grass?

却忘记铺张诸天，立定地基，创造你的耶和华。又因欺压者图谋毁灭要发的暴怒，整天害怕。其实那欺压者的暴怒在哪里呢？
And you have given no thought to the Lord your Maker, by whom the heavens were stretched out, and the earth placed on its base; and you went all day in fear of the wrath of the cruel one, when he was making ready for your destruction. And where is the wrath of the cruel one?

被掳去的快得释放，必不死而下坑。他的食物，也不致缺乏。
The prisoner, bent under his chain, will quickly be made free, and will not go down into the underworld, and his bread will not come to an end.

我是耶和华你的神，搅动大海，使海中的波浪？？訇。万军之耶和华是我的名。
For I am the Lord your God, who makes the sea calm when its waves are thundering: the Lord of armies is his name.

我将我的话传给你，用我的手影遮蔽你，为要栽定诸天，立定地基。又对锡安说，你是我的百姓。
And I have put my words in your mouth, covering you with the shade of my hand, stretching out the heavens, and placing the earth on its base, and saying to Zion, You are my people.

耶路撒冷阿，兴起，兴起，站起来。你从耶和华手中喝了他忿怒之杯，喝了那使人东倒西歪的爵，以至喝尽。
Awake! awake! up! O Jerusalem, you who have taken from the Lord's hand the cup of his wrath; tasting in full measure the wine which overcomes.

他所生育的诸子中没有一个引导他的。他所养大的诸子中没有一个搀扶他的。
She has no one among all her children to be her guide; not one of the sons she has taken care of takes her by the hand.

荒凉，毁灭，饥荒，刀兵，这几样临到你，谁为你举哀？我如何能安慰你呢？
These two things have come on you; who will be weeping for you? wasting and destruction; death from need of food, and from the sword; how may you be comforted?

你的众子发昏，在各市口上躺卧，好像黄羊在网罗之中。都满了耶和华的忿怒，你神的斥责。
Your sons are overcome, like a roe in a net; they are full of the wrath of the Lord, the punishment of your God.

因此，你这困苦却非因酒而醉的，要听我言。
So now give ear to this, you who are troubled and overcome, but not with wine:

你的主耶和华，就是为他百姓辨屈的神，如此说，看哪，我已将那使人东倒西歪的杯，就是我忿怒的爵，从你手中接过来。你必不至再喝。
This is the word of the Lord your master, even your God who takes up the cause of his people: See, I have taken out of your hand the cup which overcomes, even the cup of my wrath; it will not again be given to you:

我必将这杯，递在苦待你的人手中。他们曾对你说，你屈身，由我们践踏过去吧。你便以背为地，好像街市，任人经过。
And I will put it into the hand of your cruel masters, and of those whose yoke has been hard on you; who have said to your soul, Down on your face! so that we may go over you: and you have given your backs like the earth, even like the street, for them to go over.

锡安哪，兴起，兴起，披上你的能力。圣城耶路撒冷阿，穿上你华美的衣服。因为从今以后，未受割礼不洁净的，必不再进入你中间。
Awake! awake! put on your strength, O Zion; put on your beautiful robes, O Jerusalem, the holy town: for from now there will never again come into you the unclean and those without circumcision.

耶路撒冷阿，要抖下尘土。起来坐在位上。锡安被掳的居民哪，（居民原文作女子）要解开你颈项的锁链。
Make yourself clean from the dust; up! and take the seat of your power, O Jerusalem: the bands of your neck are loose, O prisoned daughter of Zion.

耶和华如此说，你们是无价被卖的，也必无银被赎。
For the Lord says, You were given for nothing, and you will be made free without price.

主耶和华如此说，起先我的百姓下到埃及，在那里寄居，又有亚述人无故欺压他们。
For the Lord God says, My people went down at first into Egypt, to get a place for themselves there: and the Assyrian put a cruel yoke on them without cause.

耶和华说，我的百姓既是无价被掳去，如今我在这里作什么呢？耶和华说，辖制他们的人呼叫，我的名整天受亵渎
Now then, what have I here? says the Lord, for my people are taken away without cause; they are made waste and give cries of sorrow, says the Lord, and all the day the nations put shame on my name.

所以我的百姓必知道我的名。到那日他们必知道说这话的就是我，看哪，是我。
For this cause I will make my name clear to my people; in that day they will be certain that it is my word which comes to them; see, here am I.

那报佳音，传平安，报好信，传救恩的，对锡安说，你的神作王了。这人的脚登山何等佳美。
How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of him who comes with good news, who gives word of peace, saying that salvation is near; who says to Zion, Your God is ruling!

听阿，你守望之人的声音。他们扬起声来，一同歌唱。因为耶和华归回锡安的时候，他们必亲眼看见。
The voice of your watchmen! their voices are loud in song together; for they will see him, eye to eye, when the Lord comes back to Zion.

耶路撒冷的荒场阿，要发起欢声，一同歌唱。因为耶和华安慰了他的百姓。救赎了耶路撒冷。
Give sounds of joy, make melody together, waste places of Jerusalem: for the Lord has given comfort to his people, he has taken up the cause of Jerusalem.

耶和华在万国眼前露出圣臂。地极的人都看见我们神的救恩了。
The Lord has let his holy arm be seen by the eyes of all nations; and all the ends of the earth will see the salvation of our God.

你们离开吧，离开吧，从巴比伦出来，不要沾不洁净的物。要从其中出来。你们扛抬耶和华器皿的人哪，务要自洁。
Away! away! go out from there, touching no unclean thing; go out from among her; be clean, you who take up the vessels of the Lord.

你们出来必不至急忙，也不至奔逃。因为耶和华必在你们前头行。以色列的神必作你们的后盾。
For you will not go out suddenly, and you will not go in flight: for the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will come after you to keep you.

我的仆人行事必有智慧，（或作行事通达）必被高举上升，且成为至高。
See, my servant will do well in his undertakings, he will be honoured, and lifted up, and be very high.

许多人因他（原文作你）惊奇，（他的面貌比别人憔悴，他的形容比世人枯槁）
As peoples were surprised at him, And his face was not beautiful, so as to be desired: his face was so changed by disease as to be unlike that of a man, and his form was no longer that of the sons of men.

这样，他必洗净（或作鼓动）许多国民。君王要向他闭口。因所未曾传与他们的，他们必看见。未曾听见的，他们要明白。
So will nations give him honour; kings will keep quiet because of him: for what had not been made clear to them they will see; and they will give their minds to what had not come to their ears.

我们所传的，（或作所传与我们的）有谁信呢？耶和华的膀臂向谁显露呢？
Who would have had faith in the word which has come to our ears, and to whom had the arm of the Lord been unveiled?

他在耶和华面前生长如嫩芽，像根出于干地。他无佳形美容，我们看见他的时候，也无美貌使我们羡慕他。
For his growth was like that of a delicate plant before him, and like a root out of a dry place: he had no grace of form, to give us pleasure;

他被藐视，被人厌弃，多受痛苦，常经忧患。他被藐视，好像被人掩面不看的一样。我们也不尊重他。
Men made sport of him, turning away from him; he was a man of sorrows, marked by disease; and like one from whom men's faces are turned away, he was looked down on, and we put no value on him.

他诚然担当我们的忧患，背负我们的痛苦。我们却以为他受责罚，被神击打苦待了。
But it was our pain he took, and our diseases were put on him: while to us he seemed as one diseased, on whom God's punishment had come.

哪知他为我们的过犯受害，为我们的罪孽压伤。因他受的刑罚我们得平安。因他受的鞭伤我们得医治。
But it was for our sins he was wounded, and for our evil doings he was crushed: he took the punishment by which we have peace, and by his wounds we are made well.

我们都如羊走迷，各人偏行己路。耶和华使我们众人的罪孽都归在他身上。
We all went wandering like sheep; going every one of us after his desire; and the Lord put on him the punishment of us all.

他被欺压，在受苦的时候却不开口。（或作他受欺压却自卑不开口）他像羊羔被牵到宰杀之地，又像羊在剪毛的人手下无声，他也是这样不开口。
Men were cruel to him, but he was gentle and quiet; as a lamb taken to its death, and as a sheep before those who take her wool makes no sound, so he said not a word.

因受欺压和审判他被夺去。至于他同世的人，谁想他受鞭打，从活人之地被剪除，是因我百姓的罪过呢？
They took away from him help and right, and who gave a thought to his fate? for he was cut off from the land of the living: he came to his death for the sin of my people.

他虽然未行强暴，口中也没有诡诈，人还使他与恶人同埋。谁知死的时候与财主同葬。
And they put his body into the earth with sinners, and his last resting-place was with the evil-doers, though he had done no wrong, and no deceit was in his mouth.

耶和华却定意（或作喜悦）将他压伤，使他受痛苦。耶和华以他为赎罪祭。（或作他献本身为赎罪祭）他必看见后裔，并且延长年日，耶和华所喜悦的事，必在他手中亨通。
And the Lord was pleased ... see a seed, long life, ... will do well in his hand. ...

他必看见自己劳苦的功效，便心满意足。有许多人，因认识我的义仆得称为义。并且他要担当他们的罪孽。
... made clear his righteousness before men ... had taken their sins on himself.

所以我要使他与位大的同分，与强盛的均分掳物。因为他将命倾倒，以致于死。他也被列在罪犯之中。他却担当多人的罪，又为罪犯代求。
For this cause he will have a heritage with the great, and he will have a part in the goods of war with the strong, because he gave up his life, and was numbered with the evil-doers; taking on himself the sins of the people, and making prayer for the wrongdoers.

你这不怀孕不生养的，要歌唱。你这未曾经过产难的，要发声歌唱，扬声欢呼。因为没有丈夫的，比有丈夫的儿女更多。这是耶和华说的。
Let your voice be loud in song, O woman without children; make melody and sounds of joy, you who did not give birth: for the children of her who had no husband are more than those of the married wife, says the Lord.

要扩张你帐幕之地，张大你居所的幔子，不要限止，要放长你的绳子，坚固你的橛子。
Make wide the place of your tent, and let the curtains of your house be stretched out without limit: make your cords long, and your tent-pins strong.

因为你要向左向右开展。你的后裔必得多国为业，又使荒凉的城邑有人居住。
For I will make wide your limits on the right hand and on the left; and your seed will take the nations for a heritage, and make the waste towns full of people.

不要惧怕，因你必不致蒙羞。也不要抱愧，因你必不至受辱。你必忘记幼年的羞愧，不再记念你寡居的羞辱。
Have no fear; for you will not be shamed or without hope: you will not be put to shame, for the shame of your earlier days will go out of your memory, and you will no longer keep in mind the sorrows of your widowed years.

因为造你的，是你的丈夫。万军之耶和华是他的名。救赎你的，是以色列的圣者。他必称为全地之神。
For your Maker is your husband; the Lord of armies is his name: and the Holy One of Israel is he who takes up your cause; he will be named the God of all the earth.

耶和华召你，如召被离弃心中忧伤的妻，就是幼年所娶被弃的妻。这是你神所说的。
For the Lord has made you come back to him, like a wife who has been sent away in grief of spirit; for one may not give up the wife of one's early days.

我离弃你不过片时，却要施大恩将你收回。
For a short time I gave you up; but with great mercies I will take you back again.

我的怒气涨溢，顷刻之间向你掩面，却要以永远的慈爱怜恤你。这是耶和华你的救赎主说的。
In overflowing wrath my face was veiled from you for a minute, but I will have pity on you for ever, says the Lord who takes up your cause.

这事在我好像挪亚的洪水。我怎样起誓不再使挪亚的洪水漫过遍地，我也照样起誓不再向你发怒，也不斥责你。
For this is like the days of Noah to me: for as I took an oath that the waters of Noah would never again go over the earth, so have I taken an oath that I will not again be angry with you, or say bitter words to you.

大山可以挪开，小山可以迁移。但我的慈爱必不离开你，我平安的约也不迁移。这是怜恤你的耶和华说的。
For the mountains may be taken away, and the hills be moved out of their places, but my love will not be taken from you, or my agreement of peace broken, says the Lord, who has had mercy on you.

你这受困苦被风飘荡不得安慰的人哪，我必以彩色安置你的石头，以蓝宝石立定你的根基。
O troubled one, storm-crushed, uncomforted! see, your stones will be framed in fair colours, and your bases will be sapphires.

又以红宝石造你的女墙，以红玉造你的城门，以宝石造你四围的边界。（或作外郭）
I will make your towers of rubies, and your doors of carbuncles, and the wall round you will be of all sorts of beautiful stones.

你的儿女都要受耶和华的教训。你的儿女必大享平安。
And all your builders will be made wise by the Lord; and great will be the peace of your children.

你必因公义得坚立。必远离欺压，不至害怕。你必远离惊吓，惊吓必不临近你。
All your rights will be made certain to you: have no fear of evil, and destruction will not come near you.

即或有人聚集，却不由于我。凡聚集攻击你的，必因你仆倒。（因你仆倒或作投降你）
See, they may be moved to war, but not by my authority: all those who come together to make an attack on you, will be broken against you.

吹嘘炭火，打造合用器械的铁匠，是我所造。残害人行毁灭的，也是我所造。
See, I have made the iron-worker, blowing on the burning coals, and making the instrument of war by his work; and I have made the waster for destruction.

凡为攻击你造成的器械，必不利用。凡在审判时兴起用舌攻击你的，你必定他为有罪。这是耶和华仆人的产业，是他们从我所得的义。这是耶和华说的。
No instrument of war which is formed against you will be of any use; and every tongue which says evil against you will be judged false. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness comes from me, says the Lord.

你们一切干渴的都当就近水来。没有银钱的也可以来。你们都来，买了吃。不用银钱，不用价值，也来买酒和奶。
Ho! everyone in need, come to the waters, and he who has no strength, let him get food: come, get bread without money; wine and milk without price.

你们为何花钱（原文作平银）买那不足为食物的，用劳碌得来的买那不使人饱足的呢？你们要留意听我的话，就能吃那美物，得享肥甘，心中喜乐。
Why do you give your money for what is not bread, and the fruit of your work for what will not give you pleasure? Give ear to me, so that your food may be good, and you may have the best in full measure.

你们当就近我来。侧耳而听，就必得活。我必与你们立永约，就是应许大卫那可靠的恩典。
Give ear, and come to me, take note with care, so that your souls may have life: and I will make an eternal agreement with you, even the certain mercies of David.

我已立他作万民的见证，为万民的君王和司令。
See, I have given him as a witness to the peoples, a ruler and a guide to the nations.

你素不认识的国民，你也必召来。素不认识你的国民，也必向你奔跑，都因耶和华你的神以色列的圣者。因为他已经荣耀你。
See, you will send for a nation of which you had no knowledge, and those who had no knowledge of you will come running to you, because of the Lord your God, and because of the Holy One of Israel, for he has given you glory.

当趁耶和华可寻找的时候寻找他，相近的时候求告他。
Make search for the Lord while he is there, make prayer to him while he is near:

恶人当离弃自己的道路。不义的人当除掉自己的意念，归向耶和华，耶和华就必怜恤他，当归向我们的神，因为神必广行赦免。
Let the sinner give up his way, and the evil-doer his purpose: and let him come back to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God, for there is full forgiveness with him.

耶和华说，我的意念，非同你们的意念，我的道路，非同你们的道路。
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, or your ways my ways, says the Lord.

天怎样高过地，照样我的道路，高过你们的道路，我的意念，高过你们的意念。
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

雨雪从天而降，并不返回，却滋润地土，使地上发芽结实，使撒种的有种，使要吃的有粮。
For as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and does not go back again, but gives water to the earth, and makes it fertile, giving seed to the planter, and bread for food;

我口所出的话，也必如此，决不徒然返回，却要成就我所喜悦的，在我发他去成就的事上（发他去成就或作所命定）必然亨通。
So will my word be which goes out of my mouth: it will not come back to me with nothing done, but it will give effect to my purpose, and do that for which I have sent it.

你们必欢欢喜喜而出来，平平安安蒙引导。大山小山必在你们面前发声歌唱。田野的树木也都拍掌。
For you will go out with joy, and be guided in peace: the mountains and the hills will make melody before you, and all the trees of the fields will make sounds of joy.

松树长出代替荆棘。番石榴长出代替蒺藜。这要为耶和华留名，作为永远的证据，不能剪除。
In place of the thorn will come up the fir-tree, and in place of the blackberry the myrtle: and it will be to the Lord for a name, for an eternal sign which will not be cut off.

耶和华如此说，你们当守公平，行公义。因我的救恩临近，我的公义将要显现。
The Lord says, Let your way of life be upright, and let your behaviour be rightly ordered: for my salvation is near, and my righteousness will quickly be seen.

谨守安息日而不干犯，禁止己手而不作恶。如此行，如此持守的人，便为有福。
Happy is the man who does this, and the son of man whose behaviour is so ordered; who keeps the Sabbath holy, and his hand from doing any evil.

与耶和华联合的外邦人不要说，耶和华必定将我从他民中分别出来。太监也不要说，我是枯树。
And let not the man from a strange country, who has been joined to the Lord, say, The Lord will certainly put a division between me and his people: and let not the unsexed man say, See, I am a dry tree.

因为耶和华如此说，那些谨守我的安息日，拣选我所喜悦的事，持守我约的太监。
For the Lord says, As for the unsexed who keep my Sabbaths, and give their hearts to pleasing me, and keep their agreement with me:

我必使他们在我殿中，在我墙内，有记念，有名号，比有儿女的更美。我必赐他们永远的名，不能剪除。
I will give to them in my house, and inside my walls, a place and a name better than that of sons and daughters; I will give them an eternal name which will not be cut off.

还有那些与耶和华联合的外邦人，要事奉他，要爱耶和华的名，要作他的仆人，就是凡守安息日不干犯，又持守他（原文作我）约的人。
And as for those from a strange country, who are joined to the Lord, to give worship to him and honour to his name, to be his servants, even everyone who keeps the Sabbath holy, and keeps his agreement with me:

我必领他们到我的圣山，使他们在祷告我的殿中喜乐。他们的燔祭，和平安祭，在我坛上必蒙悦纳。因我的殿必称为万民祷告的殿。
I will make them come to my holy mountain, and will give them joy in my house of prayer; I will take pleasure in the burned offerings which they make on my altar: for my house will be named a house of prayer for all peoples.

主耶和华，就是招聚以色列被赶散的，说，在这被招聚的人以外，我还要招聚别人归并他们。
The Lord God, who gets together the wandering ones of Israel, says, I will get together others in addition to those of Israel who have come back.

田野的诸兽，都来吞吃吧。林中的诸兽，也要如此。
All you beasts of the field, come together for your meat, even all you beasts of the wood.

他看守的人是瞎眼的，都没有知识，都是哑吧狗，不能叫唤。但知作梦，躺卧，贪睡。
His watchmen are blind, they are all without knowledge; they are all dogs without tongues, unable to make a sound; stretched out dreaming, loving sleep.

这些狗贪食，不知饱足。这些牧人不能明白，各人偏行己路，各从各方求自己的利益。
Yes, the dogs are for ever looking for food; while these, the keepers of the sheep, are without wisdom: they have all gone after their pleasure, every one looking for profit; they are all the same.

他们说，来吧，我去拿酒，我们饱饮浓酒。明日必和今日一样，就是宴乐无量极大之日。
Come, they say, I will get wine, and we will take strong drink in full measure; and tomorrow will be like today, full of pleasure.

义人死亡，无人放在心上。虔诚人被收去，无人思念。这义人被收去是免了将来的祸患。
The upright man goes to his death, and no one gives a thought to it; and god-fearing men are taken away, and no one is troubled by it; for the upright man is taken away because of evil-doing, and goes into peace.

他们得享（原文作进入）平安，素行正直的，各人在坟里（原文作床上）安歇。
They are at rest in their last resting-places, every one going straight before him.

你们这些巫婆的儿子，奸夫和妓女的种子，都要前来。
But come near, you sons of her who is wise in secret arts, the seed of her who is false to her husband, and of the loose woman.

你们向谁戏笑，向谁张口吐舌呢？你们岂不是悖逆的儿女，虚谎的种类呢？
Of whom do you make sport? against whom is your mouth open wide and your tongue put out? are you not uncontrolled children, a false seed,

你们在橡树中间，在各青翠树下欲火攻心。在山谷间，在石穴下杀了儿女。
You who are burning with evil desire among the oaks, under every green tree; putting children to death in the valleys, under the cracks of the rocks?

在谷中光滑石头里有你的分。这些就是你所得的分。你也向他浇了奠祭，献了供物。因这事我岂能容忍吗？
Among the smooth stones of the valley is your heritage; they, even they, are your part: even to them have you made a drink offering and a meal offering. Is it possible for such things to be overlooked by me?

你在高而又高的山上安设床榻，也上那里去献祭。
You have put your bed on a high mountain: there you went up to make your offering.

你在门后，在门框后，立起你的记念，向外人赤露。又上去扩张床榻，与他们立约。你在那里看见他们的床，就甚喜爱。
And on the back of the doors and on the pillars you have put your sign: for you have been false to me with another; you have made your bed wide, and made an agreement with them; you had a desire for their bed where you saw it

你把油带到王那里，又多加香料，打发使者往远方去，自卑自贱直到阴间。
And you went to Melech with oil and much perfume, and you sent your representatives far off, and went as low as the underworld.

你因路远疲倦，却不说，这是枉然。你以为有复兴之力，所以不觉疲惫。
You were tired with your long journeys; but you did not say, There is no hope: you got new strength, and so you were not feeble.

你怕谁？因谁恐惧？竟说谎，不记念我，又不将这事放在心上。我不是许久闭口不言，你仍不怕我吗？
And of whom were you in fear, so that you were false, and did not keep me in mind, or give thought to it? Have I not been quiet, keeping myself secret, and so you were not in fear of me?

我要指明你的公义。至于你所行的，都必与你无益。
I will make clear what your righteousness is like and your works; you will have no profit in them.

你哀求的时候，让你所聚集的拯救你吧。风要把他们刮散。一口气要把他们都吹去。但那投靠我的必得地土，必承受我的圣山为业。
Your false gods will not keep you safe in answer to your cry; but the wind will take them, they will be gone like a breath: but he who puts his hope in me will take the land, and will have my holy mountain as his heritage.

耶和华要说，你们修筑修筑，预备道路，将绊脚石从我百姓的路中除掉。
And I will say, Make it high, make it high, get ready the way, take the stones out of the way of my people.

因为那至高至上，永远长存，（原文作住在永远）名为圣者的如此说，我住在至高至圣的所在，也与心灵痛悔谦卑的人同居，要使谦卑人的灵苏醒，也使痛悔人的心苏醒。
For this is the word of him who is high and lifted up, whose resting-place is eternal, whose name is Holy: my resting-place is in the high and holy place, and with him who is crushed and poor in spirit, to give life to the spirit of the poor, and to make strong the heart of the crushed.

我必不永远相争，也不长久发怒。恐怕我所造的人与灵性，都必发昏。
For I will not give punishment for ever, or be angry without end: for from me breath goes out; and I it was who made the souls.

因他贪婪的罪孽，我就发怒击打他。我向他掩面发怒，他却仍然随心背道。
I was quickly angry with his evil ways, and sent punishment on him, veiling my face in wrath: and he went on, turning his heart from me.

我看见他所行的道，也要医治他。又要引导他，使他和那一同伤心的人，再得安慰。
I have seen his ways, and I will make him well: I will give him rest, comforting him and his people who are sad.

我造就嘴唇的果子。愿平安康泰归与远处的人，也归与近处的人，并且我要医治他。这是耶和华说的。
I will give the fruit of the lips: Peace, peace, to him who is near and to him who is far off, says the Lord; and I will make him well.

惟独恶人，好像翻腾的海，不得平静，其中的水，常涌出污秽和淤泥来。
But the evil-doers are like the troubled sea, for which there is no rest, and its waters send up earth and waste.

我的神说，恶人必不得平安。
There is no peace, says my God, for the evil-doers.

你要大声喊叫，不可止息，扬起声来好像吹角，向我百姓说明他们的过犯，向雅各家说明他们的罪恶。
Make a loud cry, do not be quiet, let your voice be sounding like a horn, and make clear to my people their evil doings, and to the family of Jacob their sins.

他们天天寻求我，乐意明白我的道。好像行义的国民，不离弃他们神的典章，向我求问公义的判语，喜悦亲近神。
Though they make prayer to me every day, and take pleasure in the knowledge of my ways: like a nation which has done righteousness, and has not given up the rules of their God, they make requests to me for the right orders, it is their delight to come near to God.

他们说，我们禁食，你为何不看见呢？我们刻苦己心，你为何不理会呢？看哪，你们禁食的日子，仍求利益，勒逼人为你们作苦工。
They say, Why have we kept ourselves from food, and you do not see it? why have we kept ourselves from pleasure, and you take no note of it? If, in the days when you keep from food, you take the chance to do your business, and get in your debts;

你们禁食，却互相争竞，以凶恶的拳头打人。你们今日禁食，不得使你们的声音听闻于上。
If keeping from food makes you quickly angry, ready for fighting and giving blows with evil hands; your holy days are not such as to make your voice come to my ears on high.

这样禁食，岂是我所拣选使人刻苦己心的日子吗？岂是叫人垂头像苇子，用麻布和炉灰铺在他以下吗？你这可称为禁食为耶和华所悦纳的日子吗？
Have I given orders for such a day as this? a day for keeping yourselves from pleasure? is it only a question of the bent head, of putting on haircloth, and being seated in the dust? is this what seems to you a holy day, well-pleasing to the Lord?

我所拣选的禁食，不是要松开凶恶的绳，解下轭上的索，使被欺压的得自由，折断一切的轭吗？
Is not this the holy day for which I have given orders: to let loose those who have wrongly been made prisoners, to undo the bands of the yoke, and to let the crushed go free, and every yoke be broken?

不是要把你的饼，分给饥饿的人。将飘流的穷人，接到你家中。见赤身的，给他衣服遮体。顾恤自己的骨肉而不掩藏吗？
Is it not to give your bread to those in need, and to let the poor who have no resting-place come into your house? to put a robe on the unclothed one when you see him, and not to keep your eyes shut for fear of seeing his flesh?

这样你的光就必发现如早晨的光。你所得的医治，要速速发明。你的公义，必在你前面行。耶和华的荣光，必作你的后盾。
Then will light be shining on you like the morning, and your wounds will quickly be well: and your righteousness will go before you, and the glory of the Lord will come after you.

那时你求告，耶和华必应允。你呼求，他必说，我在这里。你若从你中间除掉重轭，和指摘人的指头，并发恶言的事。
Then at the sound of your voice, the Lord will give an answer; at your cry he will say, Here am I. If you take away from among you the yoke, the putting out of the finger of shame, and the evil word;

你心若向饥饿的人发怜悯，使困苦的人得满足。你的光就必在黑暗中发现，你的幽暗必变如正午。
And if you give your bread to those in need of it, so that the troubled one may have his desire; then you will have light in the dark, and your night will be as the full light of the sun:

耶和华也必时常引导你，在干旱之地，使你心满意足，骨头强壮。你必像浇灌的园子，又像水流不绝的泉源。
And the Lord will be your guide at all times; in dry places he will give you water in full measure, and will make strong your bones; and you will be like a watered garden, and like an ever-flowing spring.

那些出于你的人，必修造久已荒废之处。你要建立拆毁累代的根基。你必称为补破口的，和重修路径与人居住的。
And your sons will be building again the old waste places: you will make strong the bases of old generations: and you will be named, He who puts up the broken walls, and, He who makes ready the ways for use.

你若在安息日掉转（或作谨慎）你的脚步，在我圣日不以操作为喜乐，称安息日为可喜乐的，称耶和华的圣日为可尊重的。而且尊敬这日，不办自己的私事，不随自己的私意，不说自己的私话。
If you keep the Sabbath with care, not doing your business on my holy day; and if the Sabbath seems to you a delight, and the new moon of the Lord a thing to be honoured; and if you give respect to him by not doing your business, or going after your pleasure, or saying unholy words;

你就以耶和华为乐。耶和华要使你乘驾地的高处。又以你祖雅各的产业养育你。这是耶和华亲口说的。
Then the Lord will be your delight; and I will put you on the high places of the earth; and I will give you the heritage of Jacob your father: for the mouth of the Lord has said it.

耶和华的膀臂，并非缩短不能拯救。耳朵，并非发沉不能听见。
Truly, the Lord's hand has not become short, so that he is unable to give salvation; and his ear is not shut from hearing:

但你们的罪孽使你们与神隔绝，你们的罪恶使他掩面不听你们。
But your sins have come between you and your God, and by your evil doings his face has been veiled from you, so that he will give you no answer.

因你们的手被血沾染，你们的指头被罪孽沾污。你们的嘴唇说谎言，你们的舌头出恶语。
For your hands are unclean with blood, and your fingers with sin; your lips have said false things, and your tongue gives out deceit.

无一人按公义告状，无一人凭诚实辨白。都倚靠虚妄，说谎言。所怀的是毒害，所生的是罪孽。
No one puts forward an upright cause, or gives a true decision: their hope is in deceit, and their words are false; they are with child with sin, and give birth to evil.

他们抱毒蛇蛋，结蜘蛛网。人吃这蛋必死。这蛋被踏，必出蝮蛇。
They give birth to snake's eggs, and make spider's threads: whoever takes their eggs for food comes to his death, and the egg which is crushed becomes a poison-snake.

所结的网，不能成为衣服，所作的，也不能遮盖自己。他们的行为都是罪孽，手所作的都是强暴。
Their twisted threads will not make clothing, and their works will give them nothing for covering themselves: their works are works of sin, and violent acts are in their hands.

他们的脚奔跑行恶，他们急速流无辜人的血。意念都是罪孽。所经过的路都荒凉毁灭。
Their feet go quickly to evil, and they take delight in the death of the upright; their thoughts are thoughts of sin; wasting and destruction are in their ways.

平安的路，他们不知道。所行的事没有公平。他们为自己修弯曲的路。凡行此路的，都不知道平安。
They have no knowledge of the way of peace, and there is no sense of what is right in their behaviour: they have made for themselves ways which are not straight; whoever goes in them has no knowledge of peace.

因此公平离我们远，公义追不上我们。我们指望光亮，却是黑暗。指望光明，却行幽暗。
For this cause our right is far from us, and righteousness does not overtake us: we are looking for light, but there is only the dark; for the shining of the sun, but our way is in the night.

我们摸索墙壁，好像瞎子。我们摸索如同无目之人。我们晌午绊脚，如在黄昏一样。我们在肥壮人中，像死人一般。
We go on our way, like blind men feeling for the wall, even like those who have no eyes: we are running against things in daylight as if it was evening; our place is in the dark like dead men.

我们咆哮如熊，哀鸣如鸽。指望公平，却是没有。指望救恩，却远离我们。
We make noises of grief, like bears, and sad sounds like doves: we are looking for our right, but it is not there; for salvation, but it is far from us.

我们的过犯在你面前增多，罪恶作见证告我们。过犯与我们同在。至于我们的罪孽，我们都知道。
For our evil doings are increased before you, and our sins give witness against us: for our evil doings are with us, and we have knowledge of our sins:

就是悖逆不认识耶和华，转去不跟从我们的神，说欺压和叛逆的话，心怀谎言，随即说出。
We have gone against the Lord, and been false to him, turning away from our God, our words have been uncontrolled, and in our hearts are thoughts of deceit.

并且公平转而退后，公义站在远处。诚实在街上仆倒，正直也不得进入。
And the right is turned back, and righteousness is far away: for good faith is not to be seen in the public places, and upright behaviour may not come into the town.

诚实少见。离恶的人反成掠物。那时，耶和华看见没有公平，甚不喜悦。
Yes, faith is gone; and he whose heart is turned from evil comes into the power of the cruel: and the Lord saw it, and he was angry that there was no one to take up their cause.

他见无人拯救，无人代求，甚为诧异。就用自己的膀臂施行拯救。以公义扶持自己。
And he saw that there was no man, and was surprised that there was no one to take up their cause: so his arm gave salvation, and he made righteousness his support.

他以公义为铠甲，（或作护心镜）以拯救为头盔，以报仇为衣服，以热心为外袍。
Yes, he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and salvation as a head-dress; and he put on punishment as clothing, and wrath as a robe.

他必按人的行为施报，恼怒他的敌人，报复他的仇敌，向众海岛施行报应。
He will give them the right reward of their doings, wrath to his attackers, punishment to his haters, and even on the sea-lands he will send punishment.

如此，人从日落之处，必敬畏耶和华的名。从日出之地，也必敬畏他的荣耀。因为仇敌好像急流的河水冲来，是耶和华之气所驱逐的。
So they will see the name of the Lord from the west, and his glory from the east: for he will come like a rushing stream, forced on by a wind of the Lord.

必有一位救赎主，来到锡安雅各族中转离过犯的人那里。这是耶和华说的。
And as a saviour he will come to Zion, turning away sin from Jacob, says the Lord.

耶和华说，至于我与他们所立的约，乃是这样。我加给你的灵，传给你的话，必不离你的口，也不离你后裔与你后裔之后裔的口，从今直到永远。这是耶和华说的。
And as for me, this is my agreement with them, says the Lord: my spirit which is on you, and my words which I have put in your mouth, will not go away from your mouth, or from the mouth of your seed, or from the mouth of your seed's seed, says the Lord, from now and for ever.

兴起发光。因为你的光已经来到，耶和华的荣耀发现照耀你。
Up! let your face be bright, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord is shining on you.

看哪，黑暗遮盖大地，幽暗遮盖万民。耶和华却要显现照耀你，他的荣耀要现在你身上。
For truly, the earth will be dark, and the peoples veiled in blackest night; but the Lord will be shining on you, and his glory will be seen among you.

万国要来就你的光，君王要来就你发现的光辉。
And nations will come to your light, and kings to your bright dawn.

你举目向四方观看。众人都聚集来到你这里。你的众子从远方而来，你的众女也被怀抱而来。
Let your eyes be lifted up, and see: they are all coming together to you: your sons will come from far, and your daughters taken with loving care.

那时你看见就有光荣，你心又跳动，又宽畅。因为大海丰盛的货物，必转来归你，列国的财宝，也必来归你。
Then you will see, and be bright with joy, and your heart will be shaking with increase of delight: for the produce of the sea will be turned to you, the wealth of the nations will come to you.

成群的骆驼，并米甸和以法的独峰驼，必遮满你。示巴的众人，都必来到。要奉上黄金乳香，又要传说耶和华的赞美。
You will be full of camel-trains, even the young camels of Midian and Ephah; all from Sheba will come, with gold and spices, giving word of the great acts of the Lord.

基达的羊群，都必聚集到你这里，尼拜约的公羊，要供你使用。在我坛上必蒙悦纳。我必荣耀我荣耀的殿。
All the flocks of Kedar will come together to you, the sheep of Nebaioth will be ready for your need; they will be pleasing offerings on my altar, and my house of prayer will be beautiful.

那些飞来如云，又如鸽子向窗户飞回的，是谁呢？
Who are these coming like a cloud, like a flight of doves to their windows?

众海岛必等候我，首先是他施的船只，将你的众子，连他们的金银，从远方一同带来，都为耶和华你神的名，又为以色列的圣者，因为他已经荣耀了你。
Vessels of the sea-lands are waiting for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, so that your sons may come from far, and their silver and gold with them, to the place of the name of the Lord your God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he has made you beautiful.

外邦人必建筑你的城墙，他们的王必服事你。我曾发怒击打你，现今却施恩怜恤你。
And men from strange countries will be building up your walls, and their kings will be your servants: for in my wrath I sent punishment on you, but in my grace I have had mercy on you.

你的城门必时常开放，昼夜不关，使人把列国的财物带来归你，并将他们的君王牵引而来。
Your doors will be open at all times; they will not be shut day or night; so that men may come into you with the wealth of the nations, with their kings at their head.

哪一邦哪一国不事奉你，就必灭亡，也必全然荒废。
For the nation or kingdom which will not be your servant will come to destruction; such nations will be completely waste.

利巴嫩的荣耀，就是松树，杉树，黄杨树，都必一同归你，为要修饰我圣所之地。我也要使我脚踏之处得荣耀。
The glory of Lebanon will come to you, the cypress, the plane, and the sherbin-tree together, to make my holy place beautiful; and the resting-place of my feet will be full of glory.

素来苦待你的，他的子孙都必屈身来就你。藐视你的，都要在你脚下跪拜。他们要称你为耶和华的城，为以色列圣者的锡安。
And the sons of those who were cruel to you will come before you with bent heads; and those who made sport of you will go down on their faces at your feet; and you will be named, The Town of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

你虽然被撇弃被厌恶，甚至无人经过，我却使你变为永远的荣华，成为累代的喜乐。
And though you were turned away from, and hated, and had no helper, I will make you a pride for ever, a joy from generation to generation.

你也必吃万国的奶，又吃君王的奶。你便知道我耶和华是你的救主，是你的救赎主，雅各的大能者。
And you will take the milk of the nations, flowing from the breast of kings; and you will see that I, the Lord, am your saviour, and he who takes up your cause, the Strong One of Jacob.

我要拿金子代替铜，拿银子代替铁，拿铜代替木头，拿铁代替石头。并要以和平为你的官长，以公义为你的监督。
In place of brass, I will give gold, and for iron silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: and I will make Peace your judge, and Righteousness your overseer.

你地上不再听见强暴的事，境内不再听见荒凉毁灭的事。你必称你的墙为拯救，称你的门为赞美。
Violent acts will no longer be seen in your land, wasting or destruction in your limits; but your walls will be named, Salvation, and your doors Praise.

日头不再作你白昼的光，月亮也不再发光照耀你。耶和华却要作你永远的光，你神要为你的荣耀。
The sun will not be your light by day, and the moon will no longer be bright for you by night: but the Lord will be to you an eternal light, and your God your glory.

你的日头不再下落，你的月亮也不退缩。因为耶和华必作你永远的光，你悲哀的日子也完毕了。
Your sun will never again go down, or your moon keep back her light: for the Lord will be your eternal light, and the days of your sorrow will be ended.

你的居民都成为义人，永远得地为业，是我种的栽子，我手的工作，使我得荣耀。
Your people will all be upright, the land will be their heritage for ever; the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, to be for my glory.

至小的族要加增千倍，微弱的国必成为强盛。我耶和华要按定期速成这事。
The smallest of their families will become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I, the Lord, will make it come quickly in its time.

主耶和华的灵在我身上。因为耶和华用膏膏我，叫我传好信息给谦卑的人，（或作传福音给贫穷的人）差遣我医好伤心的人，报告被掳的得释放，被囚的出监牢。
The spirit of the Lord is on me, because I am marked out by him to give good news to the poor; he has sent me to make the broken-hearted well, to say that the prisoners will be made free, and that those in chains will see the light again;

报告耶和华的恩年，和我们神报仇的日子。安慰一切悲哀的人。
To give knowledge that the year of the Lord's good pleasure has come, and the day of punishment from our God; to give comfort to all who are sad;

赐华冠与锡安悲哀的人，代替灰尘，喜乐油，代替悲哀，赞美衣，代替忧伤之灵。使他们称为公义树，是耶和华所栽的，叫他得荣耀。
To give them a fair head-dress in place of dust, the oil of joy in place of the clothing of grief, praise in place of sorrow; so that they may be named trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, and so that he may have glory.

他们必修造已久的荒场，建立先前凄凉之处，重修历代荒凉之城。
And they will be building again the old broken walls, and will make new the old waste places, and will put up again the towns which have been waste for long generations.

那时，外人必起来牧放你们的羊群，外邦人必作你们耕种田地的，修理葡萄园的。
And men from strange countries will be your herdsmen, and those who are not Israelites will be your ploughmen and vine-keepers.

你们倒要称为耶和华的祭司。人必称你们为我们神的仆役。你们必吃用列国的财物，因得他们的荣耀自夸。
But you will be named the priests of the Lord, the servants of our God: you will have the wealth of the nations for your food, and you will be clothed with their glory.

你们必得加倍的好处，代替所受的羞辱。分中所得的喜乐，必代替所受的凌辱。在境内必得加倍的产业。永远之乐必归与你们。（原文作他们）
As they had twice as much grief, and marks of shame were their heritage, so in their land they will be rewarded twice over, and will have eternal joy.

因为我耶和华喜爱公平，恨恶抢夺和罪孽。我要凭诚实施行报应，并要与我的百姓立永约。
For I, the Lord, take pleasure in upright judging; I will not put up with the violent taking away of right; and I will certainly give them their reward, and I will make an eternal agreement with them.

他们的后裔必在列国中被人认识，他们的子孙在众民中也是如此。凡看见他们的，必认他们是耶和华赐福的后裔。
And their seed will be noted among the nations, and their offspring among the peoples: it will be clear to all who see them that they are the seed to which the Lord has given his blessing.

我因耶和华大大欢喜，我的心靠神快乐。因他以拯救为衣给我穿上，以公义为袍给我披上，好像新郎戴上华冠，又像新妇佩戴妆饰。
I will be full of joy in the Lord, my soul will be glad in my God; for he has put on me the clothing of salvation, covering me with the robe of righteousness, as the husband puts on a fair head-dress, and the bride makes herself beautiful with jewels.

田地怎样使百谷发芽，园子怎样使所种的发生，主耶和华必照样使公义和赞美在万民中发出。
For as the earth puts out buds, and as the garden gives growth to the seeds which are planted in it, so the Lord will make righteousness and praise to be flowering before all the nations.

我因锡安必不静默，为耶路撒冷必不息声，直到他的公义如光辉发出，他的救恩如明灯发亮。
Because of Zion I will not keep quiet, and because of Jerusalem I will take no rest, till her righteousness goes out like the shining of the sun, and her salvation like a burning light.

列国必见你的公义，列王必见你的荣耀。你必得新名的称呼，是耶和华亲口所起的。
And the nations will see your righteousness, and all kings your glory: and you will have a new name, given by the mouth of the Lord.

你在耶和华的手中要作为华冠，在你神的掌上必作为冕旒。
And you will be a fair crown in the hand of the Lord, and a king's head-dress in the hand of your God.

你必不再称为撇弃的，你的地也不再称为荒凉的，你却要称为我所喜悦的，你的地也必称为有夫之妇。因为耶和华喜悦你，你的地也必归他。
You will not now be named, She who is given up; and your land will no longer be named, The waste land: but you will have the name, My pleasure is in her, and your land will be named, Married: for the Lord has pleasure in you, and your land will be married.

少年人怎样娶处女，你的众民（民原文作子）也要照样娶你。新郎怎样喜悦新妇，你的神也要照样喜悦你。
For as a young man takes a virgin for his wife, so will your maker be married to you: and as a husband has joy in his bride, so will the Lord your God be glad over you.

耶路撒冷阿，我在你城上设立守望的。他们昼夜必不静默。呼吁耶和华的，你们不要歇息，
I have put watchmen on your walls, O Jerusalem; they will not keep quiet day or night: you who are the Lord's recorders, take no rest,

也不要使他歇息，直等他建立耶路撒冷，使耶路撒冷在地上成为可赞美的。
And give him no rest, till he puts Jerusalem in her place to be praised in the earth.

耶和华指着自己的右手和大能的膀臂起誓，说，我必不再将你的五谷给你仇敌作食物，外邦人也不再喝你劳碌得来的新酒。
The Lord has taken an oath by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Truly, I will no longer give your grain to be food for your haters; and men of strange countries will not take the wine for which your work has been done:

惟有那收割的要吃，并赞美耶和华。那聚敛的要在我圣所的院内喝。
But those who have got in the grain will have it for their food, and will give praise to the Lord; and those who have got in the grapes will take the wine of them in the open places of my holy house.

你们当从门经过经过。预备百姓的路。修筑修筑大道。捡去石头。为万民竖立大旗。
Go through, go through the doors; make ready the way of the people; let the highway be lifted up; let the stones be taken away; let a flag be lifted up over the peoples.

看哪，耶和华曾宣告到地极，对锡安的居民（原文作女子）说，你的拯救者来到。他的赏赐在他那里，他的报应在他面前。
The Lord has sent out word to the end of the earth, Say to the daughter of Zion, See, your saviour comes; those whom he has made free are with him, and those to whom he has given salvation go before him.

人必称他们为圣民，为耶和华的赎民。你也必称为被眷顾不撇弃的城。
And they will be named, The holy people, Those whose cause has been taken up by the Lord: and you will be named, Desired, A town not given up.

这从以东的波斯拉来，穿红衣服，装扮华美，能力广大，大步行走的是谁呢？就是我，是凭公义说话，以大能施行拯救。
Who is this who comes from Edom, with blood-red robes from Bozrah? he whose clothing is fair, stepping with pride in his great strength? I whose glory is in the right, strong for salvation.

你的装扮为何有红色，你的衣服为何像踹酒榨的呢？
Why is your clothing red, and why are your robes like those of one who is crushing the grapes?

我独自踹酒榨。众民中无一人与我同在。我发怒将他们踹下，发烈怒将他们践踏。他们的血溅在我衣服上，并且污染了我一切的衣裳。
I have been crushing the grapes by myself, and of the peoples there was no man with me: in my wrath and in my passion, they were crushed under my feet; and my robes are marked with their life-blood, and all my clothing is red.

因为报仇之日在我心中，救赎我民之年已经来到。
For the day of punishment is in my heart, and the year for the payment of the price for my people has come.

我仰望，见无人帮助。我诧异，没有人扶持。所以我自己的膀臂为我施行拯救。我的烈怒将我扶持。
And I saw that there was no helper, and I was wondering that no one gave them support: so my arm did the work of salvation, and my wrath was my support.

我发怒，踹下众民，发烈怒，使他们沉醉，又将他们的血倒在地上。
And in my passion the peoples were crushed under my feet, and broken in my wrath, and I put down their strength to the earth.

我要照耶和华一切所赐给我们的，提起他的慈爱，和美德，并他向以色列家所施的大恩，这恩是照他的怜恤和丰盛的慈爱赐给他们的。
I will give news of the mercies of the Lord, and his great acts, even all the things the Lord has done for us, in his great grace to the house of Israel; even all he has done for us in his unnumbered mercies.

他说，他们诚然是我的百姓，不行虚假的子民。这样，他就作了他们的救主。
For he said, Truly they are my people, children who will not be false: so he was their saviour out of all their trouble.

他们在一切苦难中，他也同受苦难。并且他面前的使者拯救他们。他以慈爱和怜悯救赎他们。在古时的日子，常保抱他们，怀搋他们。
It was no sent one or angel, but he himself who was their saviour: in his love and in his pity he took up their cause, and he took them in his arms, caring for them all through the years.

他们竟悖逆，使主的圣灵担忧。他就转作他们的仇敌，亲自攻击他们。
But they went against him, causing grief to his holy spirit: so he was turned against them, and made war on them.

那时，他们（原文作他）想起古时的日子摩西和他百姓，说，将百姓和牧养他全群的人从海里领上来的，在哪里呢？将他的圣灵降在他们中间的，在哪里呢？
Then the early days came to their minds, the days of Moses his servant: and they said, Where is he who made the keeper of his flock come up from the sea? where is he who put his holy spirit among them,

使他荣耀的膀臂在摩西的右手边行动，在他们前面将水分开，要建立自己永远的名，
He who made the arm of his glory go at the right hand of Moses, by whom the waters were parted before them, to make himself an eternal name;

带领他们经过深处，如马行走旷野，使他们不至绊跌的，在哪里呢？
He who made them go through the deep waters, like a horse in the waste land?

耶和华的灵使他们得安息，仿佛牲畜下到山谷，照样，你也引导你的百姓，要建立自己荣耀的名。
Like the cattle which go down into the valley, they went without falling, the spirit of the Lord guiding them: so you went before your people, to make yourself a great name.

求你从天上垂顾，从你圣洁荣耀的居所观看。你的热心和你大能的作为在哪里呢？你爱慕的心肠和怜悯向我们止住了。
Let your eyes be looking down from heaven, from your holy and beautiful house: where is your deep feeling, the working of your power? do not keep back the moving of your pity and your mercies:

亚伯拉罕虽然不认识我们，以色列也不承认我们，你却是我们的父。耶和华阿，你是我们的父。从万古以来，你名称为我们的救赎主。
For you are our father, though Abraham has no knowledge of us, and Israel gives no thought to us: you, O Lord, are our father; from the earliest days you have taken up our cause.

耶和华阿，你为何使我们走差离开你的道，使我们心里刚硬不敬畏你呢？求你为你仆人为你产业支派的缘故转回来。
O Lord, why do you send us wandering from your ways, making our hearts hard, so that we have no fear of you? Come back, because of your servants, the tribes of your heritage.

你的圣民不过暂时得这产业。我们的敌人已经践踏你的圣所。
Why have evil men gone over your holy place, so that it has been crushed under the feet of our haters?

我们好象你未曾治理的人，又像未曾得称你名下的人。
We have become as those who were never ruled by you, on whom your name was not named.

愿你裂天而降，愿山在你面前震动，
O let the heavens be broken open and come down, so that the mountains may be shaking before you,

好像火烧干柴，又像火将水烧开。使你敌人知道你的名，使列国在你面前发颤。
As when fire puts the brushwood in flames, or as when water is boiling from the heat of the fire: to make your name feared by your haters, so that the nations may be shaking before you;

你曾行我们不能逆料可畏的事。那时你降临，山岭在你面前震动。
While you do acts of power for which we are not looking, and which have not come to the ears of men in the past.

从古以来人未曾听见，未曾耳闻，未曾眼见，在你以外有什么神为等候他的人行事。
The ear has not had news of, or the eye seen, ... any God but you, working for the man who is waiting for him.

你迎接那欢喜行义记念你道的人，你曾发怒，我们仍犯罪。这景况已久。我们还能得救吗？
Will you not have mercy on him who takes pleasure in doing righteousness, even on those who keep in mind your ways? Truly you were angry, and we went on doing evil, and sinning against you in the past.

我们都像不洁净的人，所有的义都像污秽的衣服。我们都像叶子渐渐枯干。我们的罪孽好像风把我们吹去。
For we have all become like an unclean person, and all our good acts are like a dirty robe: and we have all become old like a dead leaf, and our sins, like the wind, take us away.

并且无人求告你的名，无人奋力抓住你。原来你掩面不顾我们，使我们因罪孽消化。
And there is no one who makes prayer to your name, or who is moved to keep true to you: for your face is veiled from us, and you have given us into the power of our sins.

耶和华阿，现在你仍是我们的父。我们是泥，你是窑匠。我们都是你手的工作。
But now, O Lord, you are our father; we are the earth, and you are our maker; and we are all the work of your hand.

耶和华阿，求你不要大发震怒，也不要永远记念罪孽。求你垂顾我们，我们都是你的百姓。
Be not very angry, O Lord, and do not keep our sins in mind for ever: give ear to our prayer, for we are all your people.

你的圣邑变为旷野，锡安变为旷野，耶路撒冷成为荒场。
Your holy towns have become a waste, Zion has become a waste, Jerusalem is a mass of broken walls.

我们圣洁华美的殿，就是我们列祖赞美你的所在，被火焚烧。我们所羡慕的美地，尽都荒废。
Our holy and beautiful house, where our fathers gave praise to you, is burned with fire; and all the things of our desire have come to destruction.

耶和华阿，有这些事，你还忍得住吗？你仍静默使我们深受苦难吗？
In view of all this, will you still do nothing, O Lord? will you keep quiet, and go on increasing our punishment?

素来没有访问我的，现在求问我。没有寻找我的，我叫他们遇见。没有称为我名下的，我对他们说，我在这里，我在这里。
I have been ready to give an answer to those who did not make prayer to me; I have been offering myself to those who were not searching for me; I said, Here am I, here am I, to a nation which gave no respect to my name.

我整天伸手招呼那悖逆的百姓，他们随自己的意念行不善之道。
All day my hands have been stretched out to an uncontrolled people, who go in an evil way, after the purposes of their hearts;

这百姓时常当面惹我发怒，在园中献祭，在坛（原文作砖）上烧香。
A people who make me angry every day, making offerings in gardens, and burning perfumes on bricks.

在坟墓间坐着，在隐密处住宿，吃猪肉，他们器皿中有可憎之物作的汤。
Who are seated in the resting-places of the dead, and by night are in the secret places; who take pig's flesh for food, and have the liquid of disgusting things in their vessels.

且对人说，你站开吧，不要挨近我，因为我比你圣洁。主说，这些人是我鼻中的烟，是整天烧着的火。
Who say, Keep away, do not come near me, for fear that I make you holy: these are a smoke in my nose, a fire burning all day.

看哪，这都写在我面前，我必不静默，必施行报应，必将你们的罪孽，和你们列祖的罪孽，就是在山上烧香，在冈上亵渎我的罪孽，一同报应在他们后人怀中。我先要把他们所行的量给他们。这是耶和华说的。
See, it is recorded before me, says the Lord: I will not keep back my hand, till I have sent punishment,


For their sins and the sins of their fathers, who were burning perfumes on the mountains, and saying evil things against me on the hills: so I will take the measure of their sins, and will send the punishment for them into their breast.

耶和华如此说，葡萄中寻得新酒，人就说，不要毁坏，因为福在其中。我因我仆人的缘故也必照样而行，不将他们全然毁灭。
This is the word of the Lord: As the new wine is seen in the grapes, and they say, Do not send destruction on it, for a blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants, in order that I may not put an end to them all.

我必从雅各中领出后裔，从犹大中领出承受我众山的。我的选民必承受，我的仆人要在那里居住。
And I will take a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah one who will have my mountains for a heritage: and the people I have taken to be mine will have it for themselves, and my servants will have their resting-place there.

沙仑平原必成为羊群的圈，亚割谷必成为牛群躺卧之处。都为寻求我的民所得。
And Sharon will be a grass-land for the flocks, and the valley of Achor a resting-place for the herds: for my people whose hearts have been turned back to me.

但你们这些离弃耶和华，忘记我的圣山，给时运摆筵席，（原文作桌子）给天命盛满调和酒的。
But as for you who have given up the Lord, who have no care for my holy mountain, who get ready a table for Chance, and make offerings of mixed wine to Fate;

我要命定你们归在刀下，都必屈身被杀，因为我呼唤，你们没有答应。我说话，你们没有听从。反倒行我眼中看为恶的，拣选我所不喜悦的。
Your fate will be the sword, and you will all go down to death: because when my voice came to you, you made no answer; you did not give ear to my word; but you did what was evil in my eyes, desiring what was not pleasing to me.

所以主耶和华如此说，我的仆人必得吃，你们却饥饿。我的仆人必得喝，你们却干渴。我的仆人必欢喜，你们却蒙羞。
For this cause says the Lord God, My servants will have food, but you will be in need of food: my servants will have drink, but you will be dry: my servants will have joy, but you will be shamed:

我的仆人因心中高兴欢呼，你们却因心中忧愁哀哭，又因心里忧伤哀号。
My servants will make songs in the joy of their hearts, but you will be crying for sorrow, and making sounds of grief from a broken spirit.

你们必留下自己的名，为我选民指着赌咒。主耶和华必杀你们，另起别名称呼他的仆人。
And your name will become a curse to my people, and the Lord God will put you to death, and give his servants another name:

这样，在地上为自己求福的，必凭真实的神求福。在地上起誓的，必指真实的神起誓。因为从前的患难已经忘记，也从我眼前隐藏了。
So that he who is requesting a blessing will make use of the name of the true God, and he who takes an oath will do so by the true God; because the past troubles are gone out of mind, and because they are covered from my eyes.

看哪，我造新天新地，从前的事不再被记念，也不再追想。
For see, I am making a new heaven and a new earth: and the past things will be gone completely out of mind.

你们当因我所造的永远欢喜快乐。因我造耶路撒冷为人所喜，造其中的居民为人所乐。
But men will be glad and have joy for ever in what I am making; for I am making Jerusalem a delight, and her people a joy.

我必因耶路撒冷欢喜，因我的百姓快乐。其中必不再听见哭泣的声音，和哀号的声音。
And I will be glad over Jerusalem, and have joy in my people: and the voice of weeping will no longer be sounding in her, or the voice of grief.

其中必没有数日夭亡的婴孩，也没有寿数不满的老者。因为百岁死的仍算孩童，有百岁死的罪人算被咒诅。
No longer will there be there a child whose days are cut short, or an old man whose days have not come to their full measure: for the young man at his death will be a hundred years old, and he whose life is shorter than a hundred years will seem as one cursed.

他们要建造房屋，自己居住。栽种葡萄园，吃其中的果子。
And they will be building houses and living in them; planting vine-gardens and getting the fruit of them.

他们建造的，别人不得住。他们栽种的，别人不得吃。因为我民的日子必像树木的日子。我选民亲手劳碌得来的必长久享用。
They will no longer be building for the use of others, or planting for others to have the fruit: for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree, and my loved ones will have joy in full measure in the work of their hands.

他们必不徒然劳碌，所生产的，也不遭灾害。因为都是蒙耶和华赐福的后裔，他们的子孙也是如此。
Their work will not be for nothing, and they will not give birth to children for destruction; for they are a seed to whom the Lord has given his blessing, and their offspring will be with them.

他们尚未求告，我就应允。正说话的时候，我就垂听。
And before they make their request I will give an answer, and while they are still making prayer to me, I will give ear.

豺狼必与羊羔同食，狮子必吃草与牛一样。尘土必作蛇的食物。在我圣山的遍处，这一切都不伤人不害物，这是耶和华说的。
The wolf and the lamb will take their food together, and the lion will make a meal of grass like the ox: but dust will be the snake's food. There will be no cause of pain or destruction in all my holy mountain, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，天是我的座位，地是我的脚凳。你们要为我造何等的殿宇，哪里是我安息的地方呢？
The Lord says, Heaven is the seat of my power, and earth is the resting-place for my feet: what sort of house will you make for me, and what place will be my resting-place?

耶和华说，这一切都是我手所造的，所以就都有了。但我所看顾的就是虚心痛悔因我话而战兢的人。（虚心原文作贫穷）
For all these things my hand has made, and they are mine, says the Lord; but to this man only will I give attention, to him who is poor and broken in spirit, fearing my word.

假冒为善的宰牛好像杀人。献羊羔好像打折狗项。献供物好像献猪血。烧乳香好像称颂偶像。这等人拣选自己的道路，心里喜悦行可憎恶的事。
He who puts an ox to death puts a man to death; he who makes an offering of a lamb puts a dog to death; he who makes a meal offering makes an offering of pig's blood; he who makes an offering of perfumes for a sign gives worship to an image: as they have gone after their desires, and their soul takes pleasure in their disgusting things;

我也必拣选迷惑他们的事，使他们所惧怕的临到他们。因为我呼唤，无人答应。我说话，他们不听从。反倒行我眼中看为恶的，拣选我所不喜悦的。
So I will go after trouble for them, and will send on them what they are fearing: because no one made answer to my voice, or gave ear to my word; but they did what was evil in my eyes, going after that in which I took no pleasure.

你们因耶和华言语战兢的人，当听他的话。你们的弟兄，就是恨恶你们，因我名赶出你们的，曾说，愿耶和华得荣耀，使我们得见你们的喜乐。但蒙羞的究竟是他们。
Give ear to the word of the Lord, you who are in fear at his word: your countrymen, hating you, and driving you out because of my name, have said, Let the Lord's glory be made clear, so that we may see your joy; but they will be put to shame.

有喧哗的声音出自城中，有声音出于殿中，是耶和华向仇敌施行报应的声音。
There is a noise of war from the town, a sound from the Temple, the voice of the Lord giving punishment to his haters.

锡安未曾劬劳，就生产。未觉疼痛，就生出男孩。
Before her pains came, she gave birth; before her pains, she gave birth to a man-child.

国岂能一日而生？民岂能一时而产？因为锡安一劬劳，便生下儿女，这样的事，谁曾听见？谁曾看见呢？
When has such a story come to men's ears? who has seen such things? will a land come to birth in one day? will a nation be given birth in a minute? For when Zion's pains came on her, she gave birth to her children straight away.

耶和华说，我既使她临产，岂不使她生产呢？你的神说，我既使她生产，岂能使她闭胎不生呢？
Will I by whom the birth was started, not make it complete? says the Lord. Will I who make children come to birth, let them be kept back? says your God.

你们爱慕耶路撒冷的，都要与她一同欢喜快乐。你们为她悲哀的，都要与她一同乐上加乐。
Have joy with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all you her lovers: take part in her joy, all you who are sorrowing for her:

使你们在她安慰的怀中吃奶得饱。使他们得她丰盛的荣耀，犹如挤奶，满心喜乐。
So that you may take of the comfort flowing from her breasts, and be delighted with the full measure of her glory.

耶和华如此说，我要使平安延及她，好像江河，使列国的荣耀延及她，如同涨溢的河，你们要从中享受。（原文作咂）你们必蒙抱在肋旁，摇弄在膝上。
For the Lord says, See, I will make her peace like a river, and the glory of the nations like an overflowing stream, and she will take her children in her arms, gently caring for them on her knees.

母亲怎样安慰儿子，我就照样安慰你们。你们也必因（或作在）耶路撒冷得安慰。
As to one who is comforted by his mother, so will I give you comfort: and you will be comforted in Jerusalem.

你们看见，就心中快乐，你们的骨头必得滋润，像嫩草一样。而且耶和华的手向他仆人所行的，必被人知道。他也要向仇敌发恼恨。
And you will see it and your heart will be glad, and your bones will get new strength, like young grass: and the hand of the Lord will be seen at work for his servants, and his wrath against his haters.

看哪，耶和华必在火中降临，他的车辇像旋风，以烈怒施行报应，以火焰施行责罚。
For the Lord is coming with fire, and his war-carriages will be like the storm-wind; to give punishment in the heat of his wrath, and his passion is like flames of fire.

因为耶和华在一切有血气的人身上，必以火与刀施行审判。被耶和华所杀的必多。
For with fire and sword will the Lord come, judging all the earth, and his sword will be on all flesh: and great numbers will be put to death by him.

那些分别为圣，洁净自己的，进入园内跟在其中一个人的后头，吃猪肉和仓鼠并可憎之物，他们必一同灭绝。这是耶和华说的。
As for those who keep themselves separate, and make themselves clean in the gardens, going after one in the middle, taking pig's flesh for food, and other disgusting things, such as the mouse: their works and their thoughts will come to an end together, says the Lord.

我知道他们的行为和他们的意念。时候将到，我必将万民万族（族原文作舌）聚来。看见我的荣耀。
And I am coming to get together all nations and tongues: and they will come and will see my glory.

我要显神迹（或作记号）在他们中间，逃脱的我要差到列国去，就是到他施，普勒，拉弓的路德，和土巴，雅完，并素来没有听见我名声，没有看见我荣耀辽远的海岛。他们必将我的荣耀传扬在列国中。
And I will put a sign among them, and I will send those who are still living to the nations, to Tarshish, Put, and Lud, Meshech and Rosh, Tubal and Javan, to the sea-lands far away, who have not had word of me, or seen my glory; and they will give the knowledge of my glory to the nations.

他们必将你们的弟兄从列国中送回，使他们或骑马，或坐车，坐轿，骑骡子，骑独峰驼，到我的圣山耶路撒冷，作为供物献给耶和华，好像以色列人用洁净的器皿盛供物奉到耶和华的殿中；这是耶和华说的。
And they will take your countrymen out of all the nations for an offering to the Lord, on horses, and in carriages, and in carts, and on asses, and on camels, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the children of Israel take their offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.

耶和华说，我也必从他们中间取人为祭司，为利未人。
And some of them will I take for priests and Levites, says the Lord.

耶和华说，我所要造的新天新地，怎样在我面前长存，你们的后裔和你们的名字，也必照样长存。
For as the new heaven and the new earth which I will make will be for ever before me, says the Lord, so will your seed and your name be for ever.

每逢月朔，安息日，凡有血气的必来在我面前下拜。这是耶和华说的。
And it will be, that from new moon to new moon, and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all flesh will come to give worship before me, says the Lord.

他们必出去观看那些违背我人的尸首。因为他们的虫是不死的，他们的火是不灭的。凡有血气的，都必憎恶他们。
And they will go out to see the dead bodies of the men who have done evil against me: for their worm will ever be living, and their fire will never be put out, and they will be a thing of fear to all flesh.