但以理书 Daniel

犹大王约雅敬在位第三年，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒来到耶路撒冷，将城围困。
In the third year of the rule of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem, shutting it in with his forces.

主将犹大王约雅敬，并神殿中器皿的几分交付他手。他就把这器皿带到示拿地，收入他神的庙里，放在他神的库中。
And the Lord gave into his hands Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with some of the vessels of the house of God; and he took them away into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he put the vessels into the store-house of his god.

王吩咐太监长亚施毗拿，从以色列人的宗室和贵胄中带进几个人来，
And the king gave orders to Ashpenaz, the captain of his unsexed servants, to take in some of the children of Israel, certain of the king's family, and those of high birth;

就是年少没有残疾，相貌俊美，通达各样学问，知识聪明俱备，足能侍立在王宫里的，要教他们迦勒底的文字言语。
Young men who were strong and healthy, good-looking, and trained in all wisdom, having a good education and much knowledge, and able to take positions in the king's house; and to have them trained in the writing and language of the Chaldaeans.

王派定将自己所用的膳和所饮的酒，每日赐他们一分，养他们三年。满了三年，好叫他们在王面前侍立。
And a regular amount of food and wine every day from the king's table was ordered for them by the king; and they were to be cared for for three years so that at the end of that time they might take their places before the king.

他们中间有犹大族的人，但以理，哈拿尼雅，米沙利，亚撒利雅。
And among these there were, of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.

太监长给他们起名，称但以理为伯提沙撒，称哈拿尼雅为沙得拉，称米沙利为米煞，称亚撒利雅为亚伯尼歌。
And the captain of the unsexed servants gave them names; to Daniel he gave the name of Belteshazzar, to Hananiah the name of Shadrach, to Mishael the name of Meshach, and to Azariah the name of Abed-nego.

但以理却立志不以王的膳和王所饮的酒玷污自己，所以求太监长容他不玷污自己。
And Daniel had come to the decision that he would not make himself unclean with the king's food or wine; so he made a request to the captain of the unsexed servants that he might not make himself unclean.

神使但以理在太监长眼前蒙恩惠，受怜悯。
And God put into the heart of the captain of the unsexed servants kind feelings and pity for Daniel.

太监长对但以理说，我惧怕我主我王，他已经派定你们的饮食。倘若他见你们的面貌比你们同岁的少年人肌瘦，怎么好呢？这样，你们就使我的头在王那里难保。
And the captain of the unsexed servants said to Daniel, I am in fear of my lord the king, who has given orders about your food and your drink; what if he sees you looking less happy than the other young men of your generation? then you would have put my head in danger from the king.

但以理对太监长所派管理但以理，哈拿尼雅，米沙利，亚撒利雅的委办说，
Then Daniel said to the keeper in whose care the captain of the unsexed servants had put Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

求你试试仆人们十天，给我们素菜吃，白水喝，
Put your servants to the test for ten days; let them give us grain for our food and water for our drink.

然后看看我们的面貌和用王膳那少年人的面貌，就照你所看的待仆人吧。
Then take a look at our faces and the faces of the young men who have food from the king's table; and, having seen them, do to your servants as it seems right to you.

委办便允准他们这件事，试看他们十天。
So he gave ear to them in this thing and put them to the test for ten days.

过了十天，见他们的面貌比用王膳的一切少年人更加俊美肥胖。
And at the end of ten days their faces seemed fairer and they were fatter in flesh than all the young men who had their food from the king's table.

于是委办撤去派他们用的膳，饮的酒，给他们素菜吃。
So the keeper regularly took away their meat and the wine which was to have been their drink, and gave them grain.

这四个少年人，神在各样文字学问上（学问原文作智慧），赐给他们聪明知识。但以理又明白各样的异象和梦兆。
Now as for these four young men, God gave them knowledge and made them expert in all book-learning and wisdom: and Daniel was wise in all visions and dreams.

尼布甲尼撒王预定带进少年人来的日期满了，太监长就把他们带到王面前。
Now at the end of the time fixed by the king for them to go in, the captain of the unsexed servants took them in to Nebuchadnezzar.

王与他们谈论，见少年人中无一人能比但以理，哈拿尼雅，米沙利，亚撒利雅，所以留他们在王面前侍立。
And the king had talk with them; and among them all there was no one like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah; so they were given places before the king.

王考问他们一切事，就见他们的智慧聪明比通国的术士和用法术的胜过十倍。
And in any business needing wisdom and good sense, about which the king put questions to them, he saw that they were ten times better than all the wonder-workers and users of secret arts in all his kingdom.

到古列王元年，但以理还在。
And Daniel went on till the first year of King Cyrus.

尼布甲尼撒在位第二年，他作了梦，心里烦乱，不能睡觉。
In the second year of the rule of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar had dreams; and his spirit was troubled and his sleep went from him.

王吩咐人将术士，用法术的，行邪术的，和迦勒底人召来，要他们将王的梦告诉王，他们就来站在王前。
Then the king gave orders that the wonder-workers, and the users of secret arts, and those who made use of evil powers, and the Chaldaeans, were to be sent for to make clear to the king his dreams. So they came and took their places before the king.

王对他们说，我作了一梦，心里烦乱，要知道这是什么梦。
And the king said to them, I have had a dream, and my spirit is troubled by the desire to have the dream made clear to me.

迦勒底人用亚兰的言语对王说，愿王万岁。请将那梦告诉仆人，仆人就可以讲解。
Then the Chaldaeans said to the king in the Aramaean language, O King, have life for ever: give your servants an account of your dream, and we will make clear to you the sense of it.

王回答迦勒底人说，梦我已经忘了（或作我已定命八节同），你们若不将梦和梦的讲解告诉我，就必被凌迟，你们的房屋必成为粪堆。
The king made answer and said to the Chaldaeans, This is my decision: if you do not make clear to me the dream and the sense of it, you will be cut in bits and your houses made waste.

你们若将梦和梦的讲解告诉我，就必从我这里得赠品和赏赐，并大尊荣。现在你们要将梦和梦的讲解告诉我。
But if you make clear the dream and the sense of it, you will have from me offerings and rewards and great honour: so make clear to me the dream and the sense of it.

他们第二次对王说，请王将梦告诉仆人，仆人就可以讲解。
A second time they said in answer, Let the king give his servants an account of his dream, and we will make clear the sense.

王回答说，我准知道你们是故意迟延，因为你们知道那梦我已经忘了。
The king made answer and said, I am certain that you are attempting to get more time, because you see that my decision is fixed;

你们若不将梦告诉我，只有一法待你们。因为你们预备了谎言乱语向我说，要等候时势改变。现在你们要将梦告诉我，因我知道你们能将梦的讲解告诉我。
That if you do not make my dream clear to me there is only one fate for you: for you have made ready false and evil words to say before me till the times are changed: so give me an account of the dream, and I will be certain that you are able to make the sense of it clear.

迦勒底人在王面前回答说，世上没有人能将王所问的事说出来。因为没有君王，大臣，掌权的向术士，或用法术的，或迦勒底人问过这样的事。
Then the Chaldaeans said to the king in answer, There is not a man on earth able to make clear the king's business; for no king, however great his power, has ever made such a request to any wonder-worker or user of secret arts or Chaldaean.

王所问的事甚难。除了不与世人同居的神明，没有人在王面前能说出来。
The king's request is a very hard one, and there is no other who is able to make it clear to the king, but the gods, whose living-place is not with flesh.

因此，王气忿忿地大发烈怒，吩咐灭绝巴比伦所有的哲士。
Because of this the king was angry and full of wrath, and gave orders for the destruction of all the wise men of Babylon.

于是命令发出，哲士将要见杀，人就寻找但以理和他的同伴，要杀他们。
So the order went out that the wise men were to be put to death; and they were looking for Daniel and his friends to put them to death.

王的护卫长亚略出来，要杀巴比伦的哲士，但以理就用婉言回答他，
Then Daniel gave an answer with wisdom and good sense to Arioch, the captain of the king's armed men, who had gone out to put to death the wise men of Babylon;

向王的护卫长亚略说，王的命令为何这样紧急呢？亚略就将情节告诉但以理。
He made answer and said to Arioch, O captain of the king, why is the king's order so cruel? Then Arioch gave Daniel an account of the business.

但以理遂进去求王宽限，就可以将梦的讲解告诉王。
And Daniel went in and made a request to the king to give him time and he would make clear the sense of his dream to the king.

但以理回到他的居所，将这事告诉他的同伴哈拿尼雅，米沙利，亚撒利雅，
And Daniel went to his house and gave his friends Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah the news:

要他们祈求天上的神施怜悯，将这奥秘的事指明，免得但以理和他的同伴与巴比伦其余的哲士一同灭亡。
So that they might make a request for the mercy of the God of heaven in the question of this secret; so that Daniel and his friends might not come to destruction with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

这奥秘的事就在夜间异象中给但以理显明，但以理便称颂天上的神。
Then the secret was made clear to Daniel in a vision of the night. And Daniel gave blessing to the God of heaven.

但以理说，神的名是应当称颂的。从亘古直到永远，因为智慧能力都属乎他。
And Daniel said in answer, May the name of God be praised for ever and ever: for wisdom and strength are his:

他改变时候，日期，废王，立王，将智慧赐与智慧人，将知识赐与聪明人。
By him times and years are changed: by him kings are taken away and kings are lifted up: he gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to those whose minds are awake:

他显明深奥隐秘的事，知道暗中所有的，光明也与他同居。
He is the unveiler of deep and secret things: he has knowledge of what is in the dark, and the light has its living-place with him.

我列祖的神阿，我感谢你，赞美你，因你将智慧才能赐给我，允准我们所求的，把王的事给我们指明。
I give you praise and worship, O God of my fathers, who have given me wisdom and strength, and have now made clear to me what we were requesting from you: for you have given us knowledge of the king's business.

于是，但以理进去见亚略，就是王所派灭绝巴比伦哲士的，对他说，不要灭绝巴比伦的哲士，求你领我到王面前，我要将梦的讲解告诉王。
For this reason Daniel went to Arioch, to whom the king had given orders for the destruction of the wise men of Babylon, and said to him, Do not put to death the wise men of Babylon: take me in before the king and I will make clear to him the sense of the dream.

亚略就急忙将但以理领到王面前，对王说，我在被掳的犹大人中遇见一人，他能将梦的讲解告诉王。
Then Arioch quickly took Daniel in before the king, and said to him, Here is a man from among the prisoners of Judah, who will make clear to the king the sense of the dream.

王问称为伯提沙撒的但以理说，你能将我所作的梦和梦的讲解告诉我吗？
The king made answer and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Are you able to make clear to me the dream which I saw and its sense?

但以理在王面前回答说，王所问的那奥秘事，哲士，用法术的，术士，观兆的都不能告诉王。
Then Daniel said in answer to the king, No wise men, or users of secret arts, or wonder-workers, or readers of signs, are able to make clear to the king the secret he is searching for;

只有一位在天上的神能显明奥秘的事。他已将日后必有的事指示尼布甲尼撒王。你的梦和你在床上脑中的异象是这样，
But there is a God in heaven, the unveiler of secrets, and he has given to King Nebuchadnezzar knowledge of what will take place in the last days. Your dreams and the visions of your head on your bed are these:

王阿，你在床上想到后来的事，那显明奥秘事的主把将来必有的事指示你。
As for you, O King, the thoughts which came to you on your bed were of what will come about after this: and the unveiler of secrets has made clear to you what is to come.

至于那奥秘的事显明给我，并非因我的智慧胜过一切活人，乃为使王知道梦的讲解和心里的思念。
As for me, this secret is not made clear to me because of any wisdom which I have more than any living man, but in order that the sense of the dream may be made clear to the king, and that you may have knowledge of the thoughts of your heart.

王阿，你梦见一个大像，这像甚高，极其光耀，站在你面前，形状甚是可怕。
You, O King, were looking, and a great image was there. This image, which was very great, and whose glory was very bright, was placed before you: its form sent fear into the heart.

这像的头是精金的，胸膛和膀臂是银的，肚腹和腰是铜的，
As for this image, its head was made of the best gold, its breast and its arms were of silver, its middle and its sides were of brass,

腿是铁的，脚是半铁半泥的。
Its legs of iron, its feet were in part of iron and in part of potter's earth.

你观看，见有一块非人手凿出来的石头打在这像半铁半泥的脚上，把脚砸碎。
While you were looking at it, a stone was cut out, but not by hands, and it gave the image a blow on its feet, which were of iron and earth, and they were broken in bits.

于是金，银，铜，铁，泥都一同砸得粉碎，成如夏天禾场上的糠秕，被风吹散，无处可寻。打碎这像的石头变成一座大山，充满天下。
Then the iron and the earth, the brass and the silver and the gold, were smashed together, and became like the dust on the floors where grain is crushed in summer; and the wind took them away so that no sign of them was to be seen: and the stone which gave the image a blow became a great mountain, covering all the earth.

这就是那梦。我们在王面前要讲解那梦。
This is the dream; and we will make clear to the king the sense of it.

王阿，你是诸王之王。天上的神已将国度，权柄，能力，尊荣都赐给你。
You, O King, king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the strength, and the glory,

凡世人所住之地的走兽，并天空的飞鸟，他都交付你手，使你掌管这一切。你就是那金头。
Wherever the children of men are living; into whose hands he has given the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven, and has made you ruler over them all, you are the head of gold.

在你以后必另兴一国，不及于你。又有第三国，就是铜的，必掌管天下。
And after you another kingdom, lower than you, will come to power; and a third kingdom, of brass, ruling over all the earth.

第四国，必坚壮如铁，铁能打碎克制百物，又能压碎一切，那国也必打碎压制列国。
And the fourth kingdom will be strong as iron: because, as all things are broken and overcome by iron, so it will have the power of crushing and smashing down all the earth.

你既见像的脚和脚指头，一半是窑匠的泥，一半是铁，那国将来也必分开。你既见铁与泥搀杂，那国也必有铁的力量。
And as you saw the feet and toes, part of potter's work and part of iron, there will be a division in the kingdom; but there will be some of the strength of iron in it, because you saw the iron mixed with the potter's earth.

那脚指头，既是半铁半泥，那国也必半强半弱。
And as the toes of the feet were in part of iron and in part of earth, so part of the kingdom will be strong and part of it will readily be broken.

你既见铁与泥搀杂，那国民也必与各种人搀杂，却不能彼此相合，正如铁与泥不能相合一样。
And as you saw the iron mixed with earth, they will give their daughters to one another as wives: but they will not be united one with another, even as iron is not mixed with earth.

当那列王在位的时候，天上的神必另立一国，永不败坏，也不归别国的人，却要打碎灭绝那一切国，这国必存到永远。
And in the days of those kings, the God of heaven will put up a kingdom which will never come to destruction, and its power will never be given into the hands of another people, and all these kingdoms will be broken and overcome by it, but it will keep its place for ever.

你既看见非人手凿出来的一块石头从山而出，打碎金，银，铜，铁，泥，那就是至大的神把后来必有的事给王指明。这梦准是这样，这讲解也是确实的。
Because you saw that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that by it the iron and the brass and the earth and the silver and the gold were broken to bits, a great God has given the king knowledge of what is to take place in the future: the dream is fixed, and its sense is certain.

当时，尼布甲尼撒王俯伏在地，向但以理下拜，并且吩咐人给他奉上供物和香品。
Then King Nebuchadnezzar, falling down on his face, gave worship to Daniel, and gave orders for an offering and spices to be given to him;

王对但以理说，你既能显明这奥秘的事，你们的神诚然是万神之神，万王之主，又是显明奥秘事的。
And the king made answer to Daniel and said, Truly, your God is a God of gods and a Lord of kings, and an unveiler of secrets, for you have been able to make this secret clear.

于是王高抬但以理，赏赐他许多上等礼物，派他管理巴比伦全省，又立他为总理，掌管巴比伦的一切哲士。
Then the king made Daniel great, and gave him offerings in great number, and made him ruler over all the land of Babylon, and chief over all the wise men of Babylon.

但以理求王，王就派沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌管理巴比伦省的事务，只是但以理常在朝中侍立。
And at Daniel's request, the king gave Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego authority over the business of the land of Babylon: but Daniel was kept near the king's person.

尼布甲尼撒王造了一个金像，高六十肘，宽六肘，立在巴比伦省杜拉平原。
Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, sixty cubits high and six cubits wide: he put it up in the valley of Dura, in the land of Babylon.

尼布甲尼撒王差人将总督，钦差，巡抚，臬司，藩司，谋士，法官，和各省的官员都召了来，为尼布甲尼撒王所立的像行开光之礼。
And Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to get together all the captains, the chiefs, the rulers, the wise men, the keepers of public money, the judges, the overseers, and all the rulers of the divisions of the country, to come to see the unveiling of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up.

于是总督，钦差，巡抚，臬司，藩司，谋士，法官，和各省的官员都聚集了来，要为尼布甲尼撒王所立的像行开光之礼，就站在尼布甲尼撒所立的像前。
Then the captains, the chiefs, the rulers, the wise men, the keepers of public money, the judges, the overseers, and all the rulers of the divisions of the country, came together to see the unveiling of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up; and they took their places before the image which Nebuchadnezzar had put up.

那时传令的大声呼叫说，各方，各国，各族的人哪（族原文作舌下同），有令传与你们，
Then one of the king's criers said in a loud voice, To you the order is given, O peoples, nations, and languages,

你们一听见角，笛，琵琶，琴，瑟，笙，和各样乐器的声音，就当俯伏敬拜尼布甲尼撒王所立的金像。
That when the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all sorts of instruments, comes to your ears, you are to go down on your faces in worship before the image of gold which Nebuchadnezzar the king has put up:

凡不俯伏敬拜的，必立时扔在烈火的窑中。
And anyone not falling down and worshipping will that same hour be put into a burning and flaming fire.

因此各方，各国，各族的人民一听见角，笛，琵琶，琴，瑟，和各样乐器的声音，就都俯伏敬拜尼布甲尼撒王所立的金像。
So at that time, all the people, when the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, and all sorts of instruments, came to their ears, went down on their faces in worship before the image of gold which Nebuchadnezzar the king had put up.

那时，有几个迦勒底人进前来控告犹大人。
At that time certain Chaldaeans came near and made a statement against the Jews.

他们对尼布甲尼撒王说，愿王万岁。
They made answer and said to Nebuchadnezzar the king, O King, have life for ever.

王阿，你曾降旨说，凡听见角，笛，琵琶，琴，瑟，笙，和各样乐器声音的都当俯伏敬拜金像。
You, O King, have given an order that every man, when the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all sorts of instruments, comes to his ears, is to go down on his face in worship before the image of gold:

凡不俯伏敬拜的，必扔在烈火的窑中。
And anyone not falling down and worshipping is to be put into a burning and flaming fire.

现在有几个犹大人，就是王所派管理巴比伦省事务的沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌。王阿，这些人不理你，不事奉你的神，也不敬拜你所立的金像。
There are certain Jews whom you have put over the business of the land of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men have not given attention to you, O King: they are not servants of your gods or worshippers of the gold image which you have put up.

当时，尼布甲尼撒冲冲大怒，吩咐人把沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌带过来，他们就把那些人带到王面前。
Then Nebuchadnezzar in his wrath and passion gave orders for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego to be sent for. Then they made these men come in before the king.

尼布甲尼撒问他们说，沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌，你们不事奉我的神，也不敬拜我所立的金像，是故意的吗？
Nebuchadnezzar made answer and said to them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, that you will not be servants of my god or give worship to the image of gold which I have put up?

你们再听见角，笛，琵琶，琴，瑟，笙，和各样乐器的声音，若俯伏敬拜我所造的像，却还可以。若不敬拜，必立时扔在烈火的窑中，有何神能救你们脱离我手呢？
Now if you are ready, on hearing the sound of the horn, pipe, harp, trigon, psaltery, bagpipe, and all sorts of instruments, to go down on your faces in worship before the image which I have made, it is well: but if you will not give worship, that same hour you will be put into a burning and flaming fire; and what god is there who will be able to take you out of my hands?

沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌对王说，尼布甲尼撒阿，这件事我们不必回答你。
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answering Nebuchadnezzar the king, said, There is no need for us to give you an answer to this question.

即便如此，我们所事奉的神能将我们从烈火的窑中救出来。王阿，他也必救我们脱离你的手。
If our God, whose servants we are, is able to keep us safe from the burning and flaming fire, and from your hands, O King, he will keep us safe.

即或不然，王阿，你当知道我们决不事奉你的神，也不敬拜你所立的金像。
But if not, be certain, O King, that we will not be the servants of your gods, or give worship to the image of gold which you have put up.

当时，尼布甲尼撒怒气填胸，向沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌变了脸色，吩咐人把窑烧热，比寻常更加七倍。
Then Nebuchadnezzar was full of wrath, and the form of his face was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: and he gave orders that the fire was to be heated up seven times more than it was generally heated.

又吩咐他军中的几个壮士，将沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌捆起来，扔在烈火的窑中。
And he gave orders to certain strong men in his army to put cords on Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego and put them into the burning and flaming fire.

这三人穿着裤子，内袍，外衣，和别的衣服，被捆起来扔在烈火的窑中。
Then these men had cords put round them as they were, in their coats, their trousers, their hats, and their clothing, and were dropped into the burning and flaming fire.

因为王命紧急，窑又甚热，那抬沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌的人都被火焰烧死。
And because the king's order was not to be put on one side, and the heat of the fire was so great, the men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were burned to death by the flame of the fire.

沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌这三个人都被捆着落在烈火的窑中。
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, with the cords about them, went down into the burning and flaming fire.

那时，尼布甲尼撒王惊奇，急忙起来，对谋士说，我捆起来扔在火里的不是三个人吗？他们回答王说，王阿，是。
Then King Nebuchadnezzar, full of fear and wonder, got up quickly, and said to his wise men, Did we not put three men in cords into the fire? and they made answer and said to the king, True, O King.

王说，看哪，我见有四个人，并没有捆绑，在火中游行，也没有受伤。那第四个的相貌好像神子。
He made answer and said, Look! I see four men loose, walking in the middle of the fire, and they are not damaged; and the form of the fourth is like a son of the gods.

于是，尼布甲尼撒就近烈火窑门，说，至高神的仆人沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌出来，上这里来吧。沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌就从火中出来了。
Then Nebuchadnezzar came near the door of the burning and flaming fire: he made answer and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, you servants of the Most High God, come out and come here. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego came out of the fire.

那些总督，钦差，巡抚，和王的谋士一同聚集看这三个人，见火无力伤他们的身体，头发也没有烧焦，衣裳也没有变色，并没有火燎的气味。
And the captains, the chiefs, and the rulers, and the king's wise men who had come together, saw these men, over whose bodies the fire had no power, and not a hair of their heads was burned, and their coats were not changed, and there was no smell of fire about them.

尼布甲尼撒说，沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌的神是应当称颂的。他差遣使者救护倚靠他的仆人，他们不遵王命，舍去己身，在他们神以外不肯事奉敬拜别神。
Nebuchadnezzar made answer and said, Praise be to the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who has sent his angel and kept his servants safe who had faith in him, and who put the king's word on one side and gave up their bodies to the fire, so that they might not be servants or worshippers of any other god but their God.

现在我降旨，无论何方，何国，何族的人，谤？？沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌之神的，必被凌迟，他的房屋必成粪堆，因为没有别神能这样施行拯救。
And it is my decision that any people, nation, or language saying evil against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, will be cut to bits and their houses made waste: because there is no other god who is able to give salvation such as this.

那时王在巴比伦省，高升了沙得拉，米煞，亚伯尼歌。
Then the king gave Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego even greater authority in the land of Babylon.

尼布甲尼撒王晓谕住在全地各方，各国，各族的人说，愿你们大享平安。
Nebuchadnezzar the king, to all the peoples, nations, and languages living in all the earth: May your peace be increased.

我乐意将至高的神向我所行的神迹奇事宣扬出来。
It has seemed good to me to make clear the signs and wonders which the Most High God has done with me.

他的神迹何其大。他的奇事何其盛。他的国是永远的。他的权柄存到万代。
How great are his signs! and how full of power are his wonders! his kingdom is an eternal kingdom and his rule goes on from generation to generation.

我尼布甲尼撒安居在宫中，平顺在殿内。
I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my place, and all things were going well for me in my great house:

我作了一梦，使我惧怕。我在床上的思念，并脑中的异象，使我惊惶。
I saw a dream which was a cause of great fear to me; I was troubled by the images of my mind on my bed, and by the visions of my head.

所以我降旨召巴比伦的一切哲士到我面前，叫他们把梦的讲解告诉我。
And I gave orders for all the wise men of Babylon to come in before me so that they might make clear to me the sense of my dream.

于是那些术士，用法术的，迦勒底人，观兆的都进来，我将那梦告诉了他们，他们却不能把梦的讲解告诉我。
Then the wonder-workers, the users of secret arts, the Chaldaeans, and the readers of signs came in to me: and I put the dream before them but they did not make clear the sense of it to me.

末后那照我神的名，称为伯提沙撒的但以理来到我面前，他里头有圣神的灵，我将梦告诉他说，
But at last Daniel came in before me, he whose name was Belteshazzar, after the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and I put the dream before him, saying,

术士的领袖伯提沙撒阿，因我知道你里头有圣神的灵，什么奥秘的事都不能使你为难。现在要把我梦中所见的异象和梦的讲解告诉我。
O Belteshazzar, master of the wonder-workers, because I am certain that the spirit of the holy gods is in you, and you are troubled by no secret; this is the dream which I saw: make clear to me its sense.

我在床上脑中的异象是这样，我看见地当中有一棵树，极其高大。
On my bed I saw a vision: there was a tree in the middle of the earth, and it was very high.

那树渐长，而且坚固，高得顶天，从地极都能看见，
And the tree became tall and strong, stretching up to heaven, and to be seen from the ends of the earth:

叶子华美，果子甚多，可作众生的食物。田野的走兽卧在荫下，天空的飞鸟宿在枝上。凡有血气的都从这树得食。
Its leaves were fair and it had much fruit, and in it was food enough for all: the beasts of the field had shade under it, and the birds of heaven were resting in its branches, and it gave food to all living things.

我在床上脑中的异象，见有一位守望的圣者从天而降。
In the visions of my head on my bed I saw a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven,

大声呼叫说，伐倒这树。砍下枝子。摇掉叶子。抛散果子。使走兽离开树下，飞鸟躲开树枝。
Crying out with a loud voice; and this is what he said: Let the tree be cut down and its branches broken off; let its leaves be taken off and its fruit sent in every direction: let the beasts get away from under it and the birds from its branches:

树墩却要留在地内，用铁圈和铜圈箍住，在田野的青草中让天露滴湿，使他与地上的兽一同吃草，
But keep its broken end and its roots still in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass; let him have the young grass of the field for food, and let him be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his part be with the beasts.

使他的心改变，不如人心。给他一个兽心，使他经过七期（期或作年。本章同）。
Let his heart be changed from that of a man, and the heart of a beast be given to him; and let seven times go by him.

这是守望者所发的命，圣者所出的令，好叫世人知道至高者在人的国中掌权，要将国赐与谁就赐与谁，或立极卑微的人执掌国权。
This order is fixed by the watchers, and the decision is by the word of the holy ones: so that the living may be certain that the Most High is ruler over the kingdom of men, and gives it to any man at his pleasure, lifting up over it the lowest of men.

这是我尼布甲尼撒王所作的梦。伯提沙撒阿，你要说明这梦的讲解。因为我国中的一切哲士都不能将梦的讲解告诉我，惟独你能，因你里头有圣神的灵。
This dream I, King Nebuchadnezzar, saw; and do you, O Belteshazzar, make clear the sense of it, for all the wise men of my kingdom are unable to make the sense of it clear to me; but you are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in you.

于是称为伯提沙撒的但以理惊讶片时，心意惊惶。王说，伯提沙撒阿，不要因梦和梦的讲解惊惶。伯提沙撒回答说，我主阿，愿这梦归与恨恶你的人，讲解归与你的敌人。
Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was at a loss for a time, his thoughts troubling him. The king made answer and said, Belteshazzar, do not be troubled by the dream or by the sense of it. Belteshazzar, answering, said, My lord, may the dream be about your haters, and its sense about those who are against you.

你所见的树渐长，而且坚固，高得顶天，从地极都能看见。
The tree which you saw, which became tall and strong, stretching up to heaven and seen from the ends of the earth;

叶子华美，果子甚多，可作众生的食物。田野的走兽住在其下。天空的飞鸟宿在枝上。
Which had fair leaves and much fruit, and had in it food for all; under which the beasts of the field were living, and in the branches of which the birds of heaven had their resting-places:

王阿，这渐长又坚固的树就是你。你的威势渐长及天，你的权柄管到地极。
It is you, O King, who have become great and strong: for your power is increased and stretching up to heaven, and your rule to the end of the earth.

王既看见一位守望的圣者从天而降，说，将这树砍伐毁坏，树墩却要留在地内，用铁圈和铜圈箍住。在田野的青草中，让天露滴湿，使他与地上的兽一同吃草，直到经过七期。
And as for the vision which the king saw of a watcher, a holy one, coming down from heaven, saying, Let the tree be cut down and given to destruction;

王阿，讲解就是这样，临到我主我王的事是出于至高者的命。
This is the sense of it, O King, and it is the decision of the Most High which has come on my lord the king:

你必被赶出离开世人，与野地的兽同居，吃草如牛，被天露滴湿，且要经过七期。等你知道至高者在人的国中掌权，要将国赐与谁就赐与谁。
That they will send you out from among men, to be with the beasts of the field; they will give you grass for your food like the oxen, and you will be wet with the dew of heaven, and seven times will go by you, till you are certain that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives it to any man at his pleasure.

守望者既吩咐存留树墩，等你知道诸天掌权，以后你的国必定归你。
And as they gave orders to let the broken end and the roots of the tree be, so your kingdom will be safe for you after it is clear to you that the heavens are ruling.

王阿，求你悦纳我的谏言，以施行公义断绝罪过，以怜悯穷人除掉罪孽，或者你的平安可以延长。
For this cause, O King, let my suggestion be pleasing to you, and let your sins be covered by righteousness and your evil-doing by mercy to the poor, so that the time of your well-being may be longer.

这事都临到尼布甲尼撒王。
All this came to King Nebuchadnezzar.

过了十二个月，他游行在巴比伦王宫里（原文作上）。
At the end of twelve months he was walking on the roof of his great house in Babylon.

他说，这大巴比伦不是我用大能大力建为京都，要显我威严的荣耀吗？
The king made answer and said, Is this not great Babylon, which I have made for the living-place of kings, by the strength of my power and for the glory of my honour?

这话在王口中尚未说完，有声音从天降下，说，尼布甲尼撒王阿，有话对你说，你的国位离开你了。
While the word was still in the king's mouth, a voice came down from heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to you it is said: The kingdom has gone from you:

你必被赶出离开世人，与野地的兽同居，吃草如牛，且要经过七期。等你知道至高者在人的国中掌权，要将国赐与谁就赐与谁。
And they will send you out from among men, to be with the beasts of the field; they will give you grass for your food like the oxen, and seven times will go by you, till you are certain that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives it to any man at his pleasure.

当时这话就应验在尼布甲尼撒的身上，他被赶出离开世人，吃草如牛，身被天露滴湿，头发长长，好像鹰毛。指甲长长，如同鸟爪。
That very hour the order about Nebuchadnezzar was put into effect: and he was sent out from among men, and had grass for his food like the oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hair became long as eagles' feathers and his nails like those of birds.

日子满足，我尼布甲尼撒举目望天，我的聪明复归于我，我便称颂至高者，赞美尊敬活到永远的神。他的权柄是永有的。他的国存到万代。
And at the end of the days, I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifting up my eyes to heaven, got back my reason, and, blessing the Most High, I gave praise and honour to him who is living for ever, whose rule is an eternal rule and whose kingdom goes on from generation to generation.

世上所有的居民都算为虚无。在天上的万军和世上的居民中，他都凭自己的意旨行事。无人能拦住他手，或问他说，你做什么呢？
And all the people of the earth are as nothing: he does his pleasure in the army of heaven and among the people of the earth: and no one is able to keep back his hand, or say to him, What are you doing?

那时，我的聪明复归于我，为我国的荣耀，威严，和光耀也都复归于我。并且我的谋士和大臣也来朝见我。我又得坚立在国位上，至大的权柄加增于我。
At the same time my reason came back to me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my honour and my great name came back to me; and my wise men and my lords were turned to me again; and I was made safe in my kingdom and had more power than before.

现在我尼布甲尼撒赞美，尊崇，恭敬天上的王。因为他所作的全都诚实，他所行的也都公平。那行动骄傲的，他能降为卑。
Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, give worship and praise and honour to the King of heaven; for all his works are true and his ways are right: and those who go in pride he is able to make low.

伯沙撒王为他的一千大臣设摆盛筵，与这一千人对面饮酒。
Belshazzar the king made a great feast for a thousand of his lords, drinking wine before the thousand.

伯沙撒欢饮之间，吩咐人将他父（父或作祖下同）尼布甲尼撒从耶路撒冷殿中所掠的金银器皿拿来，王与大臣，皇后，妃嫔好用这器皿饮酒。
Belshazzar, while he was overcome with wine, gave orders for them to put before him the gold and silver vessels which Nebuchadnezzar, his father, had taken from the Temple in Jerusalem; so that the king and his lords, his wives and his other women, might take their drink from them.

于是他们把耶路撒冷神殿库房中所掠的金器皿拿来，王和大臣，皇后，妃嫔就用这器皿饮酒。
Then they took in the gold and silver vessels which had been in the Temple of the house of God at Jerusalem; and the king and his lords, his wives and his other women, took wine from them.

他们饮酒，赞美金，银，铜，铁，木，石所造的神。
They took their wine and gave praise to the gods of gold and silver, of brass and iron and wood and stone.

当时，忽有人的指头显出，在王宫与灯台相对的粉墙上写字。王看见写字的指头，
In that very hour the fingers of a man's hand were seen, writing opposite the support for the light on the white wall of the king's house, and the king saw the part of the hand which was writing.

就变了脸色，心意惊惶，腰骨好像脱节，双膝彼此相碰，
Then the colour went from the king's face, and he was troubled by his thoughts; strength went from his body, and his knees were shaking.

大声吩咐将用法术的和迦勒底人并观兆的领进来，对巴比伦的哲士说，谁能读这文字，把讲解告诉我，他必身穿紫袍，项带金链，在我国中位列第三。
The king, crying out with a loud voice, said that the users of secret arts, the Chaldaeans, and the readers of signs, were to be sent for. The king made answer and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whoever is able to make out this writing, and make clear to me the sense of it, will be clothed in purple and have a chain of gold round his neck, and will be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom.

于是王的一切哲士都进来，却不能读那文字，也不能把讲解告诉王。
Then all the king's wise men came in: but they were not able to make out the writing or give the sense of it to the king.

伯沙撒王就甚惊惶，脸色改变，他的大臣也都惊奇。
Then King Belshazzar was greatly troubled and the colour went from his face, and his lords were at a loss.

太后（或作皇后下同）因王和他大臣所说的话，就进入宴宫，说，愿王万岁。你心意不要惊惶，脸面不要变色。
The queen, because of the words of the king and his lords, came into the house of the feast: the queen made answer and said, O King, have life for ever; do not be troubled by your thoughts or let the colour go from your face:

在你国中有一人，他里头有圣神的灵，你父在世的日子，这人心中光明，又有聪明智慧，好像神的智慧。你父尼布甲尼撒王，就是王的父，立他为术士，用法术的，和迦勒底人，并观兆的领袖。
There is a man in your kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of your father, light and reason like the wisdom of the gods were seen in him: and King Nebuchadnezzar, your father, made him master of the wonder-workers, and the users of secret arts, and the Chaldaeans, and the readers of signs;

在他里头有美好的灵性，又有知识聪明，能圆梦，释谜语，解疑惑。这人名叫但以理，尼布甲尼撒王又称他为伯提沙撒，现在可以召他来，他必解明这意思。
Because a most special spirit, and knowledge and reason and the power of reading dreams and unfolding dark sayings and answering hard questions, were seen to be in him, even in Daniel (named Belteshazzar by the king): now let Daniel be sent for, and he will make clear the sense of the writing.

但以理就被领到王前。王问但以理说，你是被掳之犹大人中的但以理吗？就是我父王从犹大掳来的吗？
Then they took Daniel in before the king; the king made answer and said to Daniel, So you are that Daniel, of the prisoners of Judah, whom my father took out of Judah.

我听说你里头有神的灵，心中光明，又有聪明和美好的智慧。
And I have had news of you, that the spirit of the gods is in you, and that light and reason and special wisdom have been seen in you.

现在哲士和用法术的都领到我面前，为叫他们读这文字，把讲解告诉我，无奈他们都不能把讲解说出来。
And now the wise men, the users of secret arts, have been sent in before me for the purpose of reading this writing and making clear to me the sense of it: but they are not able to make clear the sense of the thing:

我听说你善于讲解，能解疑惑。现在你若能读这文字，把讲解告诉我，就必身穿紫袍，项戴金链，在我国中位列第三。
And I have had news of you, that you have the power of making things clear, and of answering hard questions: now if you are able to make out the writing and give me the sense of it, you will be clothed in purple and have a gold chain round your neck and be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom.

但以理在王面前回答说，你的赠品可以归你自己，你的赏赐可以归给别人。我却要为王读这文字，把讲解告诉王。
Then Daniel made answer and said to the king, Keep your offerings for yourself, and give your rewards to another; but I, after reading the writing to the king, will give him the sense of it.

王阿，至高的神曾将国位，大权，荣耀，威严赐与你父尼布甲尼撒。
As for you, O King, the Most High God gave to Nebuchadnezzar, your father, the kingdom and great power and glory and honour:

因神所赐他的大权，各方，各国，各族的人都在他面前战兢恐惧。他可以随意生杀，随意升降。
And because of the great power he gave him, all peoples and nations and languages were shaking in fear before him: some he put to death and others he kept living, at his pleasure, lifting up some and putting others down as it pleased him.

但他心高气傲，灵也刚愎，甚至行事狂傲，就被革去王位，夺去荣耀。
But when his heart was lifted up and his spirit became hard with pride, he was put down from his place as king, and they took his glory from him:

他被赶出离开世人，他的心变如兽心，与野驴同居，吃草如牛，身被天露滴湿，等他知道至高的神在人的国中掌权，凭自己的意旨立人治国。
And he was sent out from among the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts', and he was living with the asses of the fields; he had grass for his food like the oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till he was certain that the Most High is ruler in the kingdom of men, and gives power over it to anyone at his pleasure.

伯沙撒阿，你是他的儿子（或作孙子），你虽知道这一切，你心仍不自卑，
And you, his son, O Belshazzar, have not kept your heart free from pride, though you had knowledge of all this;

竟向天上的主自高，使人将他殿中的器皿拿到你面前，你和大臣，皇后，妃嫔用这器皿饮酒。你又赞美那不能看，不能听，无知无识，金，银，铜，铁，木，石所造的神，却没有将荣耀归与那手中有你气息，管理你一切行动的神。
But you have been lifting yourself up against the Lord of heaven, and they have put the vessels of his house before you, and you and your lords, your wives and your women, have taken wine in them; and you have given praise to gods of silver and gold, of brass and iron and wood and stone, who are without the power of seeing or hearing, and without knowledge: and to the God in whose hand your breath is, and whose are all your ways, you have not given glory;

因此从神那里显出指头来写这文字。
Then the part of the hand was sent out from before him, and this writing was recorded.

所写的文字是，弥尼，弥尼，提客勒，乌法珥新。
And this is the writing which was recorded, Mene, tekel, peres.

讲解是这样，弥尼，就是神已经数算你国的年日到此完毕。
This is the sense of the words: Mene; your kingdom has been numbered by God and ended.

提客勒，就是你被称在天平里，显出你的亏欠。
Tekel; you have been put in the scales and seen to be under weight.

毗勒斯（与乌法珥新同义），就是你的国分裂，归与玛代人和波斯人。
Peres; your kingdom has been cut up and given to the Medes and Persians.

伯沙撒下令，人就把紫袍给但以理穿上，把金链给他戴在颈项上，又传令使他在国中位列第三。
Then, by the order of Belshazzar, they put a purple robe on Daniel, and a gold chain round his neck, and a public statement was made that he was to be a ruler of high authority in the kingdom.

当夜，迦勒底王伯沙撒被杀。
That very night Belshazzar, the king of the Chaldaeans, was put to death.

玛代人大利乌年六十二岁，取了迦勒底国。
And Darius the Mede took the kingdom, being then about sixty-two years old.

大利乌随心所愿，立一百二十个总督，治理通国。
Darius was pleased to put over the kingdom a hundred and twenty captains, who were to be all through the kingdom;

又在他们以上立总长三人（但以理在其中），使总督在他们三人面前回覆事务，免得王受亏损。
And over them were three chief rulers, of whom Daniel was one; and the captains were to be responsible to the chief rulers, so that the king might undergo no loss.

因这但以理有美好的灵性，所以显然超乎其余的总长和总督，王又想立他治理通国。
Then this Daniel did his work better than the chief rulers and the captains, because there was a special spirit in him; and it was the king's purpose to put him over all the kingdom.

那时，总长和总督寻找但以理误国的把柄，为要参他。只是找不着他的错误过失，因他忠心办事，毫无错误过失。
Then the chief rulers and the captains were looking for some cause for putting Daniel in the wrong in connection with the kingdom, but they were unable to put forward any wrongdoing or error against him; because he was true, and no error or wrong was to be seen in him.

那些人便说，我们要找参这但以理的把柄，除非在他神的律法中就寻不着。
Then these men said, We will only get a reason for attacking Daniel in connection with the law of his God.

于是，总长和总督纷纷聚集来见王，说，愿大利乌王万岁。
Then these chief rulers and the captains came to the king and said to him, O King Darius, have life for ever.

国中的总长，钦差，总督，谋士，和巡抚彼此商议，要立一条坚定的禁令（或作求王下旨要立一条云云），三十日内，不拘何人，若在王以外，或向神或向人求什么，就必扔在狮子坑中。
All the chief rulers of the kingdom, the chiefs and the captains, the wise men and the rulers, have made a common decision to put in force a law having the king's authority, and to give a strong order, that whoever makes any request to any god or man but you, O King, for thirty days, is to be put into the lions' hole.

王阿，现在求你立这禁令，加盖玉玺，使禁令决不更改。照玛代和波斯人的例是不可更改的。
Now, O King, put the order in force, signing the writing so that it may not be changed, like the law of the Medes and Persians which may not come to an end.

于是大利乌王立这禁令，加盖玉玺。
For this reason King Darius put his name on the writing and the order.

但以理知道这禁令盖了玉玺，就到自己家里（他楼上的窗户开向耶路撒冷），一日三次，双膝跪在他神面前，祷告感谢，与素常一样。
And Daniel, on hearing that the writing had been signed, went into his house; (now he had windows in his room on the roof opening in the direction of Jerusalem;) and three times a day he went down on his knees in prayer and praise before his God, as he had done before.

那些人就纷纷聚集，见但以理在他神面前祈祷恳求。
Then these men were watching and saw Daniel making prayers and requesting grace before his God.

他们便进到王前，提王的禁令，说，王阿，三十日内不拘何人，若在王以外，或向神或向人求什么，必被扔在狮子坑中。王不是在这禁令上盖了玉玺吗？王回答说，实有这事，照玛代和波斯人的例，是不可更改的。
Then they came near before the king and said, O King, have you not put your name to an order that any man who makes a request to any god or man but you, O King, for thirty days, is to be put into the lions' hole? The king made answer and said, The thing is fixed by the law of the Medes and Persians which may not come to an end.

他们对王说，王阿，那被掳之犹大人中的但以理不理你，也不遵你盖了玉玺的禁令，他竟一日三次祈祷。
Then they made answer and said before the king, Daniel, one of the prisoners of Judah, has no respect for you, O King, or for the order signed by you, but three times a day he makes his prayer to God.

王听见这话，就甚愁烦，一心要救但以理，筹划解救他，直到日落的时候。
When this thing came to the king's ears, it was very evil to him, and his heart was fixed on keeping Daniel safe, and till the going down of the sun he was doing everything in his power to get him free.

那些人就纷纷聚集来见王，说，王阿，当知道玛代人和波斯人有例，凡王所立的禁令和律例都不可更改。
Then these men said to the king, Be certain, O King, that by the law of the Medes and Persians no order or law which the king has put into force may be changed.

王下令，人就把但以理带来，扔在狮子坑中。王对但以理说，你所常事奉的神，他必救你。
Then the king gave the order, and they took Daniel and put him into the lions' hole. The king made answer and said to Daniel, Your God, whose servant you are at all times, will keep you safe.

有人搬石头放在坑口，王用自己的玺和大臣的印，封闭那坑，使惩办但以理的事毫无更改。
Then they got a stone and put it over the mouth of the hole, and it was stamped with the king's stamp and with the stamp of the lords, so that the decision about Daniel might not be changed.

王回宫，终夜禁食，无人拿乐器到他面前，并且睡不着觉。
Then the king went to his great house, and took no food that night, and no ... were placed before him, and his sleep went from him.

次日黎明，王就起来，急忙往狮子坑那里去。
Then very early in the morning the king got up and went quickly to the lions' hole.

临近坑边，哀声呼叫但以理，对但以理说，永生神的仆人但以理阿，你所常事奉的神能救你脱离狮子吗？
And when he came near the hole where Daniel was, he gave a loud cry of grief; the king made answer and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is your God, whose servant you are at all times, able to keep you safe from the lions?

但以理对王说，愿王万岁。
Then Daniel said to the king, O King, have life for ever.

我的神差遣使者，封住狮子的口，叫狮子不伤我。因我在神面前无辜，我在王面前也没有行过亏损的事。
My God has sent his angel to keep the lions' mouths shut, and they have done me no damage: because I was seen to be without sin before him; and further, before you, O King, I have done no wrong.

王就甚喜乐，吩咐人将但以理从坑里系上来。于是但以理从坑里被系上来，身上毫无伤损，因为信靠他的神。
Then the king was very glad, and gave orders for them to take Daniel up out of the hole. So Daniel was taken up out of the hole and he was seen to be untouched, because he had faith in his God.

王下令，人就把那些控告但以理的人，连他们的妻子儿女都带来，扔在狮子坑中。他们还没有到坑底，狮子就抓住他们（抓住原文作胜了），咬碎他们的骨头。
And at the king's order, they took those men who had said evil against Daniel, and put them in the lions' hole, with their wives and their children; and they had not got to the floor of the hole before the lions overcame them and all their bones were broken.

那时，大利乌王传旨，晓谕住在全地各方，各国，各族的人说，愿你们大享平安。
Then King Darius sent a letter to all the peoples, nations, and languages, living in all the earth: May your peace be increased.

现在我降旨晓谕我所统辖的全国人民，要在但以理的神面前，战兢恐惧。因为他是永远长存的活神，他的国永不败坏。他的权柄永存无极。
It is my order that in all the kingdom of which I am ruler, men are to be shaking with fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, unchanging for ever, and his kingdom is one which will never come to destruction, his rule will go on to the end.

他护庇人，搭救人，在天上地下施行神迹奇事，救了但以理脱离狮子的口。
He gives salvation and makes men free from danger, and does signs and wonders in heaven and earth, who has kept Daniel safe from the power of the lions.

如此，这但以理当大利乌王在位的时候，和波斯王古列在位的时候，大享亨通。
So this Daniel did well in the kingdom of Darius and in the kingdom of Cyrus the Persian.

巴比伦王伯沙撒元年，但以理在床上作梦，见了脑中的异象，就记录这梦，述说其中的大意。
In the first year of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, Daniel saw a dream, and visions came into his head on his bed: then he put the dream in writing.

但以理说，我夜里见异象，看见天的四风陡起，刮在大海之上。
I had a vision by night, and saw the four winds of heaven violently moving the great sea.

有四个大兽从海中上来，形状各有不同，
And four great beasts came up from the sea, different one from another.

头一个像狮子，有鹰的翅膀。我正观看的时候，兽的翅膀被拔去，兽从地上得立起来，用两脚站立，像人一样，又得了人心。
The first was like a lion and had eagle's wings; while I was watching its wings were pulled off, and it was lifted up from the earth and placed on two feet like a man, and a man's heart was given to it.

又有一兽如熊，就是第二兽，旁跨而坐，口齿内衔着三根肋骨。有吩咐这兽的说，起来吞吃多肉。
And I saw another beast, like a bear, and it was lifted up on one side, and three side-bones were in its mouth, between its teeth: and they said to it, Up! take much flesh.

此后我观看，又有一兽如豹，背上有鸟的四个翅膀。这兽有四个头，又得了权柄。
After this I saw another beast, like a leopard, which had on its back four wings like those of a bird; and the beast had four heads, and the power of a ruler was given to it.

其后我在夜间的异象中观看，见第四兽甚是可怕，极其强壮，大有力量，有大铁牙，吞吃嚼碎，所剩下的用脚践踏。这兽与前三兽大不相同，头有十角。
After this, in my vision of the night, I saw a fourth beast, a thing causing fear and very troubling, full of power and very strong; and it had great iron teeth: it took its food, crushing some of it to bits and stamping down the rest with its feet: it was different from all the beasts before it; and it had ten horns.

我正观看这些角，见其中又长起一个小角。先前的角中有三角在这角前，连根被它拔出来。这角有眼，像人的眼，有口说夸大的话。
I was watching the horns with care, and I saw another coming up among them, a little one, before which three of the first horns were pulled up by the roots: and there were eyes like a man's eyes in this horn, and a mouth saying great things.

我观看，见有宝座设立，上头坐着亘古常在者。他的衣服洁白如雪，头发如纯净的羊毛。宝座乃火焰，其轮乃烈火。
I went on looking till the seats of kings were placed, and one like a very old man took his seat: his clothing was white as snow, and the hair of his head was like clean wool; his seat was flames of fire and its wheels burning fire.

从他面前有火，像河发出。事奉他的有千千，在他面前侍立的有万万。他坐着要行审判，案卷都展开了。
A stream of fire was flowing and coming out from before him: a thousand thousands were his servants, and ten thousand times ten thousand were in their places before him: the judge was seated and the books were open.

那时我观看，见那兽因小角说夸大话的声音被杀，身体损坏，扔在火中焚烧。
Then I saw--because of the voice of the great words which the horn said--I saw till the beast was put to death, and its body was given to destruction, and the beast was given to the burning of fire.

其余的兽，权柄都被夺去，生命却仍存留，直到所定的时候和日期。
As for the rest of the beasts, their authority was taken away: but they let them go on living for a measure of time.

我在夜间的异象中观看，见有一位像人子的，驾着天云而来，被领到亘古常在者面前，
I saw in visions of the night, and there was coming with the clouds of heaven one like a man, and he came to the one who was very old, and they took him near before him.

得了权柄，荣耀，国度，使各方，各国，各族的人都事奉他。他的权柄是永远的，不能废去。他的国必不败坏。
And to him was given authority and glory and a kingdom; and all peoples, nations, and languages were his servants: his authority is an eternal authority which will not come to an end, and his kingdom is one which will not come to destruction.

至于我但以理，我的灵在我里面愁烦，我脑中的异象使我惊惶。
As for me, Daniel, my spirit was pained because of this, and the visions of my head were troubling me.

我就近一位侍立者，问他这一切的真情。他就告诉我，将那事的讲解给我说明。
I came near to one of those who were waiting there, questioning him about what all this was. And he said to me that he would make clear to me the sense of these things.

这四个大兽就是四王将要在世上兴起。
These great beasts are four kings who will be cut off from the earth.

然而，至高者的圣民，必要得国享受，直到永永远远。
But the saints of the Most High will take the kingdom, and it will be theirs for ever, even for ever and ever.

那时我愿知道第四兽的真情，它为何与那三兽的真情大不相同，甚是可怕，有铁牙铜爪，吞吃嚼碎，所剩下的用脚践踏。
Then it was my desire to have certain knowledge about the fourth beast, which was different from all the others, a cause of great fear, whose teeth were of iron and his nails of brass; who took his food, crushing some of it to bits and stamping on the rest with his feet;

头有十角和那另长的一角，在这角前有三角被它打落。这角有眼，有说夸大话的口，形状强横，过于它的同类。
And about the ten horns on his head and the other which came up, causing the fall of three; that horn which had eyes, and a mouth saying great things, which seemed to be greater than the other horns.

我观看，见这角与圣民争战，胜了他们。
And I saw how that horn made war on the saints and overcame them,

直到亘古常在者来给至高者的圣民伸冤，圣民得国的时候就到了。
Till he came, who was very old, and the decision was made and the authority was given to the saints of the Most High; and the time came when the saints took the kingdom.

那侍立者这样说，第四兽就是世上必有的第四国，与一切国大不相同，必吞吃全地，并且践踏嚼碎。
This is what he said: The fourth beast is a fourth kingdom which will come on earth, different from all the kingdoms, and it will overcome all the earth, crushing it down and smashing it.

至于那十角，就是从这国中必兴起的十王，后来又兴起一王，与先前的不同。他必制伏三王。
And as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings will come to power; and after them another will come up: he will be different from the first ones and will put down three kings.

他必向至高者说夸大的话，必折磨至高者的圣民，必想改变节期和律法。圣民必交付他手一载，二载，半载。
And he will say words against the Most High, attempting to put an end to the saints of the Most High; and he will have the idea of changing times and law; and the saints will be given into his hands for a time and times and half a time.

然而，审判者必坐着行审判。他的权柄必被夺去，毁坏，灭绝，一直到底。
But the judge will be seated, and they will put an end to his authority, to overcome it and send complete destruction on it.

国度，权柄，和天下诸国的大权必赐给至高者的圣民。他的国是永远的。一切掌权的都必事奉他，顺从他。
And the kingdom and the authority and the power of the kingdoms under all the heaven will be given to the people of the saints of the Most High: his kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and all powers will be his servants and do his pleasure.

那事至此完毕。至于我但以理，心中甚是惊惶，脸色也改变了，却将那事存记在心。
Here is the end of the account. As for me, Daniel, I was greatly troubled by my thoughts, and the colour went from my face: but I kept the thing in my heart.

伯沙撒王在位第三年，有异象现与我但以理，是在先前所见的异象之后。
In the third year of the rule of Belshazzar the king, a vision was seen by me, Daniel, after the one I saw at first.

我见了异象的时候，我以为在以拦省书珊城中（城或作宫）。我见异象又如在乌莱河边。
And I saw in the vision; and when I saw it, I was in the strong town Shushan, which is in the country of Elam; and in the vision I was by the water-door of the Ulai.

我举目观看，见有双角的公绵羊站在河边，两角都高。这角高过那角，更高的是后长的。
And lifting up my eyes, I saw, there before the stream, a male sheep with two horns: and the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, the higher one coming up last.

我见那公绵羊往西，往北，往南抵触。兽在它面前都站立不住，也没有能救护脱离它手的。但它任意而行，自高自大。
I saw the sheep pushing to the west and to the north and to the south; and no beasts were able to keep their place before him, and no one was able to get people out of his power; but he did whatever his pleasure was and made himself great.

我正思想的时候，见有一只公山羊从西而来，遍行全地，脚不沾尘。这山羊两眼当中有一非常的角。
And while I was giving thought to this, I saw a he-goat coming from the west over the face of all the earth without touching the earth: and the he-goat had a great horn between his eyes.

它往我所看见，站在河边有双角的公绵羊那里去，大发忿怒，向它直闯。
And he came to the two-horned sheep which I saw before the stream, rushing at him in the heat of his power.

我见公山羊就近公绵羊，向它发烈怒，抵触它，折断它的两角。绵羊在它面前站立不住。它将绵羊触倒在地，用脚践踏，没有能救绵羊脱离它手的。
And I saw him come right up to the sheep, and he was moved with wrath against him, attacking the sheep so that his two horns were broken; and the sheep had not strength to keep his place before him, but was pushed down on the earth and crushed under his feet: and there was no one to get the sheep out of his power.

这山羊极其自高自大，正强盛的时候，那大角折断了，又在角根上向天的四方（方原文作风）长出四个非常的角来。
And the he-goat became very great: and when he was strong, the great horn was broken, and in its place came up four other horns turned to the four winds of heaven.

四角之中有一角长出一个小角，向南，向东，向荣美之地，渐渐成为强大。
And out of one of them came another horn, a little one, which became very great, stretching to the south and to the east and to the beautiful land.

它渐渐强大，高及天象，将些天象和星宿抛落在地，用脚践踏。
And it became great, even as high as the army of heaven, pulling down some of the army, even of the stars, to the earth and crushing them under its feet.

并且它自高自大，以为高及天象之君。除掉常献给君的燔祭，毁坏君的圣所。
It made itself great, even as great as the lord of the army; and by it the regular burned offering was taken away, and the place overturned and the holy place made waste.

因罪过的缘故，有军旅和常献的燔祭交付它。它将真理抛在地上，任意而行，无不顺利。
... against the regular burned offering; and ... crushed down to the earth, and it did its pleasure and things went well for it.

我听见有一位圣者说话，又有一位圣者问那说话的圣者说，这除掉常献的燔祭和施行毁坏的罪过，将圣所与军旅践踏的异象（军旅或作以色列的军），要到几时才应验呢？
Then there came to my ears the voice of a holy one talking; and another holy one said to that certain one who was talking, How long will the vision be while the regular burned offering is taken away, and the unclean thing causing fear is put up, and the holy place crushed under foot?

他对我说，到二千三百日，圣所就必洁净。
And he said to him, For two thousand, three hundred evenings and mornings; then the holy place will be made clean.

我但以理见了这异象，愿意明白其中的意思。忽有一位形状像人的站在我面前。
And it came about that when I, Daniel, had seen this vision, I had a desire for the sense of it to be unfolded; and I saw one before me in the form of a man.

我又听见乌莱河两岸中有人声呼叫说，加百列阿，要使此人明白这异象。
And the voice of a man came to my ears between the sides of the Ulai, crying out and saying, Gabriel, make the vision clear to this man.

他便来到我所站的地方。他一来，我就惊慌俯伏在地。他对我说，人子阿，你要明白，因为这是关乎末后的异象。
So he came and took his place near where I was; and when he came, I was full of fear and went down on my face: but he said to me, Let it be clear to you, O son of man; for the vision has to do with the time of the end.

他与我说话的时候，我面伏在地沉睡。他就摸我，扶我站起来，
Now while he was talking to me, I went into a deep sleep with my face to the earth: but touching me, he put me on my feet where I had been.

说，我要指示你恼怒临完必有的事，因为这是关乎末后的定期。
And he said, See, I will make clear to you what is to come in the later time of the wrath: for it has to do with the fixed time of the end.

你所看见双角的公绵羊，就是玛代和波斯王。
The sheep which you saw with two horns, they are the kings of Media and Persia.

那公山羊就是希腊王（希腊原文作雅完下同）。两眼当中的大角就是头一王。
And the he-goat is the king of Greece: and the great horn between his eyes is the first king.

至于那折断了的角，在其根上又长出四角，这四角就是四国，必从这国里兴起来，只是权势都不及他。
And as for that which was broken, in place of which four came up, four kingdoms will come up from his nation, but not with his power.

这四国末时，犯法的人罪恶满盈，必有一王兴起，面貌凶恶，能用双关的诈语。
And in the later years of their kingdom, when their evil doings have become complete, there will come up a king full of pride and expert in dark sayings.

他的权柄必大，却不是因自己的能力。他必行非常的毁灭，事情顺利，任意而行。又必毁灭有能力的和圣民。
And his power will be great, and he will be purposing strange things. And all will go well for him and he will do his pleasure; and he will send destruction on the strong ones.

他用权术成就手中的诡计，心里自高自大，在人坦然无备的时候，毁灭多人。又要站起来攻击万君之君，至终却非因人手而灭亡。
And his designs will be turned against the holy people, causing deceit to do well in his hand; in his heart he will make himself great, and send destruction on numbers who are living unconscious of their danger; and he will put himself up against the prince of princes; but he will be broken, though not by men's hands.

所说二千三百日的异象是真的，但你要将这异象封住，因为关乎后来许多的日子。
And the vision of evenings and mornings which has been talked of is true: and keep the vision secret; for it has to do with the far-off future.

于是我但以理昏迷不醒，病了数日，然后起来办理王的事务。我因这异象惊奇，却无人能明白其中的意思。
And I, Daniel, was ill for some days; then I got up and did the king's business: and I was full of wonder at the vision, but no one was able to give the sense of it.

玛代族亚哈随鲁的儿子大利乌立为迦勒底国的王元年，
In the first year of Darius, the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the kingdom of the Chaldaeans;

就是他在位第一年，我但以理从书上得知耶和华的话临到先知耶利米，论耶路撒冷荒凉的年数，七十年为满。
In the first year of his rule, I, Daniel, saw clearly from the books the number of years given by the word of the Lord to the prophet Jeremiah, in which the making waste of Jerusalem was to be complete, that is, seventy years.

我便禁食，披麻蒙灰，定意向主神祈祷恳求。
And turning my face to the Lord God, I gave myself up to prayer, requesting his grace, going without food, in haircloth and dust.

我向耶和华我的神祈祷，认罪，说，主阿，大而可畏的神，向爱主，守主诫命的人守约施慈爱。
And I made prayer to the Lord my God, putting our sins before him, and said, O Lord, the great God, greatly to be feared. keeping your agreement and mercy with those who have love for you and do your orders;

我们犯罪作孽，行恶叛逆，偏离你的诫命典章，
We are sinners, acting wrongly and doing evil; we have gone against you, turning away from your orders and from your laws:

没有听从你仆人众先知奉你名向我们君王，首领，列祖，和国中一切百姓所说的话。
We have not given ear to your servants the prophets, who said words in your name to our kings and our rulers and our fathers and all the people of the land.

主阿，你是公义的，我们是脸上蒙羞的。因我们犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民，并以色列众人，或在近处，或在远处，被你赶到各国的人，都得罪了你，正如今日一样。
O Lord, righteousness is yours, but shame is on us, even to this day; and on the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem, and on all Israel, those who are near and those who are far off, in all the countries where you have sent them because of the sin which they have done against you.

主阿，我们和我们的君王，首领，列祖因得罪了你，就都脸上蒙羞。
O Lord, shame is on us, on our kings and our rulers and our fathers, because of our sin against you.

主我们的神是怜悯饶恕人的，我们却违背了他，
With the Lord our God are mercies and forgiveness, for we have gone against him;

也没有听从耶和华我们神的话，没有遵行他借仆人众先知向我们所陈明的律法。
And have not given ear to the voice of the Lord our God to go in the way of his laws which he put before us by the mouth of his servants the prophets.

以色列众人都犯了你的律法，偏行，不听从你的话。因此，在你仆人摩西律法上所写的咒诅和誓言都倾在我们身上，因我们得罪了神。
And all Israel have been sinners against your law, turning away so as not to give ear to your voice: and the curse has been let loose on us, and the oath recorded in the law of Moses, the servant of God, for we have done evil against him.

他使大灾祸临到我们，成就了警戒我们和审判我们官长的话。原来在普天之下未曾行过像在耶路撒冷所行的。
And he has given effect to his words which he said against us and against those who were our judges, by sending a great evil on us: for under all heaven there has not been done what has been done to Jerusalem.

这一切灾祸临到我们身上是照摩西律法上所写的，我们却没有求耶和华我们神的恩典，使我们回头离开罪孽，明白你的真理。
As it was recorded in the law of Moses, all this evil has come on us: but we have made no prayer for grace from the Lord our God that we might be turned from our evil doings and come to true wisdom.

所以耶和华留意使这灾祸临到我们身上，因为耶和华我们的神在他所行的事上都是公义。我们并没有听从他的话。
So the Lord has been watching over this evil and has made it come on us: for the Lord our God is upright in all his acts which he has done, and we have not given ear to his voice.

主我们的神阿，你曾用大能的手领你的子民出埃及地，使自己得了名，正如今日一样。我们犯了罪，作了恶。
And now, O Lord our God, who took your people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand and made a great name for yourself even to this day; we are sinners, we have done evil.

主阿，求你按你的大仁大义，使你的怒气和忿怒转离你的城耶路撒冷，就是你的圣山。耶路撒冷和你的子民，因我们的罪恶和我们列祖的罪孽被四围的人羞辱。
O Lord, because of your righteousness, let your wrath and your passion be turned away from your town Jerusalem, your holy mountain: because, through our sins and the evil-doing of our fathers, Jerusalem and your people have become a cause of shame to all who are round about us.

我们的神阿，现在求你垂听仆人的祈祷恳求，为自己使脸光照你荒凉的圣所。
And now, give ear, O our God, to the prayer of your servant and to his request for grace, and let your face be shining on your holy place which is made waste, because of your servants, O Lord.

我的神阿，求你侧耳而听，睁眼而看，眷顾我们荒凉之地和称为你名下的城。我们在你面前恳求，原不是因自己的义，乃因你的大怜悯。
O my God, let your ear be turned and give hearing; let your eyes be open and see how we have been made waste and the town which is named by your name: for we are not offering our prayers before you because of our righteousness, but because of your great mercies.

求主垂听，求主赦免，求主应允而行，为你自己不要迟延。我的神阿，因这城和这民都是称为你名下的。
O Lord, give ear; O Lord, have forgiveness; O Lord, take note and do; let there be no more waiting; for the honour of your name, O my God, because your town and your people are named by your name.

我说话，祷告，承认我的罪和本国之民以色列的罪，为我神的圣山，在耶和华我神面前恳求。
And while I was still saying these words in prayer, and putting my sins and the sins of my people Israel before the Lord, and requesting grace from the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God;

我正祷告的时候，先前在异象中所见的那位加百列，奉命迅速飞来，约在献晚祭的时候，按手在我身上。
Even while I was still in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at first when my weariness was great, put his hand on me about the time of the evening offering.

他指教我说，但以理阿，现在我出来要使你有智慧，有聪明。
And teaching me and talking to me he said, O Daniel, I have come now to give you wisdom.

你初恳求的时候，就发出命令，我来告诉你，因你大蒙眷爱。所以你要思想明白这以下的事和异象。
At the first word of your prayer a word went out, and I have come to give you knowledge; for you are a man dearly loved: so give thought to the word and let the vision be clear to you.

为你本国之民和你圣城，已经定了七十个七。要止住罪过，除净罪恶，赎尽罪孽，引进（或作彰显）永义，封住异象和预言，并膏至圣者（者或作所）。
Seventy weeks have been fixed for your people and your holy town, to let wrongdoing be complete and sin come to its full limit, and for the clearing away of evil-doing and the coming in of eternal righteousness: so that the vision and the word of the prophet may be stamped as true, and to put the holy oil on a most holy place.

你当知道，当明白，从出令重新建造耶路撒冷，直到有受膏君的时候，必有七个七和六十二个七。正在艰难的时候，耶路撒冷城连街带濠都必重新建造。
Have then the certain knowledge that from the going out of the word for the building again of Jerusalem till the coming of a prince, on whom the holy oil has been put, will be seven weeks: in sixty-two weeks its building will be complete, with square and earthwork.

过了六十二个七，那受膏者（那或作有）必被剪除，一无所有。必有一王的民来毁灭这城和圣所，至终必如洪水冲没。必有争战，一直到底，荒凉的事已经定了。
And at the end of the times, even after the sixty-two weeks, one on whom the holy oil has been put will be cut off and have no ...; and the town and the holy place will be made waste together with a prince; and the end will come with an overflowing of waters, and even to the end there will be war; the making waste which has been fixed.

一七之内，他必与许多人坚定盟约。一七之半，他必使祭祀与供献止息。那行毁坏可憎的（或作使地荒凉的）如飞而来，并且有忿怒倾在那行毁坏的身上（或作倾在那荒凉之地），直到所定的结局。
And a strong order will be sent out against the great number for one week; and so for half of the week the offering and the meal offering will come to an end; and in its place will be an unclean thing causing fear; till the destruction which has been fixed is let loose on him who has made waste.

波斯王古列第三年，有事显给称为伯提沙撒的但以理。这事是真的，是指着大争战。但以理通达这事，明白这异象。
In the third year of Cyrus, king of Persia, a secret was unfolded to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, even a hard work: and he had knowledge of it, and the vision was clear to him.

当那时，我但以理悲伤了三个七日。
In those days I, Daniel, gave myself up to grief for three full weeks.

美味我没有吃，酒肉没有入我的口，也没有用油抹我的身，直到满了三个七日。
I had no pleasing food, no meat or wine came into my mouth, and I put no oil on my body till three full weeks were ended.

正月二十四日，我在希底结大河边，
And on the twenty-fourth day of the first month I was by the side of the great river;

举目观看，见有一人身穿细麻衣，腰束乌法精金带。
And lifting up my eyes I saw the form of a man clothed in a linen robe, and round him there was a band of gold, of the best gold:

他身体如水苍玉，面貌如闪电，眼目如火把，手和脚如光明的铜，说话的声音如大众的声音。
And his body was like the beryl, and his face had the look of a thunder-flame, and his eyes were like burning lights, and his arms and feet like the colour of polished brass, and the sound of his voice was like the sound of an army.

这异象惟有我但以理一人看见，同着我的人没有看见。他们却大大战兢，逃跑隐藏，
And I, Daniel, was the only one who saw the vision, for the men who were with me did not see it; but a great shaking came on them and they went in flight to take cover.

只剩下我一人。我见了这大异象便浑身无力，面貌失色，毫无气力。
So I was by myself, and I saw this great vision, and all my strength went from me; and the colour went from my face.

我却听见他说话的声音，一听见就面伏在地沉睡了。
But the sound of his words came to my ears, and on hearing his voice I went into a deep sleep with my face to the earth.

忽然，有一手按在我身上，使我用膝和手掌支持微起。
Then a hand gave me a touch, awaking me, and putting me on my knees and my hands.

他对我说，大蒙眷爱的但以理阿，要明白我与你所说的话，只管站起来，因为我现在奉差遣来到你这里。他对我说这话，我便战战兢兢地立起来。
And he said to me, O Daniel, you man dearly loved, take in the sense of the words I say to you and get up on to your feet: for to you I am now sent; and when he had said this to me I got on to my feet, shaking with fear.

他就说，但以理阿，不要惧怕。因为从你第一日专心求明白将来的事，又在你神面前刻苦己心，你的言语已蒙应允。我是因你的言语而来。
Then he said to me, Have no fear, Daniel; for from the first day when you gave your heart to getting wisdom and making yourself poor in spirit before your God, your words have come to his ears: and I have come because of your words.

但波斯国的魔君拦阻我二十一日。忽然有大君（就是天使长。二十一节同）中的一位米迦勒来帮助我，我就停留在波斯诸王那里。
But the angel of the kingdom of Persia put himself against me for twenty-one days; but Michael, one of the chief angels, came to my help; and when I came he was still there with the angel of the kings of Persia.

现在我来，要使你明白本国之民日后必遭遇的事，因为这异象关乎后来许多的日子。
Now I have come to give you knowledge of the fate of your people in the later days; for there is still a vision for the days.

他向我这样说，我就脸面朝地，哑口无声。
And after he had said these words to me, I kept my face turned to the earth and was unable to say anything.

不料，有一位像人的，摸我的嘴唇，我便开口向那站在我面前的说，我主阿，因见这异象，我大大愁苦，毫无气力。
Then one whose form was like the sons of men put his finger on my lips; and opening my mouth, I said to him who was before me, O my lord, because of the vision my pains have come on me, and I have no more strength.

我主的仆人怎能与我主说话呢？我一见异象就浑身无力，毫无气息。
For how may this servant of my lord have talk with my lord? for, as for me, straight away my strength went from me and there was no breath in my body.

有一位形状像人的又摸我，使我有力量。
Then again one having the form of a man put his hand on me and gave me strength.

他说，大蒙眷爱的人哪，不要惧怕，愿你平安。你总要坚强。他一向我说话，我便觉得有力量，说，我主请说，因你使我有力量。
And he said to me, O man greatly loved, have no fear: peace be with you, be strong and let your heart be lifted up. And at his words I became strong, and said, Let my lord say on, for you have given me strength.

他就说，你知道我为何来见你吗？现在我要回去与波斯的魔君争战，我去后，希腊（原文作雅完）的魔君必来。
Then he said, It is clear to you why I have come to you. And now I will give you an account of what is recorded in the true writings:

但我要将那录在真确书上的事告诉你。除了你们的大君米迦勒之外，没有帮助我抵挡这两魔君的。
But I am going back to make war with the angel of Persia, and when I am gone, the angel of Greece will come. And there is no one on my side against these, but Michael, your angel.

又说，当玛代王大利乌元年，我曾起来扶助米迦勒，使他坚强。
And as for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede I was on his side to make his position safe and make him strong.

现在我将真事指示你，波斯还有三王兴起，第四王必富足远胜诸王。他因富足成为强盛，就必激动大众攻击希腊国。
And now I will make clear to you what is true. There are still three kings to come in Persia, and the fourth will have much greater wealth than all of them: and when he has become strong through his wealth, he will put his forces in motion against all the kingdoms of Greece.

必有一个勇敢的王兴起，执掌大权，随意而行。
And a strong king will come to power, ruling with great authority and doing whatever is his pleasure.

他兴起的时候，他的国必破裂，向天的四方（方原文作风）分开，却不归他的后裔，治国的权势也都不及他。因为他的国必被拔出，归与他后裔之外的人。
And when he has become strong, his kingdom will be broken and parted to the four winds of heaven; but not to his offspring, for it will be uprooted; and his kingdom will be for the others and not for these: but not with the same authority as his.

南方的王必强盛，他将帅中必有一个比他更强盛，执掌权柄，他的权柄甚大。
And the king of the south will be strong, but one of his captains will be stronger than he and will be ruler; and his rule will be a great rule.

过些年后，他们必互相连合，南方王的女儿必就了北方王来立约。但这女子帮助之力存立不住，王和他所倚靠之力也不能存立。这女子和引导她来的，并生她的，以及当时扶助她的，都必交与死地。
And at the end of years they will be joined together; and the daughter of the king of the south will come to the king of the north to make an agreement: but she will not keep the strength of her arm; and his offspring will not keep their place; but she will be uprooted, with those who were the cause of her coming, and her son, and he who took her in those times.

但这女子的本家（本家原文作根）必另生一子（子原文作枝）继续王位，他必率领军队进入北方王的保障，攻击他们，而且得胜。
But out of a branch from her roots one will come up to take his place, who will come against the army, forcing his way into the strong place of the king of the north, and he will take them in hand and overcome them:

并将他们的神像和铸成的偶像，与金银的宝器掠到埃及去。数年之内，他不去攻击北方的王。
And their gods and their metal images and their fair vessels of silver and gold he will take away into the south; and for some years he will keep away from the king of the north.

北方的王（原文作他）必入南方王的国，却要仍回本地。
And he will come into the kingdom of the king of the south, but he will go back to his land.

北方王（原文作他）的二子必动干戈，招聚许多军兵。这军兵前去，如洪水泛滥，又必再去争战，直到南方王的保障。
And his son will make war, and will get together an army of great forces, and he will make an attack on him, overflowing and going past: and he will again take the war even to his strong place.

南方王必发烈怒，出来与北方王争战，摆列大军。北方王的军兵必交付他手。
And the king of the south will be moved with wrath, and will come out and make war on him, on this same king of the north: and he will get together a great army, but the army will be given into his hand.

他的众军高傲，他的心也必自高。他虽使数万人仆倒，却不得常胜。
And the army will be taken away, and his heart will be uplifted: he will be the cause of the downfall of tens of thousands, but he will not be strong.

北方王必回来摆列大军，比先前的更多。满了所定的年数，他必率领大军，带极多的军装来。
And again the king of the north will get together an army greater than the first; and he will make an attack on him at the end of years, with a great army and much wealth.

那时，必有许多人起来攻击南方王，并且你本国的强暴人必兴起，要应验那异象，他们却要败亡。
In those times, a number will take up arms against the king of the south: and the children of the violent among your people will be lifting themselves up to make the vision come true; but it will be their downfall.

北方王必来筑垒攻取坚固城。南方的军兵必站立不住，就是选择的精兵（精兵原文作民）也无力站住。
So the king of the north will come, and put up earthworks and take a well-armed town: and the forces of the king of the south will make an attempt to keep their position, even the best of his army, but they will not have strength to do so.

来攻击他的，必任意而行，无人在北方王（原文作他）面前站立得住。他必站在那荣美之地，用手施行毁灭。
And he who comes against him will do his pleasure, and no one will be able to keep his place before him: he will take up his position in the beautiful land and in his hand there will be destruction.

他必定意用全国之力而来，立公正的约，照约而行，将自己的女儿给南方王为妻，想要败坏他（或作埃及），这计却不得成就，与自己毫无益处。
And it will be his purpose to come with the strength of all his kingdom, but in place of this he will make an agreement with him; and he will give him the daughter of women to send destruction on it; but this will not take place or come about.

其后他必转回夺取了许多海岛。但有一大帅，除掉他令人受的羞辱，并且使这羞辱归他本身。
After this, his face will be turned to the islands, and he will take a number of them: but a chief, by his destruction, will put an end to the shame offered by him; and more than this, he will make his shame come back on him.

他就必转向本地的保障，却要绊跌仆倒，归于无有。
Then his face will be turned to the strong places of his land: but his way will be stopped, causing his downfall, and he will not be seen again.

那时，必有一人兴起接续他为王，使横征暴敛的人通行国中的荣美地。这王不多日就必灭亡，却不因忿怒，也不因争战。
Then his place will be taken by one who will send out a man with the glory of a king to get wealth together; but after a short time destruction will overtake him, but not in wrath or in the fight.

必有一个卑鄙的人兴起接续为王，人未曾将国的尊荣给他，他却趁人坦然无备的时候，用谄媚的话得国。
And his place will be taken by a low person, to whom the honour of the kingdom had not been given: but he will come in time of peace and will get the kingdom by fair words.

必有无数的军兵势如洪水，在他面前冲没败坏。同盟的君也必如此。
And his forces will be completely taken away from before him and broken; and even the ruler of the agreement will have the same fate.

与那君结盟之后，他必行诡诈，因为他必上来以微小的军（原文作民）成为强盛。
And from the time when they make an agreement with him, he will be working falsely: for he will take up arms suddenly with a small force,

趁人坦然无备的时候，他必来到国中极肥美之地，行他列祖和他列祖之祖所未曾行的，将掳物，掠物，和财宝散给众人，又要设计攻打保障，然而这都是暂时的。
Against fertile places, and will make waste a part of the country; and he will do what his fathers have not done, or his fathers' fathers; he will make distribution among them of goods taken in war and by force, and of property: he will even make designs against the strong places for a time.

他必奋勇向前，率领大军攻击南方王。南方王也必以极大极强的军兵与他争战，却站立不住，因为有人设计谋害南方王。
And he will put in motion his power and his strength against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south will go to war with a very great and strong army: but he will be forced to give way, because of their designs against him;

吃王膳的，必败坏他。他的军队必被冲没，而且被杀的甚多。
And his fears will overcome him and be the cause of his downfall, and his army will come to complete destruction, and a great number will be put to the sword.

至于这二王，他们心怀恶计，同席说谎，计谋却不成就。因为到了定期，事就了结。
And as for these two kings, their hearts will be fixed on doing evil and they will say false words at one table; but it will come to nothing: for the end will be at the time fixed.

北方王（原文作他）必带许多财宝回往本国，他的心反对圣约，任意而行，回到本地。
And he will go back to his land with great wealth; and his heart will be against the holy agreement; and he will do his pleasure and go back to his land.

到了定期，他必返回，来到南方。后一次却不如前一次，
At the time fixed he will come back and come into the south; but in the later time it will not be as it was before.

因为基提战船必来攻击他，他就丧胆而回，又要恼恨圣约，任意而行。他必回来联络背弃圣约的人。
For those who go out from the west will come against him, and he will be in fear and will go back, full of wrath against the holy agreement; and he will do his pleasure: and he will go back and be united with those who have given up the holy agreement.

他必兴兵，这兵必亵渎圣地，就是保障，除掉常献的燔祭，设立那行毁坏可憎的。
And armies sent by him will take up their position and they will make unclean the holy place, even the strong place, and take away the regular burned offering and put in its place an unclean thing causing fear.

作恶违背圣约的人，他必用巧言勾引。惟独认识神的子民必刚强行事。
And those who do evil against the agreement will be turned to sin by his fair words: but the people who have knowledge of their God will be strong and do well.

民间的智慧人必训诲多人。然而他们多日必倒在刀下，或被火烧，或被掳掠抢夺。
And those who are wise among the people will be the teachers of the mass of the people: but they will come to their downfall by the sword and by the flame, being made prisoners and undergoing loss for a long time.

他们仆倒的时候，稍得扶助，却有许多人用谄媚的话亲近他们。
Now at the time of their downfall they will have a little help, but numbers will be joined to them in the town, and in their separate heritages.

智慧人中有些仆倒的，为要熬炼其余的人，使他们清净洁白，直到末了。因为到了定期，事就了结。
And some of those who are wise will have wisdom in testing themselves and making themselves clean, till the time of the end: for it is still for the fixed time.

王必任意而行，自高自大，超过所有的神，又用奇异的话攻击万神之神。他必行事亨通，直到主的忿怒完毕，因为所定的事必然成就。
And the king will do his pleasure; he will put himself on high, lifting himself over every god, and saying things to be wondered at against the God of gods; and all will be well for him till the wrath is complete; for what has been purposed will be done.

他必不顾他列祖的神，也不顾妇女所羡慕的神，无论何神他都不顾。因为他必自大，高过一切。
He will have no respect for the gods of his fathers or for the god desired by women; he will have no respect for any god: for he will put himself on high over all.

他倒要敬拜保障的神，用金，银，宝石和可爱之物敬奉他列祖所不认识的神。
But in place of this he will give honour to the god of armed places, and to a god of whom his fathers had no knowledge he will give honour with gold and silver and jewels and things to be desired.

他必靠外邦神的帮助，攻破最坚固的保障。凡承认他的，他必将荣耀加给他们，使他们管辖许多人，又为贿赂分地与他们。
And he will make use of the people of a strange god to keep his strongest places; to those whom he takes note of he will give high honour: and he will make them rulers over the mass of the people, and will make division of the land for a price.

到末了，南方王要与他交战。北方王必用战车，马兵，和许多战船，势如暴风来攻击他，也必进入列国，如洪水泛滥。
And at the time of the end, the king of the south will make an attack on him: and the king of the north will come against him like a storm-wind, with war-carriages and horsemen and numbers of ships; and he will go through many lands like overflowing waters.

又必进入那荣美之地，有许多国就被倾覆，但以东人，摩押人，和一大半亚扪人必脱离他的手。
And he will come into the beautiful land, and tens of thousands will be overcome: but these will be kept from falling into his hands: Edom and Moab and the chief of the children of Ammon.

他必伸手攻击列国。埃及地也不得脱离。
And his hand will be stretched out on the countries: and the land of the south will not be safe from him.

他必把持埃及的金银财宝和各样的宝物。吕彼亚人和古实人都必跟从他。
But he will have power over the stores of gold and silver, and over all the valued things of the south: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians will be at his steps.

但从东方和北方必有消息扰乱他，他就大发烈怒出去，要将多人杀灭净尽。
But he will be troubled by news from the east and from the north; and he will go out in great wrath, to send destruction on, and put an end to, great numbers.

他必在海和荣美的圣山中间设立他如宫殿的帐幕。然而到了他的结局，必无人能帮助他。
He will put the tents of his great house between the sea and the beautiful holy mountain: but he will come to his end with no helper.

那时，保佑你本国之民的天使长（原文作大君）米迦勒必站起来，并且有大艰难，从有国以来直到此时，没有这样的。你本国的民中，凡名录在册上的，必得拯救。
And at that time Michael will take up his place, the great angel, who is the supporter of the children of your people: and there will be a time of trouble, such as there never was from the time there was a nation even till that same time: and at that time your people will be kept safe, everyone who is recorded in the book.

睡在尘埃中的，必有多人复醒。其中有得永生的，有受羞辱永远被憎恶的。
And a number of those who are sleeping in the dust of the earth will come out of their sleep, some to eternal life and some to eternal shame.

智慧人必发光如同天上的光。那使多人归义的，必发光如星，直到永永远远。
And those who are wise will be shining like the light of the outstretched sky; and those by whom numbers have been turned to righteousness will be like the stars for ever and ever.

但以理阿，你要隐藏这话，封闭这书，直到末时。必有多人来往奔跑（或作切心研究），知识就必增长。
But as for you, O Daniel, let the words be kept secret and the book rolled up and kept shut till the time of the end: numbers will be going out of the way and troubles will be increased.

我但以理观看，见另有两个人站立，一个在河这边，一个在河那边。
Then I, Daniel, looking, saw two others, one at the edge of the river on this side and one at the edge of the river on that side.

有一个问那站在河水以上，穿细麻衣的说，这奇异的事到几时才应验呢？
And I said to the man clothed in linen, who was over the waters of the river, How long will it be to the end of these wonders?

我听见那站在河水以上，穿细麻衣的，向天举起左右手，指着活到永远的主起誓说，要到一载，二载，半载，打破圣民权力的时候，这一切事就都应验了。
Then in my hearing the man clothed in linen, who was over the river, lifting up his right hand and his left hand to heaven, took an oath by him who is living for ever that it would be a time, times, and a half; and when the power of the crusher of the holy people comes to an end, all these things will be ended.

我听见这话，却不明白，就说，我主阿，这些事的结局是怎样呢？
And the words came to my ears, but the sense of them was not clear to me: then I said, O my lord, what is the sense of these things?

他说，但以理阿，你只管去。因为这话已经隐藏封闭，直到末时。
And he said, Go on your way, Daniel: for the words are secret and shut up till the time of the end;

必有许多人使自己清净洁白，且被熬炼。但恶人仍必行恶，一切恶人都不明白，惟独智慧人能明白。
Till a number are tested and make themselves clean; and the evil-doers will do evil; for not one of the evil-doers will have knowledge; but all will be made clear to those who are wise.

从除掉常献的燔祭，并设立那行毁坏可憎之物的时候，必有一千二百九十日。
And from the time when the regular burned offering is taken away, and an unclean thing causing fear is put up, there will be a thousand, two hundred and ninety days.

等到一千三百三十五日的，那人便为有福。
A blessing will be on the man who goes on waiting, and comes to the thousand, three hundred and thirty-five days.

你且去等候结局，因为你必安歇。到了末期，你必起来，享受你的福分。
But you, go on your way and take your rest: for you will be in your place at the end of the days.

