何西阿书 Hosea


当乌西雅，约坦，亚哈斯，希西家作犹大王，约阿施的儿子耶罗波安，作以色列王的时候，耶和华的话临到备利的儿子何西阿。
The word of the Lord which came to Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel.

耶和华初次与何西阿说话，对他说，你去娶淫妇为妻，也收那从淫乱所生的儿女，因为这地大行淫乱，离弃耶和华。
The start of the word of the Lord by Hosea: And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take for yourself a wife of loose ways, and children of the same, for the land has been untrue to the Lord.

于是，何西阿去娶了滴拉音的女儿歌篾。这妇人怀孕，给他生了一个儿子。
So he took as his wife Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, and she gave birth to a son.

耶和华对何西阿说，给他起名叫耶斯列，因为再过片时，我必讨耶户家在耶斯列杀人流血的罪，也必使以色列家的国灭绝。
And the Lord said to him, Give him the name of Jezreel, for after a little time I will send punishment for the blood of Jezreel on the line of Jehu, and put an end to the kingdom of Israel.

到那日，我必在耶斯列平原折断以色列的弓。
And in that day I will let the bow of Israel be broken in the valley of Jezreel.

歌篾又怀孕生了一个女儿，耶和华对何西阿说，给她起名叫罗路哈玛（就是不蒙怜悯的意思），因为我必不再怜悯以色列家，决不赦免他们。
And after that she gave birth to a daughter. And the Lord said, Give her the name Lo-ruhamah; for I will not again have mercy on Israel, to give them forgiveness.

我却要怜悯犹大家，使他们靠耶和华他们的神得救，不使他们靠弓，刀，争战，马匹，与马兵得救。
But I will have mercy on Judah and will give them salvation by the Lord their God, but not by the bow or the sword or by fighting or by horses or horsemen.

歌篾给罗路哈玛断奶以后，又怀孕生了一个儿子。
Now when Lo-ruhamah had been taken from the breast, the woman gave birth to a son.

耶和华说，给他起名叫罗阿米（就是非我民的意思），因为你们不作我的子民，我也不作你们的神。
And the Lord said, Give him the name Lo-ammi; for you are not my people, and I will not be your God.

然而，以色列的人数必如海沙，不可量，不可数。从前在什么地方对他们说，你们不是我的子民，将来在那里必对他们说，你们是永生神的儿子。
But still the number of the children of Israel will be like the sand of the sea, which may not be measured or numbered; and in place of its being said to them, You are not my people, it will be said to them, You are the sons of the living God

犹大人和以色列人，必一同聚集，为自己立一个首领，从这地上去（或作从被掳之地上来），因为耶斯列的日子必为大日。
And the children of Israel and the children of Judah will come together and take for themselves one head, and will go up from the land, for great will be the day of Jezreel.

你们要称你们的弟兄为阿米（就是我民的意思），称你们的姐妹为路哈玛（就是蒙怜悯的意思）。
Say to your brothers, Ammi; and to your sisters, Ruhamah.

你们要与你们的母亲大大争辩，因为她不是我的妻子，我也不是她的丈夫。叫她除掉脸上的淫像，和胸间的淫态。
Take up the cause against your mother, take it up, for she is not my wife, and I am not her husband; let her put away her loose ways from her face, and her false ways from between her breasts;

免得我剥她的衣服，使她赤体，与才生的时候一样，使她如旷野，如干旱之地，因渴而死。
For fear that I may take away her robe from her, making her uncovered as in the day of her birth; making her like a waste place and a dry land, causing her death through need of water.

我必不怜悯她的儿女，因为他们是从淫乱而生的。
And I will have no mercy on her children, for they are the children of her loose ways.

他们的母亲行了淫乱，怀他们的母做了可羞耻的事，因为她说，我要随从所爱的，我的饼，水，羊毛，麻，油，酒都是他们给的。
For their mother has been untrue; she who gave them birth has done things of shame, for she said, I will go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my linen, my oil and my wine.

因此，我必用荆棘堵塞她的道，筑墙挡住她，使她找不着路。
For this cause I will put thorns in her road, building up a wall round her so that she may not go on her way.

她必追随所爱的，却追不上，她必寻找他们，却寻不见，便说，我要归回前夫，因我那时的光景比如今还好。
And if she goes after her lovers she will not overtake them; if she makes search for them she will not see them; then will she say, I will go back to my first husband, for then it was better for me than now.

她不知道是我给她五谷，新酒，和油，又加增她的金银。她却以此供奉（或作制造）巴力。
For she had no knowledge that it was I who gave her the grain and the wine and the oil, increasing her silver and gold which they gave to the Baal.

因此，到了收割的日子，出酒的时候，我必将我的五谷新酒收回，也必将她应当遮体的羊毛和麻，夺回来。
So I will take away again my grain in its time and my wine, and I will take away my wool and my linen with which her body might have been covered.

如今我必在她所爱的眼前，显露她的丑态，必无人能救她脱离我的手。
And now I will make her shame clear before the eyes of her lovers, and no one will take her out of my hand.

我也必使她的宴乐，节期，月朔，安息日，并她的一切大会，都止息了。
And I will put an end to all her joy, her feasts, her new moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her regular meetings.

我也必毁坏她的葡萄树，和无花果树，就是她说，这是我所爱的给我为赏赐的，我必使这些树变为荒林，为田野的走兽所吃。
And I will make waste her vines and her fig-trees, of which she has said, These are the payments which my lovers have made to me; and I will make them a waste of trees, and the beasts of the field will take them for food.

我必追讨她素日给诸巴力烧香的罪，那时她佩带耳环，和别样妆饰，随从她所爱的，却忘记我。这是耶和华说的。
And I will give her punishment for the days of the Baals, to whom she has been burning perfumes, when she made herself fair with her nose-rings and her jewels, and went after her lovers, giving no thought to me, says the Lord.

后来我必劝导她，领她到旷野，对她说安慰的话。
For this cause I will make her come into the waste land and will say words of comfort to her.

她从那里出来。我必赐她葡萄园，又赐她亚割谷作为指望的门，她必在那里应声（或作歌唱），与幼年的日子一样，与从埃及地上来的时候相同。
And I will give her vine-gardens from there, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she will give her answer there as in the days when she was young, and as in the time when she came up out of the land of Egypt.

耶和华说，那日你必称呼我伊施（就是我夫的意思），不再称呼我巴力（就是我主的意思）。
And in that day, says the Lord, you will say to me, Ishi; and you will never again give me the name of Baali;

因为我必从我民的口中除掉诸巴力的名号，这名号不再提起。
For I will take away the names of the Baals out of her mouth, and never again will she say their names.

当那日，我必为我的民，与田野的走兽，和空中的飞鸟，并地上的昆虫立约。又必在国中折断弓刀，止息争战，使他们安然躺卧。
And in that day I will make an agreement for them with the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven and the things which go low on the earth; I will put an end to the bow and the sword and war in all the land, and will make them take their rest in peace.

我必聘你永远归我为妻，以仁义，公平，慈爱，怜悯聘你归我。
And I will take you as my bride for ever; truly, I will take you as my bride in righteousness and in right judging, in love and in mercies.

也以诚实聘你归我，你就必认识我耶和华。
I will take you as my bride in good faith, and you will have knowledge of the Lord.

耶和华说，那日我必应允，我必应允天，天必应允地。
And it will be, in that day, says the Lord, that I will give an answer to the heavens, and the heavens to the earth;

地必应允五谷，新酒，和油，这些必应允耶斯列民（耶斯列就是神栽种的意思）。
And the earth will give its answer to the grain and the wine and the oil, and they will give an answer to Jezreel;

我必将她种在这地，素不蒙怜悯的，我必怜悯，本非我民的，我必对他说，你是我的民，他必说，你是我的神。
And I will put her as seed in the earth, and I will have mercy on her to whom no mercy was given; and I will say to those who were not my people, You are my people, and they will say, My God.

耶和华对我说，你再去爱一个淫妇，就是她情人所爱的，好像以色列人。虽然偏向别神，喜爱葡萄饼，耶和华还是爱他们。
And the Lord said to me, Give your love again to a woman who has a lover and is false to her husband, even as the Lord has love for the children of Israel, though they are turned to other gods and are lovers of grape-cakes.

我便用银子十五舍客勒，大麦一贺梅珥半，买她归我。
So I got her for myself for fifteen shekels of silver and a homer and a half of barley;

我对她说，你当多日为我独居，不可行淫，不可归别人为妻，我向你也必这样。
And I said to her, You are to be mine for a long space of time; you are not to be false to me, and no other man is to have you for his wife; and so will I be to you.

以色列人也必多日独居，无君王，无首领，无祭祀，无柱像，无以弗得，无家中的神像。
For the children of Israel will for a long time be without king and without ruler, without offerings and without pillars, and without ephod or images.

后来以色列人必归回（或作回心转意），寻求他们的神耶和华，和他们的王大卫。在末后的日子，必以敬畏的心归向耶和华，领受他的恩惠。
And after that, the children of Israel will come back and go in search of the Lord their God and David their king; and they will come in fear to the Lord and to his mercies in the days to come.

以色列人哪，你们当听耶和华的话。耶和华与这地的居民争辩，因这地上无诚实，无良善，无人认识神。
Give ear to the word of the Lord, O children of Israel; for the Lord has a cause against the people of this land, because there is no good faith in it, and no mercy and no knowledge of God in the land.

但起假誓，不践前言，杀害，偷盗，奸淫，行强暴，杀人流血，接连不断。
There is cursing and broken faith, violent death and attacks on property, men are untrue in married life, houses are broken into, and there is blood touching blood.

因此，这地悲哀，其上的民，田野的兽，空中的鸟，必都衰微，海中的鱼也必消灭。
Because of this the land will be dry, and everyone living in it will be wasted away, with the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven; even the fishes of the sea will be taken away.

然而，人都不必争辩，也不必指责，因为这民与抗拒祭司的人一样。
Let no man go to law or make protests, for your people are like those who go to law with a priest.

你这祭司必日间跌倒，先知也必夜间与你一同跌倒。我必灭绝你的母亲。
You will not be able to keep on your feet by day, and by night the prophet will be falling down with you, and I will give your mother to destruction.

我的民因无知识而灭亡。你弃掉知识，我也必弃掉你，使你不再给我作祭司。你既忘了你神的律法，我也必忘记你的儿女。
Destruction has overtaken my people because they have no knowledge; because you have given up knowledge, I will give you up, so that you will be no priest to me, because you have not kept in mind the law of your God, I will not keep your children in my memory.

祭司越发增多，就越发得罪我。我必使他们的荣耀变为羞辱。
Even while they were increasing in number they were sinning against me; I will let their glory be changed into shame.

他们吃我民的赎罪祭，满心愿意我民犯罪。
The sin of my people is like food to them; and their desire is for their wrongdoing.

将来民如何，祭司也必如何，我必因他们所行的惩罚他们，照他们所做的报应他们。
And the priest will be like the people; I will give them punishment for their evil ways, and the reward of their acts.

他们吃，却不得饱。行淫，而不得立后。因为他们离弃耶和华，不遵他的命。
They will have food, but they will not be full; they will be false to me, but they will not be increased, because they no longer give thought to the Lord.

奸淫和酒，并新酒，夺去人的心。
Loose ways and new wine take away wisdom.

我的民求问木偶，以为木杖能指示他们，因为他们的淫心使他们失迷，他们就行淫离弃神，不守约束。
My people get knowledge from their tree, and their rod gives them news; for a false spirit is the cause of their wandering, and they have been false to their God.

在各山顶，各高冈的橡树，杨树，栗树之下，献祭烧香，因为树影美好。所以，你们的女儿淫乱，你们的新妇（或作儿妇下同）行淫。
They make offerings on the tops of mountains, burning perfumes in high places, under trees of every sort, because their shade is good: and so your daughters are given up to loose ways and your brides are false to their husbands.

你们的女儿淫乱，你们的新妇行淫，我却不惩罚她们，因为你们自己离群与娼妓同居，与妓女一同献祭。这无知的民必致倾倒。
I will not give punishment to your daughters or your brides for their evil behaviour; for they make themselves separate with loose women, and make offerings with those who are used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods: the people who have no wisdom will be sent away.

以色列阿，你虽然行淫，犹大却不可犯罪。不要往吉甲去，不要上到伯亚文，也不要指着永生的耶和华起誓。
Do not you, O Israel, come into error; do not you, O Judah, come to Gilgal, or go up to Beth-aven, or take an oath, By the living Lord.

以色列倔强，犹如倔强的母牛。现在耶和华要放他们，如同放羊羔在宽阔之地。
For Israel is uncontrolled, like a cow which may not be controlled; now will the Lord give them food like a lamb in a wide place.

以法莲亲近偶像，任凭他吧。
Ephraim is joined to false gods; let him be.

他们所喝的已经发酸。他们时常行淫，他们的官长最爱羞耻的事。
Their drink has become bitter; they are completely false; her rulers take pleasure in shame.

风把他们裹在翅膀里。他们因所献的祭必致蒙羞。
They are folded in the skirts of the wind; they will be shamed because of their offerings.

众祭司阿，要听我的话，以色列家阿，要留心听。王家阿，要侧耳而听。审判要临到你们，因你们在米斯巴如网罗，在他泊山如铺张的网。
Give ear to this, O priests; give attention, O Israel, and you, family of the king; for you are to be judged; you have been a deceit at Mizpah and a net stretched out on Tabor.

这些悖逆的人，肆行杀戮，罪孽极深。我却斥责他们众人。
They have gone deep in the evil ways of Shittim, but I am the judge of all.

以法莲为我所知，以色列不能向我隐藏。以法莲哪，现在你行淫了，以色列被玷污了。
I have knowledge of Ephraim, and Israel is not secret from me; for now, O Ephraim, you have been false to me, Israel has become unclean.

他们所行的使他们不能归向神，因有淫心在他们里面，他们也不认识耶和华。
Their works will not let them come back to their God, for a false spirit is in them and they have no knowledge of the Lord.

以色列的骄傲当面见证自己。故此，以色列和以法莲必因自己的罪孽跌倒，犹大也必与他们一同跌倒。
And the pride of Israel gives an answer to his face; and Ephraim will have a fall through his sins, and the fall of Judah will be the same as theirs.

他们必牵着牛羊去寻求耶和华，却寻不见，他已经转去离开他们。
They will go, with their flocks and their herds, in search of the Lord, but they will not see him; he has taken himself out of their view.

他们向耶和华行事诡诈，生了私子。到了月朔，他们与他们的地业必被吞灭。
They have been false to the Lord; they have given birth to strange children; now the new moon will make them waste with their fields.

你们当在基比亚吹角，在拉玛吹号，在伯亚文吹出大声，说，便雅悯哪，有仇敌在你后头。
Let the horn be sounded in Gibeah and in Ramah; give a loud cry in Beth-aven, They are after you, O Benjamin.

在责罚的日子，以法莲必变为荒场。我在以色列支派中。指示将来必成的事。
Ephraim will become a waste in the day of punishment; I have given knowledge among the tribes of Israel of what is certain.

犹大的首领如同挪移地界的人，我必将忿怒倒在他们身上，如水一般。
The rulers of Judah are like those who take away a landmark; I will let loose my wrath on them like flowing water.

以法莲因乐从人的命令，就受欺压，被审判压碎。
Ephraim is troubled; he is crushed by his judges, because he took pleasure in walking after deceit.

我使以法莲如虫蛀之物，使犹大家如朽烂之木。
And so to Ephraim I am like a wasting insect, and a destruction to the children of Judah.

以法莲见自己有病，犹大见自己有伤，他们就打发人往亚述去见耶雷布王，他却不能医治你们，不能治好你们的伤。
When Ephraim saw his disease and Judah his wound, then Ephraim went to Assyria and sent to the great king; but he is not able to make you well or give you help for your wound.

我必向以法莲如狮子，向犹大家如少壮狮子。我必撕裂而去，我要夺去，无人搭救。
For I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the children of Judah; I, even I, will give him wounds and go away; I will take him away, and there will be no helper.

我要回到原处，等他们自觉有罪（或作承认己罪），寻求我面，他们在急难的时候，必切切寻求我。
I will go back to my place till they are made waste; in their trouble they will go after me early and will make search for me.

来吧，我们归向耶和华。他撕裂我们，也必医治。他打伤我们，也必缠裹。
Come, let us go back to the Lord; for he has given us wounds and he will make us well; he has given blows and he will give help.

过两天他必使我们苏醒，第三天他必使我们兴起，我们就在他面前得以存活。
After two days he will give us life, and on the third day he will make us get up, and we will be living before him.

我们务要认识耶和华，竭力追求认识他。他出现确如晨光，他必临到我们像甘雨，像滋润田地的春雨。
And let us have knowledge, let us go after the knowledge of the Lord; his going out is certain as the dawn, his decisions go out like the light; he will come to us like the rain, like the spring rain watering the earth.

主说，以法莲哪，我可向你怎样行呢？犹大阿，我可向你怎样做呢？因为你们的良善，如同早晨的云雾，又如速散的甘露。
O Ephraim, what am I to do to you? O Judah, what am I to do to you? For your love is like a morning cloud, and like the dew which goes early away.

因此，我借先知砍伐他们，以我口中的话杀戮他们，我施行的审判如光发出。
So I have had it cut in stones; I gave them teaching by the words of my mouth;

我喜爱良善（或作怜恤），不喜爱祭祀，喜爱认识神，胜于燔祭。
Because my desire is for mercy and not offerings; for the knowledge of God more than for burned offerings.

他们却如亚当背约，在境内向我行事诡诈。
But like a man, they have gone against the agreement; there they were false to me.

基列是作孽之人的城。被血沾染。
Gilead is a town of evil-doers, marked with blood.

强盗成群，怎样埋伏杀人。祭司结党，也照样在示剑的路上杀戮，行了邪恶。
And like a band of thieves waiting for a man, so are the priests watching secretly the way of those going quickly to Shechem, for they are working with an evil design.

在以色列家，我见了可憎的事。在以法莲那里有淫行，以色列被玷污。
In Israel I have seen a very evil thing; there false ways are seen in Ephraim, Israel is unclean;

犹大阿，我使被掳之民归回的时候，必有为你所命定的收场。
And Judah has put up disgusting images for himself.

我想医治以色列的时候，以法莲的罪孽，和撒玛利亚的罪恶，就显露出来。他们行事虚谎，内有贼人入室偷窃，外有强盗成群骚扰。
When my desire was for the fate of my people to be changed and to make Israel well, then the sin of Ephraim was made clear, and the evil-doing of Samaria; for their ways are false, and the thief comes into the house, while the band of outlaws takes property by force in the streets.

他们心里并不思想我记念他们的一切恶，他们所行的现在缠绕他们，都在我面前。
And they do not say to themselves that I keep in mind all their sin; now their evil acts come round them on every side; they are before my face.

他们行恶使君王欢喜，说谎使首领喜乐。
In their sin they make a king for themselves, and rulers in their deceit.

他们都是行淫的，像火炉被烤饼的烧热，从抟面到发面的时候，暂不使火着旺。
They are all untrue; they are like a burning oven; the bread-maker does not make up the fire from the time when the paste is mixed till it is leavened.

在我们王宴乐的日子，首领因酒的烈性成病。王与亵慢人拉手。
On the day of our king, the rulers made him ill with the heat of wine; his hand was stretched out with the men of pride.

首领埋伏的时候，心中热如火炉，就如烤饼的整夜睡卧，到了早晨火气炎炎。
For they have made their hearts ready like an oven, while they are waiting secretly; their wrath is sleeping all night; in the morning it is burning like a flaming fire.

众民也热如火炉，烧灭他们的官长。他们的君王都仆倒而死。他们中间无一人求告我。
They are all heated like an oven, and they put an end to their judges; all their kings have been made low; not one among them makes prayer to me.

以法莲与列邦人搀杂。以法莲是没有翻过的饼。
Ephraim is mixed with the peoples; Ephraim is a cake not turned.

外邦人吞吃他劳力得来的，他却不知道，头发斑白，他也不觉得。
Men from other lands have made waste his strength, and he is not conscious of it; grey hairs have come on him here and there, and he has no knowledge of it.

以色列的骄傲当面见证自己，虽遭遇这一切，他们仍不归向耶和华他们的神，也不寻求他。
And the pride of Israel gives an answer to his face; but for all this, they have not gone back to the Lord their God, or made search for him.

以法莲好像鸽子愚蠢无知。他们求告埃及，投奔亚述。
And Ephraim is like a foolish dove, without wisdom; they send out their cry to Egypt, they go to Assyria.

他们去的时候，我必将我的网撒在他们身上，我要打下他们，如同空中的鸟。我必按他们会众所听见的惩罚他们。
When they go, my net will be stretched out over them; I will take them like the birds of heaven, I will give them punishment, I will take them away in the net for their sin.

他们因离弃我，必定有祸，因违背我，必被毁灭。我虽要救赎他们，他们却向我说谎。
May trouble be theirs! for they have gone far away from me; and destruction, for they have been sinning against me; I was ready to be their saviour, but they said false words against me.

他们并不诚心哀求我，乃在床上呼号。他们为求五谷新酒聚集，仍然悖逆我。
And they have not made prayer to me in their hearts, but they make loud cries on their beds; they are cutting themselves for food and wine, they are turned against me.

我虽教导他们，坚固他们的膀臂，他们竟图谋抗拒我。
Though I have given training and strength to their arms, they have evil designs against me.

他们归向，却不归向至上者。他们如同翻背的弓。他们的首领必因舌头的狂傲倒在刀下，这在埃及地必作人的讥笑。
They have gone to what is of no value; they are like a false bow; their captains will come to destruction by the sword, and their ruler by my wrath; for this, the land of Egypt will make sport of them.

你用口吹角吧。敌人如鹰来攻打耶和华的家，因为这民违背我的约，干犯我的律法。
Put the horn to your mouth. He comes like an eagle against the house of the Lord; because they have gone against my agreement, they have not kept my law.

他们必呼叫我说，我的神阿，我们以色列认识你了。
They will send up to me a cry for help: We, Israel, have knowledge of you, O God of Israel.

以色列丢弃良善（或作福分），仇敌必追逼他。
Israel has given up what is good; his haters will go after him.

他们立君王，却不由我，他们立首领，我却不认。他们用金银为自己制造偶像，以致被剪除。
They have put up kings, but not by me; they have made princes, but I had no knowledge of it; they have made images of silver and gold, so that they may be cut off.

撒玛利亚阿，耶和华已经丢弃你的牛犊。我的怒气向拜牛犊的人发作。他们到几时方能无罪呢？
I will have nothing to do with your young ox, O Samaria; my wrath is burning against them; how long will it be before the children of Israel make themselves clean?

这牛犊出于以色列，是匠人所造的，并不是神。撒玛利亚的牛犊必被打碎。
The workman made it, it is no god; the ox of Samaria will be broken into bits.

他们所种的是风，所收的是暴风，所种的不成禾稼，就是发苗也不结实。即便结实，外邦人必吞吃。
For they have been planting the wind, and their fruit will be the storm; his grain has no stem, it will give no meal, and if it does, a strange nation will take it.

以色列被吞吃，现今在列国中，好像人不喜悦的器皿。
Israel has come to destruction; now they are among the nations like a cup in which there is no pleasure.

他们投奔亚述，如同独行的野驴。以法莲贿买朋党。
For they have gone up to Assyria like an ass going by himself; Ephraim has given money to get lovers.

他们虽在列邦中贿买人，现在我却要聚集惩罚他们。他们因君王和首领所加的重担，日渐衰微。
But though they give money to the nations for help, still I will send them in all directions; and in a short time they will be without a king and rulers.

以法莲增添祭坛取罪，因此，祭坛使他犯罪。
Because Ephraim has been increasing altars for sin, altars have become a cause of sin to him.

我为他写了律法万条，他却以为与他毫无关涉。
Though I put my law in writing for him in ten thousand rules, they are to him as a strange thing.

至于献给我的祭物，他们自食其肉，耶和华却不悦纳他们。现在必记念他们的罪孽，追讨他们的罪恶，他们必归回埃及。
He gives the offerings of his lovers, and takes the flesh for food; but the Lord has no pleasure in them; now he will keep in mind their evil-doing and give them the punishment of their sins; they will go back to Egypt.

以色列忘记造他的主，建造宫殿。犹大多造坚固城，我却要降火焚烧他的城邑，烧灭其中的宫殿。
For Israel has no memory of his Maker, and has put up the houses of kings; and Judah has made great the number of his walled towns. But I will send a fire on his towns and put an end to his great houses.

以色列阿，不要像外邦人欢喜快乐，因为你行邪淫离弃你的神，在各谷场上如妓女喜爱赏赐。
Have no joy, O Israel, and do not be glad like the nations; for you have been untrue to your God; your desire has been for the loose woman's reward on every grain-floor.

谷场和酒榨，都不够以色列人使用，新酒也必缺乏。
The grain-floor and the place where the grapes are crushed will not give them food; there will be no new wine for them.

他们必不得住耶和华的地，以法莲却要归回埃及，必在亚述吃不洁净的食物。
They will have no resting-place in the Lord's land, but Ephraim will go back to Egypt, and they will take unclean food in Assyria.

他们必不得向耶和华奠酒，即便奠酒也不蒙悦纳。他们的祭物，必如居丧者的食物，凡吃的必被玷污，因他们的食物，只为自己的口腹，必不奉入耶和华的殿。
They will give no wine offering to the Lord, they will not make offerings ready for him; their bread will be like the bread of those in sorrow; all who take it will be unclean, because their bread will be only for their desire, it will not come into the house of the Lord.

在大会的日子，到耶和华的节期，你们怎样行呢？
What will you do on the day of worship, and on the day of the feast of the Lord?

看哪，他们逃避灾难，埃及人必收殓他们的尸首，摩弗人必葬埋他们的骸骨。他们用银子做的美物上必长蒺藜，他们的帐棚中必生荆棘。
For see, they are going away into Assyria; Egypt will get them together, Memphis will be their last resting-place; their fair silver vessels will be covered over with field plants, and thorns will come up in their tents.

以色列人必知道降罚的日子临近，报应的时候来到。（民说，作先知的是愚昧，受灵感的是狂妄皆因他们多多作孽，大怀怨恨。
The days of punishment, the days of reward are come; Israel will be put to shame; the prophet is foolish, the man who has the spirit is off his head, because of your great sin.

以法莲曾作我神守望的，至于先知，在他一切的道上作为捕鸟人的网罗，在他神的家中怀怨恨。
There is great hate against the watchman of Ephraim, the people of my God; as for the prophet, there is a net in all his ways, and hate in the house of his God.

以法莲深深地败坏，如在基比亚的日子一样，耶和华必记念他们的罪孽，追讨他们的罪恶。
They have gone deep in evil as in the days of Gibeah; he will keep in mind their wrongdoing, he will give them punishment for their sins.

主说，我遇见以色列如葡萄在旷野，我看见你们的列祖如无花果树上春季初熟的果子。他们却来到巴力毗珥专拜那可羞耻的，就成为可憎恶的，与他们所爱的一样。
I made discovery of Israel as of grapes in the waste land; I saw your fathers as the first-fruits of the fig-tree in her early fruit time; but they came to Baal-peor, and made themselves holy to the thing of shame, and became disgusting like that to which they gave their love.

至于以法莲人，他们的荣耀必如鸟飞去，必不生产，不怀胎，不成孕。
As for Ephraim, their glory will go in flight like a bird: there will be no birth and no one with child and no giving of life.

纵然养大儿女，我却必使他们丧子，甚至不留一个。我离弃他们，他们就有祸了。
Even though their children have come to growth I will take them away, so that not a man will be there; for their evil-doing will be complete and they will be put to shame because of it.

我看以法莲如推罗栽于美地。以法莲却要将自己的儿女带出来，交与行杀戮的人。
As I have seen a beast whose young have been taken from her, so Ephraim will give birth to children only for them to be put to death.

耶和华阿，求你加给他们加什么呢？要使他们胎坠乳干。
O Lord, what will you give them? Give them bodies which may not give birth and breasts without milk.

耶和华说，他们一切的恶事都在吉甲，我在那里憎恶他们，因他们所行的恶，我必从我地上赶出他们去，不再怜爱他们，他们的首领都是悖逆的。
All their evil-doing is in Gilgal; there I had hate for them; because of their evil-doing I will send them out of my house; they will no longer be dear to me; all their rulers are uncontrolled.

以法莲受责罚，根本枯干，必不能结果，即或生产，我必杀他们所生的爱子。
The rod has come on Ephraim, their root is dry, let them have no fruit; even though they give birth, I will put to death the dearest fruit of their bodies.

我的神必弃绝他们，因为他们不听从他，他们也必飘流在列国中。
My God will give them up because they did not give ear to him; they will be wandering among the nations.

以色列是茂盛的葡萄树，结果繁多，果子越多，就越增添祭坛。地土越肥美，就越造美丽的柱像。
Israel is a branching vine, full of fruit; as his fruit is increased, so the number of his altars is increased; as the land is fair, so they have made fair pillars.

他们心怀二意，现今要定为有罪。耶和华必拆毁他们的祭坛，毁坏他们的柱像。
Their mind is taken away; now they will be made waste: he will have their altars broken down, he will give their pillars to destruction.

他们必说，我们没有王，因为我们不敬畏耶和华。王能为我们做什么呢？
Now, truly, they will say, We have no king, we have no fear of the Lord; and the king, what is he able to do for us?

他们为立约说谎言，起假誓，因此，灾罚如苦菜滋生在田间的犁沟中。
Their words are foolish; they make agreements with false oaths, so punishment will come up like a poison-plant in a ploughed field.

撒玛利亚的居民，必因伯亚文的牛犊惊恐，崇拜牛犊的民，和喜爱牛犊的祭司，都必因荣耀离开他，为他悲哀。
The people of Samaria will be full of fear because of the ox of Beth-aven; its people will have sorrow for it, and its priests will give cries of grief for its glory, for the glory has gone in flight.

人必将牛犊带到亚述当作礼物，献给耶雷布王。以法莲必蒙羞，以色列必因自己的计谋惭愧。
And they will take it to Assyria and give it to the great king; shame will come on Ephraim, and Israel will be shamed because of its image.

至于撒玛利亚，她的王必灭没，如水面的沫子一样。
As for Samaria, her king is cut off, like mist on the water.

伯亚文的丘坛就是以色列取罪的地方，必被毁灭，荆棘和蒺藜必长在他们的祭坛上，他们必对大山说，遮盖我们，对小山说，倒在我们身上。
And the high places of Aven, the sin of Israel, will come to destruction; thorns and waste plants will come up on their altars; they will say to the mountains, Be a cover over us; and to the hills, Come down on us.

以色列阿，你从基比亚的日子以来，时常犯罪。你们的先人曾站在那里，现今住基比亚的人以为攻击罪孽之辈的战事临不到自己。
O Israel, you have done evil from the days of Gibeah; there they took up their position, so that the fighting against the children of evil might not overtake them in Gibeah.

我必随意惩罚他们。他们为两样的罪所缠，列邦的民必聚集攻击他们。
I will come and give them punishment; and the peoples will come together against them when I give them the reward of their two sins.

以法莲是驯良的母牛犊，喜爱踹谷，我却将轭加在它肥美的颈项上，我要使以法莲拉套（或作被骑）。犹大必耕田，雅各必耙地。
And Ephraim is a trained cow, taking pleasure in crushing the grain; but I have put a yoke on her fair neck; I will put a horseman on the back of Ephraim; Judah will be working the plough, Jacob will be turning up the earth.

你们要为自己栽种公义，就能收割慈爱。现今正是寻求耶和华的时候，你们要开垦荒地，等他临到，使公义如雨降在你们身上。
Put in the seed of righteousness, get in your grain in mercy, let your unploughed earth be turned up: for it is time to make search for the Lord, till he comes and sends righteousness on you like rain.

你们耕种的是奸恶，收割的是罪孽，吃的是谎话的果子。因你倚靠自己的行为，仰赖勇士众多。
You have been ploughing sin, you have got in a store of evil, the fruit of deceit has been your food: for you put faith in your way, in the number of your men of war.

所以在这民中必有哄嚷之声，你一切的保障必被拆毁，就如沙勒幔在争战的日子拆毁伯亚比勒，将其中的母子一同摔死。
So a great outcry will go up from among your people, and all your strong places will be broken, as Beth-arbel was broken by Shalman in the day of war, as the mother was broken on the rocks with her children.

因他们的大恶，伯特利必使你们遭遇如此。到了黎明，以色列的王必全然灭绝。
So will Beth-el do to you because of your evil-doing; at dawn will the king of Israel be cut off completely.

以色列年幼的时候，我爱他，就从埃及召出我的儿子来。
When Israel was a child he was dear to me; and I took my son out of Egypt.

先知越发招呼他们，他们越发走开，向诸巴力献祭，给雕刻的偶像烧香。
When I sent for them, then they went away from me; they made offerings to the Baals, burning perfumes to images.

我原教导以法莲行走，用膀臂抱着他们，他们却不知道是我医治他们。
But I was guiding Ephraim's footsteps; I took them up in my arms, but they were not conscious that I was ready to make them well.

我用慈绳（慈原文是人的）爱索牵引他们，我待他们如人放松牛的两腮夹板，把粮食放在他们面前。
I made them come after me with the cords of a man, with the bands of love; I was to them as one who took the yoke from off their mouths, putting meat before them.

他们必不归回埃及地，亚述人却要作他们的王，因他们不肯归向我。
He will go back to the land of Egypt and the Assyrian will be his king, because they would not come back to me.

刀剑必临到他们的城邑，毁坏门闩，把人吞灭，都因他们随从自己的计谋。
And the sword will go through his towns, wasting his children and causing destruction because of their evil designs.

我的民偏要背道离开我，众先知虽然招呼他们归向至上的主，却无人尊崇主。
My people are given up to sinning against me; though their voice goes up on high, no one will be lifting them up.

以法莲哪，我怎能舍弃你，以色列阿，我怎能弃绝你，我怎能使你如押玛，怎能使你如洗扁，我回心转意，我的怜爱大大发动。
How may I give you up, O Ephraim? how may I be your saviour, O Israel? how may I make you like Admah? how may I do to you as I did to Zeboim? My heart is turned in me, it is soft with pity.

我必不发猛烈的怒气，也不再毁灭以法莲，因我是神，并非世人，是你们中间的圣者，我必不在怒中临到你们。
I will not put into effect the heat of my wrath; I will not again send destruction on Ephraim; for I am God and not man, the Holy One among you; I will not put an end to you.

耶和华必如狮子吼叫，子民必跟随他。他一吼叫，他们就从西方急速而来。
They will go after the Lord; his cry will be like that of a lion; his cry will be loud, and the children will come from the west, shaking with fear;

他们必如雀鸟从埃及急速而来，又如鸽子从亚述地来到，我必使他们住自己的房屋。这是耶和华说的。
Shaking with fear like a bird, they will come out of Egypt, like a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will give them rest in their houses, says the Lord.

以法莲用谎话，以色列家用诡计围绕我，犹大却靠神掌权，向圣者有忠心。（或作犹大向神，向诚实的圣者犹疑不定）。
The deceit of Ephraim and the false words of Israel are about me on every side. ...

以法莲吃风，且追赶东风。时常增添虚谎和强暴。与亚述立约，把油送到埃及。
Ephraim's food is the wind, and he goes after the east wind: deceit and destruction are increasing day by day; they make an agreement with Assyria, and take oil into Egypt.

耶和华与犹大争辩，必照雅各所行的惩罚他，按他所做的报应他。
The Lord has a cause against Judah, and will give punishment to Jacob for his ways; he will give him the reward of his acts.

他在腹中抓住哥哥的脚跟，壮年的时候与神较力。
In the body of his mother he took his brother by the foot, and in his strength he was fighting with God;

与天使较力，并且得胜，哭泣恳求，在伯特利遇见耶和华。耶和华万军之神在那里晓谕我们以色列人，耶和华是他可记念的名。
He had a fight with the angel and overcame him; he made request for grace to him with weeping; he came face to face with him in Beth-el and there his words came to him;


Even the Lord, the God of armies; the Lord is his name.

所以你当归向你的神，谨守仁爱，公平，常常等候你的神。
So then, come back to your God; keep mercy and right, and be waiting at all times on your God.

以法莲是商人，手里有诡诈的天平，爱行欺骗。
As for Canaan, the scales of deceit are in his hands; he takes pleasure in twisted ways.

以法莲说，我果然成了富足，得了财宝，我所劳碌得来的，人必不见有什么不义，可算为罪的。
And Ephraim said, Now I have got wealth and much property; in all my works no sin may be seen in me.

自从你出埃及地以来，我就是耶和华你的神，我必使你再住帐棚，如在大会的日子一样。
But I am the Lord your God from the land of Egypt; I will give you tents for your living-places again as in the days of the holy meeting.

我已晓谕众先知，并且加增默示，借先知设立比喻。
My word came to the ears of the prophets and I gave them visions in great number, and by the mouths of the prophets I made use of comparisons.

基列人没有罪孽吗？他们全然是虚假的。人在吉甲献牛犊为祭，他们的祭坛，好像田间犁沟中的乱堆。
In Gilead there is evil. They are quite without value; in Gilgal they make offerings of oxen; truly their altars are like masses of stones in the hollows of a ploughed field.

从前雅各逃到亚兰地，以色列为得妻服事人，为得妻与人放羊。
And Jacob went in flight into the field of Aram, and Israel became a servant for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.

耶和华借先知领以色列从埃及上来，以色列也借先知而得保存。
And by a prophet the Lord made Israel come up out of Egypt, and by a prophet he was kept safe.

以法莲大大惹动主怒，所以他流血的罪，必归在他身上，主必将那因以法莲所受的羞辱归还他。
I have been bitterly moved to wrath by Ephraim; so that his blood will be on him, and the Lord will make his shame come back on him.

从前以法莲说话，人都战兢，他在以色列中居处高位，但他在事奉巴力的事上犯罪就死了。
When the words of my law came from Ephraim, he was lifted up in Israel; but when he did evil through the Baal, death overtook him.

现今他们罪上加罪，用银子为自己铸造偶像，就是照自己的聪明制造。都是匠人的工作，有人论说，献祭的人可以向牛犊亲嘴。
And now their sins are increased; they have made themselves a metal image, false gods from their silver, after their designs, all of them the work of the metal-workers; they say of them, Let them give offerings, let men give kisses to the oxen.

因此，他们必如早晨的云雾，又如速散的甘露，像场上的糠秕被狂风吹去，又像烟气腾于窗外。
So they will be like the morning cloud, like the dew which goes early away, like the dust of the grain which the wind is driving out of the crushing-floor, like smoke going up from the fireplace.

自从你出埃及地以来，我就是耶和华你的神。在我以外，你不可认识别神，除我以外并没有救主。
But I am the Lord your God, from the land of Egypt; you have knowledge of no other God and there is no saviour but me.

我曾在旷野干旱之地认识你。
I had knowledge of you in the waste land where no water was.

这些民照我所赐的食物得了饱足，既得饱足，心就高傲，忘记了我。
When I gave them food they were full, and their hearts were full of pride, and they did not keep me in mind.

因此，我向他们如狮子，又如豹伏在道旁。
So I will be like a lion to them; as a cruel beast I will keep watch by the road;

我遇见他们必像丢崽子的母熊，撕裂他们的胸膛（或作心膜），在那里，我必像母狮吞吃他们。野兽必撕裂他们。
I will come face to face with them like a bear whose young ones have been taken from her, and their inmost hearts will be broken; there the dogs will make a meal of them; they will be wounded by the beasts of the field.

以色列阿，你与我反对，就是反对帮助你的，自取败坏。
I have sent destruction on you, O Israel; who will be your helper?

你曾求我说，给我立王和首领，现在你的王在哪里呢？治理你的在哪里呢？让他在你所有的城中拯救你吧。
Where is your king, that he may be your saviour? and all your rulers, that they may take up your cause? of whom you said, Give me a king and rulers.

我在怒气中将王赐你，又在烈怒中将王废去。
I have given you a king, because I was angry, and have taken him away in my wrath.

以法莲的罪孽包裹，他的罪恶收藏。
The wrongdoing of Ephraim is shut up; his sin is put away in secret.

产妇的疼痛必临到他身上。他是无智慧之子，到了产期不当迟延。
The pains of a woman in childbirth will come on him: he is an unwise son, for at this time it is not right for him to keep his place when children come to birth.

我必救赎他们脱离阴间，救赎他们脱离死亡。死亡阿，你的灾害在哪里呢？阴间哪，你的毁灭在哪里呢？在我眼前绝无后悔之事。
I will give the price to make them free from the power of the underworld, I will be their saviour from death: O death! where are your pains? O underworld! where is your destruction? my eyes will have no pity.

他在弟兄中虽然茂盛，必有东风刮来，就是耶和华的风从旷野上来，他的泉源必干，他的源头必竭，仇敌必掳掠他所积蓄的一切宝器。
Though he gives fruit among his brothers, an east wind will come, the wind of the Lord coming up from the waste land, and his spring will become dry, his fountain will be without water: it will make waste the store of all the vessels of his desire.

撒玛利亚必担当自己的罪，因为悖逆她的神。她必倒在刀下，婴孩必被摔死。孕妇必被剖开。
Samaria will be made waste, for she has gone against her God: they will be cut down by the sword, their little children will be broken on the rocks, their women who are with child will be cut open.

以色列阿，你要归向耶和华你的神。你是因自己的罪孽跌倒了。
O Israel, come back to the Lord your God; for your evil-doing has been the cause of your fall.

当归向耶和华，用言语祷告他说，求你除净罪孽，悦纳善行，这样。我们就把嘴唇的祭，代替牛犊献上。
Take with you words, and come back to the Lord; say to him, Let there be forgiveness for all wrongdoing, so that we may take what is good, and give in payment the fruit of our lips.

我们不向亚述求救。不骑埃及的马。也不再对我们手所造的说，你是我们的神。因为孤儿在你耶和华那里得蒙怜悯。
Assyria will not be our salvation; we will not go on horses; we will not again say to the work of our hands, You are our gods; for in you there is mercy for the child who has no father.

我必医治他们背道的病，甘心爱他们，因为我的怒气向他们转消。
I will put right their errors; freely will my love be given to them, for my wrath is turned away from him.

我必向以色列如甘露，他必如百合花开放，如利巴嫩的树木扎根。
I will be as the dew to Israel; he will put out flowers like a lily, and send out his roots like Lebanon.

他的枝条必延长，他的荣华如橄榄树，他的香气如利巴嫩的香柏树。
His branches will be stretched out, he will be beautiful as the olive-tree and sweet-smelling as Lebanon.

曾住在他荫下的必归回，发旺如五谷。开花如葡萄树。他的香气如利巴嫩的酒。
They will come back and have rest in his shade; their life will be made new like the grain, and they will put out flowers like the vine; his name will be like the wine of Lebanon.

以法莲必说，我与偶像还有什么关涉呢？我耶和华回答他，也必顾念他。我如青翠的松树，你的果子从我而得。
As for Ephraim, what has he to do with false gods any longer? I have given an answer and I will keep watch over him; I am like a branching fir-tree, from me comes your fruit.

谁是智慧人，可以明白这些事，谁是通达人，可以知道这一切。因为，耶和华的道是正直的，义人必在其中行走，罪人却在其上跌倒。
He who is wise will see these things; he who has good sense will have knowledge of them. For the ways of the Lord are straight, and the upright will go in them, but sinners will be falling in them.

