以色列的众子，各带家眷和雅各一同来到埃及，他们的名字记在下面。
Now these are the names of the sons of Israel who came into Egypt; every man and his family came with Jacob.

有流便，西缅，利未，犹大，
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah;

以萨迦，西布伦，便雅悯，
Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin;

但，拿弗他利，迦得，亚设。
Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.

凡从雅各而生的，共有七十人。约瑟已经在埃及。
All the offspring of Jacob were seventy persons: and Joseph had come to Egypt before them.

约瑟和他的弟兄，并那一代的人都死了。
Then Joseph came to his end, and all his brothers, and all that generation.

以色列人生养众多，并且繁茂，极其强盛，满了那地。
And the children of Israel were fertile, increasing very greatly in numbers and in power; and the land was full of them.

有不认识约瑟的新王起来，治理埃及，
Now a new king came to power in Egypt, who had no knowledge of Joseph.

对他的百姓说，看哪，这以色列民比我们还多，又比我们强盛。
And he said to his people, See, the people of Israel are greater in number and in power than we are:

来吧，我们不如用巧计待他们，恐怕他们多起来，日后若遇什么争战的事，就连合我们的仇敌攻击我们，离开这地去了。
Let us take care for fear that their numbers may become even greater, and if there is a war, they may be joined with those who are against us, and make an attack on us, and go up out of the land.

于是埃及人派督工的辖制他们，加重担苦害他们。他们为法老建造两座积货城，就是比东和兰塞。
So they put overseers of forced work over them, in order to make their strength less by the weight of their work. And they made store-towns for Pharaoh, Pithom and Raamses.

只是越发苦害他们，他们越发多起来，越发蔓延，埃及人就因以色列人愁烦。
But the more cruel they were to them, the more their number increased, till all the land was full of them. And the children of Israel were hated by the Egyptians.

埃及人严严地使以色列人作工，
And they gave the children of Israel even harder work to do:

使他们因作苦工觉得命苦，无论是和泥，是做砖，是作田间各样的工，在一切的工上都严严地待他们。
And made their lives bitter with hard work, making building-material and bricks, and doing all sorts of work in the fields under the hardest conditions.

有希伯来的两个收生婆，一名施弗拉，一名普阿，埃及王对她们说，
And the king of Egypt said to the Hebrew women who gave help at the time of childbirth (the name of the one was Shiphrah and the name of the other Puah),

你们为希伯来妇人收生，看她们临盆的时候，若是男孩，就把他杀了，若是女孩，就留她存活。
When you are looking after the Hebrew women in childbirth, if it is a son you are to put him to death; but if it is a daughter, she may go on living.

但是收生婆敬畏神，不照埃及王的吩咐行，竟存留男孩的性命。
But the women had the fear of God, and did not do as the king of Egypt said, but let the male children go on living.

埃及王召了收生婆来，说，你们为什么作这事，存留男孩的性命呢？
And the king of Egypt sent for the women, and said to them, Why have you done this, and let the male children go on living?

收生婆对法老说，因为希伯来妇人与埃及妇人不同，希伯来妇人本是健壮的（原文作活泼的），收生婆还没有到，她们已经生产了。
And they said to Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not like the Egyptian women, for they are strong, and the birth takes place before we come to them.

神厚待收生婆。以色列人多起来，极其强盛。
And the blessing of God was on these women: and the people were increased in number and became very strong.

收生婆因为敬畏神，神便叫她们成立家室。
And because the women who took care of the Hebrew mothers had the fear of God, he gave them families.

法老吩咐他的众民说，以色列人所生的男孩，你们都要丢在河里，一切的女孩，你们要存留她的性命。
And Pharaoh gave orders to all his people, saying, Every son who comes to birth is to be put into the river, but every daughter may go on living.

有一个利未家的人娶了一个利未女子为妻。
Now a man of the house of Levi took as his wife a daughter of Levi.

那女人怀孕，生一个儿子，见他俊美，就藏了他三个月，
And she became with child and gave birth to a Son; and when she saw that he was a beautiful child, she kept him secretly for three months.

后来不能再藏，就取了一个蒲草箱，抹上石漆和石油，将孩子放在里头，把箱子搁在河边的芦荻中。
And when she was no longer able to keep him secret, she made him a basket out of the stems of water-plants, pasting sticky earth over it to keep the water out; and placing the baby in it she put it among the plants by the edge of the Nile.

孩子的姐姐远远站着，要知道他究竟怎么样。
And his sister took her place at a distance to see what would become of him.

法老的女儿来到河边洗澡，她的使女们在河边行走。她看见箱子在芦荻中，就打发一个婢女拿来。
Now Pharaoh's daughter came down to the Nile to take a bath, while her women were walking by the riverside; and she saw the basket among the river-plants, and sent her servant-girl to get it.

她打开箱子，看见那孩子。孩子哭了，她就可怜他，说，这是希伯来人的一个孩子。
And opening it, she saw the child, and he was crying. And she had pity on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.

孩子的姐姐对法老的女儿说，我去在希伯来妇人中叫一个奶妈来，为你奶这孩子，可以不可以。
Then his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter, May I go and get you one of the Hebrew women to give him the breast?

法老的女儿说，可以。童女就去叫了孩子的母亲来。
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the girl went and got the child's mother.

法老的女儿对她说，你把这孩子抱去，为我奶他，我必给你工价。妇人就抱了孩子去奶他。
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take the child away and give it milk for me, and I will give you payment. And the woman took the child and gave it milk at her breast.

孩子渐长，妇人把他带到法老的女儿那里，就作了她的儿子。她给孩子起名叫摩西，意思说，因我把他从水里拉出来。
And when the child was older, she took him to Pharaoh's daughter and he became her son, and she gave him the name Moses, Because, she said, I took him out of the water.

后来，摩西长大，他出去到他弟兄那里，看他们的重担，见一个埃及人打希伯来人的一个弟兄。
Now when Moses had become a man, one day he went out to his people and saw how hard their work was; and he saw an Egyptian giving blows to a Hebrew, one of his people.

他左右观看，见没有人，就把埃及人打死了，藏在沙土里。
And turning this way and that, and seeing no one, he put the Egyptian to death, covering his body with sand.

第二天他出去，见有两个希伯来人争斗，就对那欺负人的说，你为什么打你同族的人呢？
And he went out the day after and saw two of the Hebrews fighting: and he said to him who was in the wrong, Why are you fighting your brother?

那人说，谁立你作我们的首领和审判官呢？难道你要杀我，像杀那埃及人吗？摩西便惧怕，说，这事必是被人知道了。
And he said, Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? are you going to put me to death as you did the Egyptian? And Moses was in fear, and said, It is clear that the thing has come to light.

法老听见这事，就想杀摩西，但摩西躲避法老，逃往米甸地居住。
Now when Pharaoh had news of this, he would have put Moses to death. But Moses went in flight from Pharaoh into the land of Midian: and he took his seat by a water-spring.

一日，他在井旁坐下。米甸的祭司有七个女儿，她们来打水，打满了槽，要饮父亲的群羊。
Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came to get water for their father's flock.

有牧羊的人来，把她们赶走了，摩西却起来帮助她们，又饮了她们的群羊。
And the keepers of the sheep came up and were driving them away; but Moses got up and came to their help, watering their flock for them.

她们来到父亲流珥那里，他说，今日你们为何来得这么快呢？
And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that you have come back so quickly today?

她们说，有一个埃及人救我们脱离牧羊人的手，并且为我们打水饮了群羊。
And they said, An Egyptian came to our help against the keepers of sheep and got water for us and gave it to the flock.

他对女儿们说，那个人在哪里，你们为什么撇下他呢？你们去请他来吃饭。
And he said to his daughters, Where is he? why have you let the man go? make him come in and give him a meal.

摩西甘心和那人同住，那人把他的女儿西坡拉给摩西为妻。
And Moses was happy to go on living with the man; and he gave his daughter Zipporah to Moses.

西坡拉生了一个儿子，摩西给他起名叫革舜，意思说，因我在外邦作了寄居的。
And she gave birth to a son, to whom he gave the name Gershom: for he said, I have been living in a strange land.

过了多年，埃及王死了。以色列人因作苦工，就叹息哀求，他们的哀声达于神。
Now after a long time the king of Egypt came to his end: and the children of Israel were crying in their grief under the weight of their work, and their cry for help came to the ears of God.

神听见他们的哀声，就记念他与亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各所立的约。
And at the sound of their weeping the agreement which God had made with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob came to his mind.

神看顾以色列人，也知道他们的苦情。
And God's eyes were turned to the children of Israel and he gave them the knowledge of himself.

摩西牧养他岳父米甸祭司叶忒罗的羊群，一日领羊群往野外去，到了神的山，就是何烈山。
Now Moses was looking after the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he took the flock to the back of the waste land and came to Horeb, the mountain of God.

耶和华的使者从荆棘里火焰中向摩西显现。摩西观看，不料，荆棘被火烧着，却没有烧毁。
And the angel of the Lord was seen by him in a flame of fire coming out of a thorn-tree: and he saw that the tree was on fire, but it was not burned up.

摩西说，我要过去看这大异象，这荆棘为何没有烧坏呢？
And Moses said, I will go and see this strange thing, why the tree is not burned up,

耶和华神见他过去要看，就从荆棘里呼叫说，摩西，摩西。他说，我在这里。
And when the Lord saw him turning to one side to see, God said his name out of the tree, crying, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I.

神说，不要近前来。当把你脚上的鞋脱下来，因为你所站之地是圣地。
And he said, Do not come near: take off your shoes from your feet, for the place where you are is holy.

又说，我是你父亲的神，是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神。摩西蒙上脸，因为怕看神。
And he said, I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses kept his face covered for fear of looking on God.

耶和华说，我的百姓在埃及所受的困苦，我实在看见了，他们因受督工的辖制所发的哀声，我也听见了。我原知道他们的痛苦，
And God said, Truly, I have seen the grief of my people in Egypt, and their cry because of their cruel masters has come to my ears; for I have knowledge of their sorrows;

我下来是要救他们脱离埃及人的手，领他们出了那地，，到美好，宽阔，流奶与蜜之地，就是到迦南人，赫人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人之地。
And I have come down to take them out of the hands of the Egyptians, guiding them out of that land into a good land and wide, into a land flowing with milk and honey; into the place of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite.

现在以色列人的哀声达到我耳中，我也看见埃及人怎样欺压他们。
For now, truly, the cry of the children of Israel has come to me, and I have seen the cruel behaviour of the Egyptians to them.

故此，我要打发你去见法老，使你可以将我的百姓以色列人从埃及领出来。
Come, then, and I will send you to Pharaoh, so that you may take my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.

摩西对神说，我是什么人，竟能去见法老，将以色列人从埃及领出来呢？
And Moses said to God, Who am I to go to Pharaoh and take the children of Israel out of Egypt?

神说，我必与你同在。你将百姓从埃及领出来之后，你们必在这山上事奉我，这就是我打发你去的证据。
And he said, Truly I will be with you; and this will be the sign to you that I have sent you: when you have taken the children of Israel out of Egypt, you will give worship to God on this mountain.

摩西对神说，我到以色列人那里，对他们说，你们祖宗的神打发我到你们这里来。他们若问我说，他叫什么名字？我要对他们说什么呢？
And Moses said to God, When I come to the children of Israel and say to them, The God of your fathers has sent me to you: and they say to me, What is his name? what am I to say to them?

神对摩西说，我是自有永有的。又说，你要对以色列人这样说，那自有的打发我到你们这里来。
And God said to him, I AM WHAT I AM: and he said, Say to the children of Israel, I AM has sent me to you.

神又对摩西说，你要对以色列人这样说，耶和华你们祖宗的神，就是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神，打发我到你们这里来。耶和华是我的名，直到永远，这也是我的纪念，直到万代。
And God went on to say to Moses, Say to the children of Israel, The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has sent me to you: this is my name for ever, and this is my sign to all generations.

你去招聚以色列的长老，对他们说，耶和华你们祖宗的神，就是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神，向我显现，说，我实在眷顾了你们，我也看见埃及人怎样待你们。
Go and get together the chiefs of the children of Israel, and say to them, The Lord, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has been seen by me, and has said, Truly I have taken up your cause, because of what is done to you in Egypt;

我也说，要将你们从埃及的困苦中领出来，往迦南人，赫人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人的地去，就是到流奶与蜜之地。
And I have said, I will take you up out of the sorrows of Egypt into the land of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, into a land flowing with milk and honey.

他们必听你的话。你和以色列的长老要去见埃及王，对他说，耶和华希伯来人的神遇见了我们，现在求你容我们往旷野去，走三天的路程，为要祭祀耶和华我们的神。
And they will give ear to your voice: and you, with the chiefs of Israel, will go to Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and say to him, The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has come to us: let us then go three days' journey into the waste land to make an offering to the Lord our God.

我知道虽用大能的手，埃及王也不容你们去。
And I am certain that the king of Egypt will not let you go without being forced.

我必伸手在埃及中间施行我一切的奇事，攻击那地，然后他才容你们去。
But I will put out my hand and overcome Egypt with all the wonders which I will do among them: and after that he will let you go.

我必叫你们在埃及人眼前蒙恩，你们去的时候就不至于空手而去。
And I will give this people grace in the eyes of the Egyptians, so that when you go out you will go out with your hands full.

但各妇女必向她的邻舍，并居住在她家里的女人，要金器银器和衣裳，好给你们的儿女穿戴。这样你们就把埃及人的财物夺去了。
For every woman will get from her neighbour and from the woman living in her house, ornaments of silver and gold, and clothing; and you will put them on your sons and your daughters; you will take the best of their goods from the Egyptians.

摩西回答说，他们必不信我，也不听我的话，必说，耶和华并没有向你显现。
And Moses, answering, said, It is certain that they will not have faith in me or give ear to my voice; for they will say, You have not seen the Lord.

耶和华对摩西说，你手里是什么？他说，是杖。
And the Lord said to him, What is that in your hand? And he said, A rod.

耶和华说，丢在地上。他一丢下去，就变作蛇，摩西便跑开。
And he said, Put it down on the earth. And he put it down on the earth and it became a snake; and Moses went running from it.

耶和华对摩西说，伸出手来，拿住它的尾巴，它必在你手中仍变为杖，
And the Lord said to Moses, Put out your hand and take it by the tail: (and he put out his hand and took a grip of it and it became a rod in his hand:)

如此好叫他们信耶和华他们祖宗的神，就是亚伯拉罕的神，以撒的神，雅各的神，是向你显现了。
So that they may be certain that the Lord, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has been seen by you.

耶和华又对他说，把手放在怀里。他就把手放在怀里，及至抽出来，不料，手长了大麻疯，有雪那样白。
Then the Lord said to him again, Put your hand inside your clothing. And he put his hand inside his robe: and when he took it out it was like the hand of a leper, as white as snow.

耶和华说，再把手放在怀里。他就再把手放在怀里，及至从怀里抽出来，不料，手已经复原，与周身的肉一样，
And he said, Put your hand inside your robe again. (And he put his hand into his robe again, and when he took it out he saw that it had become like his other flesh.)

又说，倘或他们不听你的话，也不信头一个神迹，他们必信第二个神迹。
And if they do not have faith in you or give ear to the voice of the first sign, they will have faith in the second sign.

这两个神迹若都不信，也不听你的话，你就从河里取些水，倒在旱地上，你从河里取的水必在旱地上变作血。
And if they have no faith even in these two signs and will not give ear to your voice, then you are to take the water of the Nile and put it on the dry land: and the water you take out of the river will become blood on the dry land.

摩西对耶和华说，主阿，我素日不是能言的人，就是从你对仆人说话以后，也是这样。我本是拙口笨舌的。
And Moses said to the Lord, O Lord, I am not a man of words; I have never been so, and am not now, even after what you have said to your servant: for talking is hard for me, and I am slow of tongue.

耶和华对他说，谁造人的口呢？谁使人口哑，耳聋，目明，眼瞎呢？岂不是我耶和华吗？
And the Lord said to him, Who has made man's mouth? who takes away a man's voice or hearing, or makes him seeing or blind? Is it not I, the Lord?

现在去吧，我必赐你口才，指教你所当说的话。
So go now, and I will be with your mouth, teaching you what to say.

摩西说，主阿，你愿意打发谁，就打发谁去吧。
And he said, O Lord, send, if you will, by the hand of anyone whom it seems good to you to send.

耶和华向摩西发怒说，不是有你的哥哥利未人亚伦吗？我知道他是能言的，现在他出来迎接你，他一见你，心里就欢喜。
And the Lord was angry with Moses, and said, Is there not Aaron, your brother, the Levite? To my knowledge he is good at talking. And now he is coming out to you: and when he sees you he will be glad in his heart.

你要将当说的话传给他，我也要赐你和他口才，又要指教你们所当行的事。
Let him give ear to your voice, and you will put my words in his mouth; and I will be with your mouth and with his, teaching you what you have to do.

他要替你对百姓说话，你要以他当作口，他要以你当作神。
And he will do the talking for you to the people: he will be to you as a mouth and you will be to him as God.

你手里要拿这杖，好行神迹。
And take in your hand this rod with which you will do the signs.

于是，摩西回到他岳父叶忒罗那里，对他说，求你容我回去见我在埃及的弟兄，看他们还在不在。叶忒罗对摩西说，你可以平平安安地去吧。
And Moses went back to Jethro, his father-in-law, and said to him, Let me go back now to my relations in Egypt and see if they are still living. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.

耶和华在米甸对摩西说，你要回埃及去，因为寻索你命的人都死了。
And the Lord said to Moses in Midian, Go back to Egypt, for all the men are dead who were attempting to take your life.

摩西就带着妻子和两个儿子，叫他们骑上驴，回埃及地去。摩西手里拿着神的杖。
And Moses took his wife and his sons and put them on an ass and went back to the land of Egypt: and he took the rod of God in his hand.

耶和华对摩西说，你回到埃及的时候，要留意将我指示你的一切奇事行在法老面前。但我要使（或作任凭下同）他的心刚硬，他必不容百姓去。
And the Lord said to Moses, When you go back to Egypt, see that you do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have given you power to do: but I will make his heart hard and he will not let the people go.

你要对法老说，耶和华这样说，以色列是我的儿子，我的长子。
And you are to say to Pharaoh, The Lord says, Israel is the first of my sons:

我对你说过，容我的儿子去，好事奉我。你还是不肯容他去。看哪，我要杀你的长子。
And I said to you, Let my son go, so that he may give me worship; and you did not let him go: so now I will put the first of your sons to death.

摩西在路上住宿的地方，耶和华遇见他，想要杀他。
Now on the journey, at the night's resting-place, the Lord came in his way and would have put him to death.

西坡拉就拿一块火石，割下他儿子的阳皮，丢在摩西脚前，说，你真是我的血郎了。
Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cutting off the skin of her son's private parts, and touching his feet with it, she said, Truly you are a husband of blood to me.

这样，耶和华才放了他。西坡拉说，你因割礼就是血郎了。
So he let him go. Then she said, You are a husband of blood because of the circumcision.

耶和华对亚伦说，你往旷野去迎接摩西。他就去，在神的山遇见摩西，和他亲嘴。
And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the waste land and you will see Moses. So he went and came across Moses at the mountain of God, and gave him a kiss.

摩西将耶和华打发他所说的言语和嘱咐他所行的神迹都告诉了亚伦。
And Moses gave Aaron an account of all the words of the Lord which he had sent him to say, and of all the signs which he had given him orders to do.

摩西，亚伦就去招聚以色列的众长老。
Then Moses and Aaron went and got together all the chiefs of the children of Israel:

亚伦将耶和华对摩西所说的一切话述说了一遍，又在百姓眼前行了那些神迹，
And Aaron said to them all the words the Lord had said to Moses, and did the signs before all the people.

百姓就信了。以色列人听见耶和华眷顾他们，鉴察他们的困苦，就低头下拜。
And the people had faith in them; and hearing that the Lord had taken up the cause of the children of Israel and had seen their troubles, with bent heads they gave him worship.

后来摩西，亚伦去对法老说，耶和华以色列的神这样说，容我的百姓去，在旷野向我守节。
And after that, Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh, and said, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, Let my people go so that they may keep a feast to me in the waste land.

法老说，耶和华是谁，使我听他的话，容以色列人去呢？我不认识耶和华，也不容以色列人去。
And Pharaoh said, Who is the Lord, to whose voice I am to give ear and let Israel go? I have no knowledge of the Lord and I will not let Israel go.

他们说，希伯来人的神遇见了我们。求你容我们往旷野去，走三天的路程，祭祀耶和华我们的神，免得他用瘟疫，刀兵攻击我们。
And they said, The God of the Hebrews has come to us: let us then go three days' journey into the waste land to make an offering to the Lord our God, so that he may not send death on us by disease or the sword.

埃及王对他们说，摩西，亚伦，你们为什么叫百姓旷工呢？你们去担你们的担子吧。
And the king of Egypt said to them, Why do you, Moses and Aaron, take the people away from their work? get back to your work.

又说，看哪，这地的以色列人如今众多，你们竟叫他们歇下担子。
And Pharaoh said, Truly, the people of the land are increasing in number, and you are keeping them back from their work.

当天，法老吩咐督工的和官长说，
The same day Pharaoh gave orders to the overseers and those who were responsible for the work, saying,

你们不可照常把草给百姓作砖，叫他们自己去捡草。
Give these men no more dry stems for their brick-making as you have been doing; let them go and get the material for themselves.

他们素常作砖的数目，你们仍旧向他们要，一点不可减少，因为他们是懒惰的，所以呼求说，容我们去祭祀我们的神。
But see that they make the same number of bricks as before, and no less: for they have no love for work; and so they are crying out and saying, Let us go and make an offering to our God.

你们要把更重的工夫加在这些人身上，叫他们劳碌，不听虚谎的言语。
Give the men harder work, and see that they do it; let them not give attention to false words.

督工的和官长出来对百姓说，法老这样说，我不给你们草。
And the overseers of the people and their responsible men went out and said to the people, Pharaoh says, I will give you no more dry stems.

你们自己在哪里能找草，就往哪里去找吧，但你们的工一点不可减少。
Go yourselves and get dry stems wherever you are able; for your work is not to be any less.

于是百姓散在埃及遍地，捡碎秸当作草。
So the people were sent in all directions through the land of Egypt to get dry grass for stems.

督工的催着说，你们一天当完一天的工，与先前有草一样。
And the overseers went on driving them and saying, Do your full day's work as before when there were dry stems for you.

法老督工的，责打他所派以色列人的官长，说，你们昨天今天为什么没有照向来的数目作砖，完你们的工作呢？
And the responsible men of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's overseers had put over them, were given blows, and they said to them, Why have you not done your regular work, in making bricks as before?

以色列人的官长就来哀求法老说，为什么这样待你的仆人？
Then the responsible men of the children of Israel came to Pharaoh, protesting and saying, Why are you acting in this way to your servants?

督工的不把草给仆人，并且对我们说，作砖吧。看哪，你仆人挨了打，其实是你百姓的错。
They give us no dry stems and they say to us, Make bricks: and they give your servants blows; but it is your people who are in the wrong.

但法老说，你们是懒惰的，你们是懒惰的，所以说，容我们去祭祀耶和华。
But he said, You have no love for work: that is why you say, Let us go and make an offering to the Lord.

现在你们去作工吧，草是不给你们的，砖却要如数交纳。
Go now, get back to your work; no dry stems will be given to you, but you are to make the full number of bricks.

以色列人的官长听说，你们每天作砖的工作一点不可减少，就知道是遭遇祸患了。
Then the responsible men of the children of Israel saw that they were purposing evil when they said, The number of bricks which you have to make every day will be no less than before.

他们离了法老出来，正遇见摩西，亚伦站在对面，
And they came face to face with Moses and Aaron, who were in their way when they came out from Pharaoh:

就向他们说，愿耶和华鉴察你们，施行判断，因你们使我们在法老和他臣仆面前有了臭名，把刀递在他们手中杀我们。
And they said to them, May the Lord take note of you and be your judge; for you have given Pharaoh and his servants a bad opinion of us, putting a sword in their hands for our destruction.

摩西回到耶和华那里，说，主阿，你为什么苦待这百姓呢？为什么打发我去呢？
And Moses went back to the Lord and said, Lord, why have you done evil to this people? why have you sent me?

自从我去见法老，奉你的名说话，他就苦待这百姓，你一点也没有拯救他们。
For from the time when I came to Pharaoh to put your words before him, he has done evil to this people, and you have given them no help.

耶和华对摩西说，现在你必看见我向法老所行的事，使他因我大能的手容以色列人去，且把他们赶出他的地。
And the Lord said to Moses, Now you will see what I am about to do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand he will be forced to let them go, driving them out of his land because of my outstretched arm.

神晓谕摩西说，我是耶和华。
And God said to Moses, I am Yahweh:

我从前向亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各显现为全能的神，至于我名耶和华，他们未曾知道。
I let myself be seen by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as God, the Ruler of all; but they had no knowledge of my name Yahweh.

我与他们坚定所立的约，要把他们寄居的迦南地赐给他们。
And I made an agreement with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their wanderings.

我也听见以色列人被埃及人苦待的哀声，我也记念我的约。
And truly my ears are open to the cry of the children of Israel whom the Egyptians keep under their yoke; and I have kept in mind my agreement.

所以你要对以色列人说，我是耶和华，我要用伸出来的膀臂重重地刑罚埃及人，救赎你们脱离他们的重担，不作他们的苦工。
Say then to the children of Israel, I am Yahweh, and I will take you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians, and make you safe from their power, and will make you free by the strength of my arm after great punishments.

我要以你们为我的百姓，我也要作你们的神。你们要知道我是耶和华你们的神，是救你们脱离埃及人之重担的。
And I will take you to be my people and I will be your God; and you will be certain that I am the Lord your God, who takes you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians.

我起誓应许给亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各的那地，我要把你们领进去，将那地赐给你们为业。我是耶和华。
And I will be your guide into the land which I made an oath to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it to you for your heritage: I am Yahweh.

摩西将这话告诉以色列人，只是他们因苦工愁烦，不肯听他的话。
And Moses said these words to the children of Israel, but they gave no attention to him, because of the grief of their spirit and the cruel weight of their work.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你进去对埃及王法老说，要容以色列人出他的地。
Go in and say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, that he is to let the children of Israel go out of his land.

摩西在耶和华面前说，以色列人尚且不听我的话，法老怎肯听我这拙口笨舌的人呢？
And Moses, answering the Lord, said, See, the children of Israel will not give ear to me; how then will Pharaoh give ear to me, whose lips are unclean?

耶和华吩咐摩西，亚伦往以色列人和埃及王法老那里去，把以色列人从埃及地领出来。
And the word of the Lord came to Moses and Aaron, with orders for the children of Israel and for Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to take the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

以色列人家长的名字记在下面。以色列长子流便的儿子是哈诺，法路，希斯仑，迦米，这是流便的各家。
These are the heads of their fathers' families: the sons of Reuben the oldest son of Israel: Hanoch and Pallu, Hezron and Carmi: these are the families of Reuben.

西缅的儿子是耶母利，雅悯，阿辖，雅斤，琐辖，和迦南女子的儿子扫罗，这是西缅的各家。
And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul, the son of a woman of Canaan: these are the families of Simeon.

利未众子的名字按着他们的后代记在下面，就是革顺，哥辖，米拉利。利未一生的岁数是一百三十七岁。
And these are the names of the sons of Levi in the order of their generations: Gershon and Kohath and Merari: and the years of Levi's life were a hundred and thirty-seven.

革顺的儿子按着家室是立尼，示每。
The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, in the order of their families.

哥辖的儿子是暗兰，以斯哈，希伯伦，乌薛。哥辖一生的岁数是一百三十三岁。
And the sons of Kohath: Amram and Izhar and Hebron and Uzziel: and the years of Kohath's life were a hundred and thirty-three.

米拉利的儿子是抹利和母示，这是利未的家，都按着他们的后代。
And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi: these are the families of the Levites, in the order of their generations.

暗兰娶了他父亲的妹妹约基别为妻，她给他生了亚伦和摩西。暗兰一生的岁数是一百三十七岁。
And Amram took Jochebed, his father's sister, as wife; and she gave birth to Aaron and Moses: and the years of Amram's life were a hundred and thirty-seven.

以斯哈的儿子是可拉，尼斐，细基利。
And the sons of Izhar: Korah and Nepheg and Zichri.

乌薛的儿子是米沙利，以利撒反，西提利。
And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael and Elzaphan and Sithri.

亚伦娶了亚米拿达的女儿，拿顺的妹妹，以利沙巴为妻，她给他生了拿答，亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛。
And Aaron took as his wife Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon; and she gave birth to Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

可拉的儿子是亚惜，以利加拿，亚比亚撒，这是可拉的各家。
And the sons of Korah: Assir and Elkanah and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korahites.

亚伦的儿子以利亚撒娶了普铁的一个女儿为妻，她给他生了非尼哈。这是利未人的家长，都按着他们的家。
And Eleazar, Aaron's son, took as his wife one of the daughters of Putiel; and she gave birth to Phinehas. These are the heads of the families of the Levites, in the order of their families.

耶和华说，将以色列人按着他们的军队从埃及地领出来。这是对那亚伦，摩西说的。
These are the same Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord said, Take the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt in their armies.

对埃及王法老说要将以色列人从埃及领出来的，就是这摩西，亚伦。
These are the men who gave orders to Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go out of Egypt: these are the same Moses and Aaron.

当耶和华在埃及地对摩西说话的日子，
And on the day when the word of the Lord came to Moses in the land of Egypt,

他向摩西说，我是耶和华，我对你说的一切话，你都要告诉埃及王法老。
The Lord said to Moses, I am the Lord: say to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, everything I am saying to you.

摩西在耶和华面前说，看哪，我是拙口笨舌的人，法老怎肯听我呢？
And Moses said to the Lord, My lips are unclean; how is it possible that Pharaoh will give me a hearing?

耶和华对摩西说，我使你在法老面前代替神，你的哥哥亚伦是替你说话的。
And the Lord said to Moses, See I have made you a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron your brother will be your prophet.

凡我所吩咐你的，你都要说。你的哥哥亚伦要对法老说，容以色列人出他的地。
Say whatever I give you orders to say: and Aaron your brother will give word to Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go out of his land.

我要使法老的心刚硬，也要在埃及地多行神迹奇事。
And I will make Pharaoh's heart hard, and my signs and wonders will be increased in the land of Egypt.

但法老必不听你们，我要伸手重重地刑罚埃及，将我的军队以色列民从埃及地领出来。
But Pharaoh will not give ear to you, and I will put my hand on Egypt, and take my armies, my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt, after great punishments.

我伸手攻击埃及，将以色列人从他们中间领出来的时候，埃及人就要知道我是耶和华。
And the Egyptians will see that I am the Lord, when my hand is stretched out over Egypt, and I take the children of Israel out from among them.

摩西，亚伦这样行，耶和华怎样吩咐他们，他们就照样行了。
And Moses and Aaron did so: as the Lord gave them orders, so they did.

摩西，亚伦与法老说话的时候，摩西八十岁，亚伦八十三岁。
And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three years old, when they gave the Lord's word to Pharaoh.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

法老若对你们说，你们行件奇事吧。你就吩咐亚伦说，把杖丢在法老面前，使杖变作蛇。
If Pharaoh says to you, Let me see a wonder: then say to Aaron, Take your rod and put it down on the earth before Pharaoh so that it may become a snake.

摩西，亚伦进去见法老，就照耶和华所吩咐的行。亚伦把杖丢在法老和臣仆面前，杖就变作蛇。
Then Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh and they did as the Lord had said: and Aaron put his rod down on the earth before Pharaoh and his servants, and it became a snake.

于是法老召了博士和术士来，他们是埃及行法术的，也用邪术照样而行。
Then Pharaoh sent for the wise men and the wonder-workers, and they, the wonder-workers of Egypt, did the same with their secret arts.

他们各人丢下自己的杖，杖就变作蛇，但亚伦的杖吞了他们的杖。
For every one of them put down his rod on the earth, and they became snakes: but Aaron's rod made a meal of their rods.

法老心里刚硬，不肯听从摩西，亚伦，正如耶和华所说的。
But Pharaoh's heart was made hard, and he did not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

耶和华对摩西说，法老心里固执，不肯容百姓去。
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, Pharaoh's heart is unchanged; he will not let the people go.

明日早晨，他出来往水边去，你要往河边迎接他，手里要拿着那变过蛇的杖，
Go to Pharaoh in the morning; when he goes out to the water, you will be waiting for him by the edge of the Nile, with the rod which was turned into a snake in your hand;

对他说，耶和华希伯来人的神打发我来见你，说，容我的百姓去，好在旷野事奉我。到如今你还是不听。
And say to him, The Lord, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to you, saying, Let my people go so that they may give me worship in the waste land; but up to now you have not given ear to his words.

耶和华这样说，我要用我手里的杖击打河中的水，水就变作血，因此，你必知道我是耶和华。
So the Lord says, By this you may be certain that I am the Lord; see, by the touch of this rod in my hand the waters of the Nile will be turned to blood;

河里的鱼必死，河也要腥臭，埃及人就要厌恶吃这河里的水。
And the fish in the Nile will come to destruction, and the river will send up a bad smell, and the Egyptians will not be able, for disgust, to make use of the water of the Nile for drinking.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，你对亚伦说，把你的杖伸在埃及所有的水以上，就是在他们的江，河，池，塘以上，叫水都变作血。在埃及遍地，无论在木器中，石器中，都必有血。
And the Lord said, Say to Aaron, Let the rod in your hand be stretched out over the waters of Egypt, and over the rivers and the streams and the pools, and over every stretch of water, so that they may be turned to blood; and there will be blood through all the land of Egypt, in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.

摩西，亚伦就照耶和华所吩咐的行。亚伦在法老和臣仆眼前举杖击打河里的水，河里的水都变作血了。
And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had said; and when his rod had been lifted up and stretched out over the waters of the Nile before the eyes of Pharaoh and his servants, all the water in the Nile was turned to blood;

河里的鱼死了，河也腥臭了，埃及人就不能吃这河里的水，埃及遍地都有了血。
And the fish in the Nile came to destruction, and a bad smell went up from the river, and the Egyptians were not able to make use of the water of the Nile for drinking; and there was blood through all the land of Egypt.

埃及行法术的，也用邪术照样而行。法老心里刚硬，不肯听摩西，亚伦，正如耶和华所说的。
And the wonder-workers of Egypt did the same with their secret arts: but Pharaoh's heart was made hard, and he would not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

法老转身进宫，也不把这事放在心上。
Then Pharaoh went into his house, and did not take even this to heart.

埃及人都在河的两边挖地，要得水喝，因为他们不能喝这河里的水。
And all the Egyptians made holes round about the Nile to get drinking-water, for they were not able to make use of the Nile water.

耶和华击打河以后满了七天。
And seven days went past, after the Lord had put his hand on the Nile.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你进去见法老，对他说，耶和华这样说，容我的百姓去，好事奉我。
And this is what the Lord said to Moses: Go to Pharaoh and say to him, The Lord says, Let my people go so that they may give me worship.

你若不肯容他们去，我必使青蛙糟蹋你的四境。
And if you will not let them go, see, I will send frogs into every part of your land:

河里要滋生青蛙，这青蛙要上来进你的宫殿和你的卧房，上你的床榻，进你臣仆的房屋，上你百姓的身上，进你的炉灶和你的抟面盆，
The Nile will be full of frogs, and they will come up into your house and into your bedrooms and on your bed, and into the houses of your servants and your people, and into your ovens and into your bread-basins.

又要上你和你百姓并你众臣仆的身上。
The frogs will come up over you and your people and all your servants.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，你对亚伦说，把你的杖伸在江，河，池以上，使青蛙到埃及地上来。
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Let the rod in your hand be stretched out over the streams and the waterways and the pools, causing frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.

亚伦便伸杖在埃及的诸水以上，青蛙就上来，遮满了埃及地。
And when Aaron put out his hand over the waters of Egypt, the frogs came up and all the land of Egypt was covered with them.

行法术的也用他们的邪术照样而行，叫青蛙上了埃及地。
And the wonder-workers did the same with their secret arts, making frogs come up over the land of Egypt.

法老召了摩西，亚伦来，说，请你们求耶和华使这青蛙离开我和我的民，我就容百姓去祭祀耶和华。
Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and said, Make prayer to the Lord that he will take away these frogs from me and my people; and I will let the people go and make their offering to the Lord.

摩西对法老说，任凭你吧，我要何时为你和你的臣仆并你的百姓祈求，除灭青蛙离开你和你的宫殿只留在河里呢？
And Moses said, I will let you have the honour of saying when I am to make prayer for you and your servants and your people, that the frogs may be sent away from you and your houses, and be only in the Nile.

他说，明天。摩西说，可以照你的话吧，好叫你知道没有像耶和华我们神的。
And he said, By tomorrow. And he said, Let it be as you say: so that you may see that there is no other like the Lord our God.

青蛙要离开你和你的宫殿，并你的臣仆与你的百姓，只留在河里。
And the frogs will be gone from you and from your houses and from your servants and from your people and will be only in the Nile.

于是摩西，亚伦离开法老出去。摩西为扰害法老的青蛙呼求耶和华。
Then Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh; and Moses made prayer to the Lord about the frogs which he had sent on Pharaoh.

耶和华就照摩西的话行。凡在房里，院中，田间的青蛙都死了。
And the Lord did as Moses said; and there was an end of all the frogs in the houses and in the open spaces and in the fields.

众人把青蛙聚拢成堆，遍地就都腥臭。
And they put them together in masses, and a bad smell went up from the land.

但法老见灾祸松缓，就硬着心，不肯听他们，正如耶和华所说的。
But when Pharaoh saw that there was peace for a time, he made his heart hard and did not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你对亚伦说，伸出你的杖击打地上的尘土，使尘土在埃及遍地变作虱子（或作虼蚤下同）。
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Let your rod be stretched out over the dust of the earth so that it may become insects through all the land of Egypt.

他们就这样行。亚伦伸杖击打地上的尘土，就在人身上和牲畜身上有了虱子，埃及遍地的尘土都变成虱子了。
And they did so; and Aaron, stretching out the rod in his hand, gave a touch to the dust of the earth, and insects came on man and on beast; all the dust of the earth was changed into insects through all the land of Egypt.

行法术的也用邪术要生出虱子来，却是不能。于是在人身上和牲畜身上都有了虱子。
And the wonder-workers with their secret arts, attempting to make insects, were unable to do so: and there were insects on man and on beast.

行法术的就对法老说，这是神的手段。法老心里刚硬，不肯听摩西，亚伦，正如耶和华所说的。
Then the wonder-workers said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: but Pharaoh's heart was hard, and he did not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

耶和华对摩西说，你清早起来，法老来到水边，你站在他面前，对他说，耶和华这样说，容我的百姓去，好事奉我。
And the Lord said to Moses, Get up early in the morning and take your place before Pharaoh when he comes out to the water; and say to him, This is what the Lord says: Let my people go to give me worship.

你若不容我的百姓去，我要叫成群的苍蝇到你和你臣仆并你百姓的身上，进你的房屋，并且埃及人的房屋和他们所住的地都要满了成群的苍蝇。
For if you do not let my people go, see, I will send clouds of flies on you and on your servants and on your people and into their houses; and the houses of the Egyptians and the land where they are will be full of flies.

当那日，我必分别我百姓所住的歌珊地，使那里没有成群的苍蝇，好叫你知道我是天下的耶和华。
And at that time I will make a division between your land and the land of Goshen where my people are, and no flies will be there; so that you may see that I am the Lord over all the earth.

我要将我的百姓和你的百姓分别出来。明天必有这神迹。
And I will put a division between my people and your people; tomorrow this sign will be seen.

耶和华就这样行。苍蝇成了大群，进入法老的宫殿，和他臣仆的房屋，埃及遍地就因这成群的苍蝇败坏了。
And the Lord did so; and great clouds of flies came into the house of Pharaoh and into his servants' houses, and all the land of Egypt was made waste because of the flies.

法老召了摩西，亚伦来，说，你们去，在这地祭祀你们的神吧。
And Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron and said, Go and make your offering to your God here in the land.

摩西说，这样行本不相宜，因为我们要把埃及人所厌恶的祭祀耶和华我们的神，若把埃及人所厌恶的在他们眼前献为祭，他们岂不拿石头打死我们吗？
And Moses said, It is not right to do so; for we make our offerings of that to which the Egyptians give worship; and if we do so before their eyes, certainly we will be stoned.

我们要往旷野去，走三天的路程，照着耶和华我们神所要吩咐我们的祭祀他。
But we will go three days' journey into the waste land and make an offering to the Lord our God as he may give us orders.

法老说，我容你们去，在旷野祭祀耶和华你们的神，只是不要走得很远。求你们为我祈祷。
Then Pharaoh said, I will let you go to make an offering to the Lord your God in the waste land; but do not go very far away, and make prayer for me.

摩西说，我要出去求耶和华，使成群的苍蝇明天离开法老和法老的臣仆并法老的百姓，法老却不可再行诡诈，不容百姓去祭祀耶和华。
And Moses said, When I go out from you I will make prayer to the Lord that the cloud of flies may go away from Pharaoh and from his people and from his servants tomorrow: only let Pharaoh no longer by deceit keep back the people from making their offering to the Lord.

于是摩西离开法老去求耶和华。
Then Moses went out from Pharaoh and made prayer to the Lord.

耶和华就照摩西的话行，叫成群的苍蝇离开法老和他的臣仆并他的百姓，一个也没有留下。
And the Lord did as Moses said, and took away the cloud of flies from Pharaoh and from his servants and from his people; not one was to be seen.

这一次法老又硬着心，不容百姓去。
But again Pharaoh made his heart hard and did not let the people go.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你进去见法老，对他说，耶和华希伯来人的神这样说，容我的百姓去，好事奉我。
Then the Lord said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh and say to him, This is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says: Let my people go so that they may give me worship.

你若不肯容他们去，仍旧强留他们，
For if you will not let them go, but still keep them in your power,

耶和华的手加在你田间的牲畜上，就是在马，驴，骆驼，牛群，羊群上，必有重重的瘟疫。
Then the hand of the Lord will put on your cattle in the field, on the horses and the asses and the camels, on the herds and the flocks, a very evil disease.

耶和华要分别以色列的牲畜和埃及的牲畜，凡属以色列人的，一样都不死。
And the Lord will make a division between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; there will be no loss of any of the cattle of Israel.

耶和华就定了时候，说，明天耶和华必在此地行这事。
And the time was fixed by the Lord, and he said, Tomorrow the Lord will do this thing in the land.

第二天，耶和华就行这事。埃及的牲畜几乎都死了，只是以色列人的牲畜一个都没有死。
And on the day after, the Lord did as he had said, causing the death of all the cattle of Egypt, but there was no loss of any of the cattle of Israel.

法老打发人去看，谁知以色列人的牲畜连一个都没有死。法老的心却是固执，不容百姓去。
And Pharaoh sent and got word that there was no loss of any of the cattle of Israel. But the heart of Pharaoh was hard and he did not let the people go.

耶和华吩咐摩西，亚伦说，你们取几捧炉灰，摩西要在法老面前向天扬起来。
And the Lord said to Moses and to Aaron, Take in your hand a little dust from the fire and let Moses send it in a shower up to heaven before the eyes of Pharaoh.

这灰要在埃及全地变作尘土，在人身上和牲畜身上成了起泡的疮。
And it will become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and will be a skin-disease bursting out in wounds on man and beast through all the land of Egypt.

摩西，亚伦取了炉灰，站在法老面前。摩西向天扬起来，就在人身上和牲畜身上成了起泡的疮。
So they took some dust from the fire, and placing themselves before Pharaoh, Moses sent it out in a shower up to heaven; and it became a skin-disease bursting out on man and on beast.

行法术的在摩西面前站立不住，因为在他们身上和一切埃及人身上都有这疮。
And the wonder-workers were not able to take their places before Moses, because of the disease; for the disease was on the wonder-workers and on all the Egyptians.

耶和华使法老的心刚硬，不听他们，正如耶和华对摩西所说的。
And the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard, and he would not give ear to them, as the Lord had said.

耶和华对摩西说，你清早起来，站在法老面前，对他说，耶和华希伯来人的神这样说，容我的百姓去，好事奉我。
And the Lord said to Moses, Get up early in the morning and take your place before Pharaoh, and say to him, This is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says: Let my people go so that they may give me worship.

因为这一次我要叫一切的灾殃临到你和你臣仆并你百姓的身上，叫你知道在普天下没有像我的。
For this time I will send all my punishments on yourself and on your servants and on your people; so that you may see that there is no other like me in all the earth.

我若伸手用瘟疫攻击你和你的百姓，你早就从地上除灭了。
For if I had put the full weight of my hand on you and your people, you would have been cut off from the earth:

其实，我叫你存立，是特要向你显我的大能，并要使我的名传遍天下。
But, for this very reason, I have kept you from destruction, to make clear to you my power, and so that my name may be honoured through all the earth.

你还向我的百姓自高，不容他们去吗？
Are you still uplifted in pride against my people so that you will not let them go?

到明天约在这时候，我必叫重大的冰雹降下，自从埃及开国以来，没有这样的冰雹。
Truly, tomorrow about this time I will send down an ice-storm, such as never was in Egypt from its earliest days till now.

现在你要打发人把你的牲畜和你田间一切所有的催进来，凡在田间不收回家的，无论是人是牲畜，冰雹必降在他们身上，他们就必死。
Then send quickly and get in your cattle and all you have from the fields; for if any man or beast in the field has not been put under cover, the ice-storm will come down on them with destruction.

法老的臣仆中，惧怕耶和华这话的，便叫他的奴仆和牲畜跑进家来。
Then everyone among the servants of Pharaoh who had the fear of the Lord, made his servants and his cattle come quickly into the house:

但那不把耶和华这话放在心上的，就将他的奴仆和牲畜留在田里。
And he who gave no attention to the word of the Lord, kept his servants and his cattle in the field.

耶和华对摩西说，你向天伸杖，使埃及遍地的人身上和牲畜身上，并田间各样菜蔬上，都有冰雹。
And the Lord said to Moses, Now let your hand be stretched out to heaven so that there may be an ice-storm on all the land of Egypt, on man and on beast and on every plant of the field through all the land of Egypt.

摩西向天伸杖，耶和华就打雷下雹，有火闪到地上，耶和华下雹在埃及地上。
And Moses put out his rod to heaven: and the Lord sent thunder, and an ice-storm, and fire running down on the earth; the Lord sent an ice-storm on the land of Egypt.

那时，雹与火搀杂，甚是厉害，自从埃及成国以来，遍地没有这样的。
So there was an ice-storm with fire running through it, coming down with great force, such as never was in all the land of Egypt from the time when it became a nation.

在埃及遍地，雹击打了田间所有的人和牲畜，并一切的菜蔬，又打坏田间一切的树木。
And through all the land of Egypt the ice-storm came down on everything which was in the fields, on man and on beast; and every green plant was crushed and every tree of the field broken.

惟独以色列人所住的歌珊地没有冰雹。
Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, there was no ice-storm.

法老打发人召摩西，亚伦来，对他们说，这一次我犯了罪了。耶和华是公义的，我和我的百姓是邪恶的。
Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have done evil this time: the Lord is upright, and I and my people are sinners.

这雷轰和冰雹已经够了。请你们求耶和华，我就容你们去，不再留住你们。
Make prayer to the Lord; for there has been enough of these thunderings of God and this ice-storm; and I will let you go and will keep you no longer.

摩西对他说，我一出城，就要向耶和华举手祷告，雷必止住，也不再有冰雹，叫你知道全地都是属耶和华的。
And Moses said, When I am gone outside the town, my hands will be stretched out to the Lord; the thunders and the ice-storm will come to an end, so that you may see that the earth is the Lord's.

至于你和你的臣仆，我知道你们还是不惧怕耶和华神。
But as for you and your servants, I am certain that even now the fear of the Lord God will not be in your hearts.

那时，麻和大麦被雹击打，因为大麦已经吐穗，麻也开了花。
And the flax and the barley were damaged, for the barley was almost ready to be cut and the flax was in flower.

只是小麦和粗麦没有被击打，因为还没有长成。
But the rest of the grain-plants were undamaged, for they had not come up.

摩西离了法老出城，向耶和华举手祷告，雷和雹就止住，雨也不再浇在地上了。
So Moses went out of the town, and stretching out his hands made prayer to God: and the thunders and the ice-storm came to an end; and the fall of rain was stopped.

法老见雨和雹与雷止住，就越发犯罪，他和他的臣仆都硬着心。
But when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the ice-storm and the thunders were ended, he went on sinning, and made his heart hard, he and his servants.

法老的心刚硬，不容以色列人去，正如耶和华借着摩西所说的。
And the heart of Pharaoh was hard, and he did not let the people go, as the Lord had said by the mouth of Moses.

耶和华对摩西说，你进去见法老。我使他和他臣仆的心刚硬，为要在他们中间显我这些神迹，
And the Lord said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh: for I have made his heart and the hearts of his servants hard, so that I may let my signs be seen among them:

并要叫你将我向埃及人所作的事，和在他们中间所行的神迹，传于你儿子和你孙子的耳中，好叫你们知道我是耶和华。
And so that you may be able to give to your son and to your son's son the story of my wonders in Egypt, and the signs which I have done among them; so that you may see that I am the Lord.

摩西，亚伦就进去见法老，对他说，耶和华希伯来人的神这样说，你在我面前不肯自卑要到几时呢？容我的百姓去，好事奉我。
Then Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and said to him, This is what the Lord, the God of the Hebrews, says: How long will you be lifted up in your pride before me? let my people go so that they may give me worship.

你若不肯容我的百姓去，明天我要使蝗虫进入你的境内，
For if you will not let my people go, tomorrow I will send locusts into your land:

遮满地面，甚至看不见地，并且吃那冰雹所剩的和田间所长的一切树木。
And the face of the earth will be covered with them, so that you will not be able to see the earth: and they will be the destruction of everything which up to now has not been damaged, everything which was not crushed by the ice-storm, and every tree still living in your fields.

你的宫殿和你众臣仆的房屋，并一切埃及人的房屋，都要被蝗虫占满了，自从你祖宗和你祖宗的祖宗在世以来，直到今日，没有见过这样的灾。摩西就转身离开法老出去。
And your houses will be full of them, and the houses of your servants and of all the Egyptians; it will be worse than anything your fathers have seen or their fathers, from the day when they were living on the earth till this day. And so he went out from Pharaoh.

法老的臣仆对法老说，这人为我们的网罗要到几时呢？容这些人去事奉耶和华他们的神吧，埃及已经败坏了，你还不知道吗？
And Pharaoh's servants said to him, How long is this man to be the cause of evil to us? let the men go so that they may give worship to the Lord their God: are you not awake to Egypt's danger?

于是摩西，亚伦被召回来见法老，法老对他们说，你们去事奉耶和华你们的神，但那要去的是谁呢？
Then Moses and Aaron came in again before Pharaoh: and he said to them, Go and give worship to the Lord your God: but which of you are going?

摩西说，我们要和我们老的少的，儿子女儿同去，且把羊群牛群一同带去，因为我们务要向耶和华守节。
And Moses said, We will go with our young and our old, with our sons and our daughters, with our flocks and our herds; for we are to keep a feast to the Lord.

法老对他们说，我容你们和你们妇人孩子去的时候，耶和华与你们同在吧，你们要谨慎，因为有祸在你们眼前（或作你们存着恶意），
And he said to them, May the Lord be with you, if I will let you and your little ones go! take care, for your purpose clearly is evil.

不可都去，你们这壮年人去事奉耶和华吧，因为这是你们所求的。于是把他们从法老面前撵出去。
Not so; but let your males go and give worship to the Lord, as your desire is. This he said, driving them out from before him.

耶和华对摩西说，你向埃及地伸杖，使蝗虫到埃及地上来，吃地上一切的菜蔬，就是冰雹所剩的。
And the Lord said to Moses, Let your hand be stretched out over the land of Egypt so that the locusts may come up on the land for the destruction of every green plant in the land, even everything untouched by the ice-storm.

摩西就向埃及地伸杖，那一昼一夜，耶和华使东风刮在埃及地上，到了早晨，东风把蝗虫刮了来。
And Moses' rod was stretched out over the land of Egypt, and the Lord sent an east wind over the land all that day and all the night; and in the morning the locusts came up with the east wind.

蝗虫上来，落在埃及的四境，甚是厉害，以前没有这样的，以后也必没有。
And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, resting on every part of the land, in very great numbers; such an army of locusts had never been seen before, and never will be again.

因为这蝗虫遮满地面，甚至地都黑暗了，又吃地上一切的菜蔬和冰雹所剩树上的果子。埃及遍地，无论是树木，是田间的菜蔬，连一点青的也没有留下。
For all the face of the earth was covered with them, so that the land was black; and every green plant and all the fruit of the trees which was untouched by the ice-storm they took for food: not one green thing, no plant or tree, was to be seen in all the land of Egypt.

于是法老急忙召了摩西，亚伦来，说，我得罪耶和华你们的神，又得罪了你们。
Then Pharaoh quickly sent for Moses and Aaron, and said, I have done evil against the Lord your God and against you.

现在求你，只这一次，饶恕我的罪，求耶和华你们的神使我脱离这一次的死亡。
Let me now have forgiveness for my sin this time only, and make prayer to the Lord your God that he will take away from me this death only.

摩西就离开法老去求耶和华。
So he went out from Pharaoh and made prayer to the Lord.

耶和华转了极大的西风，把蝗虫刮起，吹入红海，在埃及的四境连一个也没有留下。
And the Lord sent a very strong west wind, which took up the locusts, driving them into the Red Sea; not one locust was to be seen in any part of Egypt.

但耶和华使法老的心刚硬，不容以色列人去。
But the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard, and he did not let the children of Israel go.

耶和华对摩西说，你向天伸杖，使埃及地黑暗，这黑暗似乎摸得着。
And the Lord said to Moses, Let your hand be stretched out to heaven, and all the land of Egypt will be dark, so that men will be feeling their way about in the dark.

摩西向天伸杖，埃及遍地就乌黑了三天。
And when Moses' hand was stretched out, dark night came over all the land of Egypt for three days;

三天之久，人不能相见，谁也不敢起来离开本处，惟有以色列人家中都有亮光。
They were not able to see one another, and no one got up from his place for three days: but where the children of Israel were living it was light.

法老就召摩西来，说，你们去事奉耶和华，只是你们的羊群牛群要留下，你们的妇人孩子可以和你们同去。
Then Pharaoh sent for Moses, and said, Go and give worship to the Lord; only let your flocks and your herds be kept here: your little ones may go with you.

摩西说，你总要把祭物和燔祭牲交给我们，使我们可以祭祀耶和华我们的神。
But Moses said, You will have to let us take burned offerings to put before the Lord our God.

我们的牲畜也要带去，连一蹄也不留下，因为我们要从其中取出来，事奉耶和华我们的神。我们未到那里，还不知道用什么事奉耶和华。
So our cattle will have to go with us, not one may be kept back; for they are needed for the worship of the Lord our God; we have no knowledge what offering we have to give till we come to the place.

但耶和华使法老的心刚硬，不肯容他们去。
But the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard, and he would not let them go.

法老对摩西说，你离开我去吧，你要小心，不要再见我的面，因为你见我面的那日你就必死。
And Pharaoh said to him, Go away from me, take care that you come not again before me; for the day when you see my face again will be your last.

摩西说，你说得好，我必不再见你的面了。
And Moses said, You say truly; I will not see your face again.

耶和华对摩西说，我再使一样的灾殃临到法老和埃及，然后他必容你们离开这地。他容你们去的时候，总要催逼你们都从这地出去。
And the Lord said to Moses, I will send one more punishment on Pharaoh and on Egypt; after that he will let you go; and when he does let you go, he will not keep one of you back, but will send you out by force.

你要传于百姓的耳中，叫他们男女各人向邻舍要金器银器。
So go now and give orders to the people that every man and every woman is to get from his or her neighbour ornaments of silver and of gold.

耶和华叫百姓在埃及人眼前蒙恩，并且摩西在埃及地，法老臣仆，和百姓的眼中看为极大。
And the Lord gave the people grace in the eyes of the Egyptians. For the man Moses was highly honoured in the land of Egypt, by Pharaoh's servants and the people.

摩西说，耶和华这样说，约到半夜，我必出去巡行埃及遍地。
And Moses said, This is what the Lord says: About the middle of the night I will go out through Egypt:

凡在埃及地，从坐宝座的法老直到磨子后的婢女所有的长子，以及一切头生的牲畜，都必死。
And death will come to every mother's first male child in all the land of Egypt, from the child of Pharaoh on his seat of power, to the child of the servant-girl crushing the grain; and the first births of all the cattle.

埃及遍地必有大哀号，从前没有这样的，后来也必没有。
And there will be a great cry through all the land of Egypt, such as never has been or will be again.

至于以色列中，无论是人是牲畜，连狗也不敢向他们摇舌，好叫你们知道耶和华是将埃及人和以色列人分别出来。
But against the children of Israel, man or beast, not so much as the tongue of a dog will be moved: so that you may see how the Lord makes a division between Israel and the Egyptians.

你这一切臣仆都要俯伏来见我，说，求你和跟从你的百姓都出去，然后我要出去。于是，摩西气忿忿地离开法老，出去了。
And all these your servants will come to me, going down on their faces before me and saying, Go out, and all your people with you: and after that I will go out. And he went away from Pharaoh burning with wrath.

耶和华对摩西说，法老必不听你们，使我的奇事在埃及地多起来。
And the Lord said to Moses, Pharaoh will not give ear to you, so that my wonders may be increased in the land of Egypt.

摩西，亚伦在法老面前行了这一切奇事，耶和华使法老的心刚硬，不容以色列人出离他的地。
All these wonders Moses and Aaron did before Pharaoh: but the Lord made Pharaoh's heart hard, and he did not let the children of Israel go out of his land.

耶和华在埃及地晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt,

你们要以本月为正月，为一年之首。
Let this month be to you the first of months, the first month of the year.

你们吩咐以色列全会众说，本月初十日，各人要按着父家取羊羔，一家一只。
Say to all the children of Israel when they are come together, In the tenth day of this month every man is to take a lamb, by the number of their fathers' families, a lamb for every family:

若是一家的人太少，吃不了一只羊羔，本人就要和他隔壁的邻舍共取一只。你们预备羊羔，要按着人数和饭量计算。
And if the lamb is more than enough for the family, let that family and its nearest neighbour have a lamb between them, taking into account the number of persons and how much food is needed for every man.

要无残疾，一岁的公羊羔，你们或从绵羊里取，或从山羊里取，都可以。
Let your lamb be without a mark, a male in its first year: you may take it from among the sheep or the goats:

要留到本月十四日，在黄昏的时候，以色列全会众把羊羔宰了。
Keep it till the fourteenth day of the same month, when everyone who is of the children of Israel is to put it to death between sundown and dark.

各家要取点血，涂在吃羊羔的房屋左右的门框上和门楣上。
Then take some of the blood and put it on the two sides of the door and over the door of the house where the meal is to be taken.

当夜要吃羊羔的肉，用火烤了，与无酵饼和苦菜同吃。
And let your food that night be the flesh of the lamb, cooked with fire in the oven, together with unleavened bread and bitter-tasting plants.

不可吃生的，断不可吃水煮的，要带着头，腿，五脏，用火烤了吃。
Do not take it uncooked or cooked with boiling water, but let it be cooked in the oven; its head with its legs and its inside parts.

不可剩下一点留到早晨，若留到早晨，要用火烧了。
Do not keep any of it till the morning; anything which is not used is to be burned with fire.

你们吃羊羔当腰间束带，脚上穿鞋，手中拿杖，赶紧地吃，这是耶和华的逾越节。
And take your meal dressed as if for a journey, with your shoes on your feet and your sticks in your hands: take it quickly: it is the Lord's Passover.

因为那夜我要巡行埃及地，把埃及地一切头生的，无论是人是牲畜，都击杀了，又要败坏埃及一切的神。我是耶和华。
For on that night I will go through the land of Egypt, sending death on every first male child, of man and of beast, and judging all the gods of Egypt: I am the Lord.

这血要在你们所住的房屋上作记号，我一见这血，就越过你们去。我击杀埃及地头生的时候，灾殃必不临到你们身上灭你们。
And the blood will be a sign on the houses where you are: when I see the blood I will go over you, and no evil will come on you for your destruction, when my hand is on the land of Egypt.

你们要记念这日，守为耶和华的节，作为你们世世代代永远的定例。
And this day is to be kept in your memories: you are to keep it as a feast to the Lord through all your generations, as an order for ever.

你们要吃无酵饼七日。头一日要把酵从你们各家中除去，因为从头一日起，到第七日为止，凡吃有酵之饼的，必从以色列中剪除。
For seven days let your food be unleavened bread; from the first day no leaven is to be seen in your houses: whoever takes bread with leaven in it, from the first till the seventh day, will be cut off from Israel.

头一日你们当有圣会，第七日也当有圣会。这两日之内，除了预备各人所要吃的以外，无论何工都不可作。
And on the first day there is to be a holy meeting and on the seventh day a holy meeting; no sort of work may be done on those days but only to make ready what is necessary for everyone's food.

你们要守无酵节，因为我正当这日把你们的军队从埃及地领出来。所以，你们要守这日，作为世世代代永远的定例。
So keep the feast of unleavened bread; for on this very day I have taken your armies out of the land of Egypt: this day, then, is to be kept through all your generations by an order for ever.

从正月十四日晚上，直到二十一日晚上，你们要吃无酵饼。
In the first month, from the evening of the fourteenth day, let your food be unleavened bread till the evening of the twenty-first day of the month.

在你们各家中，七日之内不可有酵，因为凡吃有酵之物的，无论是寄居的，是本地的，必从以色列的会中剪除。
For seven days no leaven is to be seen in your houses: for whoever takes bread which is leavened will be cut off from the people of Israel, if he is from another country or if he is an Israelite by birth.

有酵的物，你们都不可吃，在你们一切住处要吃无酵饼。
Take nothing which has leaven in it; wherever you are living let your food be unleavened cakes.

于是，摩西召了以色列的众长老来，对他们说，你们要按着家口取出羊羔，把这逾越节的羊羔宰了。
Then Moses sent for the chiefs of Israel, and said to them, See that lambs are marked out for yourselves and your families, and let the Passover lamb be put to death.

拿一把牛膝草，蘸盆里的血，打在门楣上和左右的门框上。你们谁也不可出自己的房门，直到早晨。
And take some hyssop and put it in the blood in the basin, touching the two sides and the top of the doorway with the blood from the basin; and let not one of you go out of his house till the morning.

因为耶和华要巡行击杀埃及人，他看见血在门楣上和左右的门框上，就必越过那门，不容灭命的进你们的房屋，击杀你们。
For the Lord will go through the land, sending death on the Egyptians; and when he sees the blood on the two sides and the top of the door, the Lord will go over your door and will not let death come in for your destruction.

这例，你们要守着，作为你们和你们子孙永远的定例。
And you are to keep this as an order to you and to your sons for ever.

日后，你们到了耶和华按着所应许赐给你们的那地，就要守这礼。
And when you come into the land which the Lord will make yours, as he gave his word, you are to keep this act of worship.

你们的儿女问你们说，行这礼是什么意思？
And when your children say to you, What is the reason of this act of worship?

你们就说，这是献给耶和华逾越节的祭。当以色列人在埃及的时候，他击杀埃及人，越过以色列人的房屋，救了我们各家。于是百姓低头下拜。
Then you will say, This is the offering of the Lord's Passover; for he went over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he sent death on the Egyptians, and kept our families safe. And the people gave worship with bent heads.

耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，亚伦，以色列人就怎样行。
And the children of Israel went and did so; as the Lord had given orders to Moses and Aaron, so they did.

到了半夜，耶和华把埃及地所有的长子，就是从坐宝座的法老，直到被掳囚在监里之人的长子，以及一切头生的牲畜，尽都杀了。
And in the middle of the night the Lord sent death on every first male child in the land of Egypt, from the child of Pharaoh on his seat of power to the child of the prisoner in the prison; and the first births of all the cattle.

法老和一切臣仆，并埃及众人，夜间都起来了。在埃及有大哀号，无一家不死一个人的。
Then Pharaoh got up in the night, he and all his servants and all the Egyptians; and a great cry went up from Egypt; for there was not a house where someone was not dead.

夜间，法老召了摩西，亚伦来，说，起来，连你们带以色列人，从我民中出去，依你们所说的，去事奉耶和华吧。
And he sent for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Get up and go out from among my people, you and the children of Israel; go and give worship to the Lord as you have said.

也依你们所说的，连羊群牛群带着走吧，并要为我祝福。
And take your flocks and your herds as you have said, and be gone; and give me your blessing.

埃及人催促百姓，打发他们快快出离那地，因为埃及人说，我们都要死了。
And the Egyptians were forcing the people on, to get them out of the land quickly; for they said, We are all dead men.

百姓就拿着没有酵的生面，把抟面盆包在衣服中，扛在肩头上。
And the people took their bread-paste before it was leavened, putting their basins in their clothing on their backs.

以色列人照着摩西的话行，向埃及人要金器，银器，和衣裳。
And the children of Israel had done as Moses had said; and they got from the Egyptians ornaments of silver and of gold, and clothing:

耶和华叫百姓在埃及人眼前蒙恩，以致埃及人给他们所要的。他们就把埃及人的财物夺去了。
And the Lord had given the people grace in the eyes of the Egyptians so that they gave them whatever was requested. So they took away all their goods from the Egyptians.

以色列人从兰塞起行，往疏割去，除了妇人孩子，步行的男人约有六十万。
And the children of Israel made the journey from Rameses to Succoth; there were about six hundred thousand men on foot, as well as children.

又有许多闲杂人，并有羊群牛群，和他们一同上去。
And a mixed band of people went with them; and flocks and herds in great numbers.

他们用埃及带出来的生面烤成无酵饼。这生面原没有发起，因为他们被催逼离开埃及，不能耽延，也没有为自己预备什么食物。
And they made unleavened cakes from the paste which they had taken out of Egypt; it was not leavened, for they had been sent out of Egypt so quickly, that they had no time to make any food ready.

以色列人住在埃及共有四百三十年。
Now the children of Israel had been living in Egypt for four hundred and thirty years.

正满了四百三十年的那一天，耶和华的军队都从埃及地出来了。
And at the end of four hundred and thirty years, to the very day, all the armies of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt.

这夜是耶和华的夜，因耶和华领他们出了埃及地，所以当向耶和华谨守，是以色列众人世世代代该谨守的。
It is a watch-night before the Lord who took them out of the land of Egypt: this same night is a watch-night to the Lord for all the children of Israel, through all their generations.

耶和华对摩西，亚伦说，逾越节的例是这样，外邦人都不可吃这羊羔。
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, This is the law of the Passover: no man who is not an Israelite is to take of it:

但各人用银子买的奴仆，既受了割礼就可以吃。
But every man's servant, whom he has got for money, may take of it, when he has had circumcision.

寄居的和雇工人都不可吃。
A man from a strange country living among you, and a servant working for payment, may not take part in it.

应当在一个房子里吃，不可把一点肉从房子里带到外头去。羊羔的骨头一根也不可折断。
It is to be taken in one house; not a bit of the flesh is to be taken out of the house, and no bone of it may be broken.

以色列全会众都要守这礼。
All Israel is to keep the feast.

若有外人寄居在你们中间，愿向耶和华守逾越节，他所有的男子务要受割礼，然后才容他前来遵守，他也就像本地人一样，但未受割礼的，都不可吃这羊羔。
And if a man from another country is living with you, and has a desire to keep the Passover to the Lord, let all the males of his family undergo circumcision, and then let him come near and keep it; for he will then be as one of your people; but no one without circumcision may keep it.

本地人和寄居在你们中间的外人同归一例。
The law is the same for him who is an Israelite by birth and for the man from a strange country who is living with you.

耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，亚伦，以色列众人就怎样行了。
So the children of Israel did as the Lord gave orders to Moses and Aaron.

正当那日，耶和华将以色列人按着他们的军队，从埃及地领出来。
And on that very day the Lord took the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

以色列中凡头生的，无论是人是牲畜，都是我的，要分别为圣归我。
Let the first male child of every mother among the children of Israel be kept holy for me, even the first male birth among man or beast; for it is mine.

摩西对百姓说，你们要记念从埃及为奴之家出来的这日，因为耶和华用大能的手将你们从这地方领出来。有酵的饼都不可吃。
And Moses said to the people, Let this day, on which you came out of Egypt, out of your prison-house, be kept for ever in memory; for by the strength of his hand the Lord has taken you out from this place; let no leavened bread be used.

亚笔月间的这日是你们出来的日子。
On this day, in the month Abib, you are going out.

将来耶和华领你进迦南人，赫人，亚摩利人，希未人，耶布斯人之地，就是他向你的祖宗起誓应许给你那流奶与蜜之地，那时你要在这月间守这礼。
And it will be that, when the Lord takes you into the land of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, the land which he made an oath to your fathers that he would give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, you will do this act of worship in this month.

你要吃无酵饼七日，到第七日要向耶和华守节。
For seven days let your food be unleavened cakes; and on the seventh day there is to be a feast to the Lord.

这七日之久，要吃无酵饼，在你四境之内不可见有酵的饼，也不可见发酵的物。
Unleavened cakes are to be your food through all the seven days; let no leavened bread be seen among you, or any leaven, in any part of your land.

当那日，你要告诉你的儿子说，这是因耶和华在我出埃及的时候为我所行的事。
And you will say to your son in that day, It is because of what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.

这要在你手上作记号，在你额上作纪念，使耶和华的律法常在你口中，因为耶和华曾用大能的手将你从埃及领出来。
And this will be for a sign to you on your hand and for a mark on your brow, so that the law of the Lord may be in your mouth: for with a strong hand the Lord took you out of Egypt.

所以你每年要按着日期守这例。
So let this order be kept, at the right time, from year to year.

将来，耶和华照他向你和你祖宗所起的誓将你领进迦南人之地，把这地赐给你，
And when the Lord takes you into the land of Canaan, as he made his oath to you and to your fathers, and gives it to you,

那时你要将一切头生的，并牲畜中头生的，归给耶和华，公的都要属耶和华。
You are to put on one side for the Lord every mother's first male child, the first-fruit of her body, and the first young one of every beast; every male is holy to the Lord.

凡头生的驴，你要用羊羔代赎，若不代赎，就要打折它的颈项。凡你儿子中头生的都要赎出来。
And for the young of an ass you may give a lamb in payment, or if you will not make payment for it, its neck is to be broken; but for all the first sons among your children, let payment be made.

日后，你的儿子问你说，这是什么意思？你就说，耶和华用大能的手将我们从埃及为奴之家领出来。
And when your son says to you in time to come, What is the reason for this? say to him, By the strength of his hand the Lord took us out of Egypt, out of the prison-house:

那时法老几乎不容我们去，耶和华就把埃及地所有头生的，无论是人是牲畜，都杀了。因此，我把一切头生的公牲畜献给耶和华为祭，但将头生的儿子都赎出来。
And when Pharaoh made his heart hard and would not let us go, the Lord sent death on all the first sons in Egypt, of man and of beast: and so every first male who comes to birth is offered to the Lord; but for all the first of my sons I give a price.

这要在你手上作记号，在你额上作经文，因为耶和华用大能的手将我们从埃及领出来。
And this will be for a sign on your hand and for a mark on your brow: for by the strength of his hand the Lord took us out of Egypt.

法老容百姓去的时候，非利士地的道路虽近，神却不领他们从那里走，因为神说，恐怕百姓遇见打仗后悔，就回埃及去。
Now after Pharaoh had let the people go, God did not take them through the land of the Philistines, though that was near: for God said, If the people see war, they may have a change of heart and go back to Egypt.

所以神领百姓绕道而行，走红海旷野的路。以色列人出埃及地，都带着兵器上去。
But God took the people round by the waste land near the Red Sea: and the children of Israel went up in fighting order out of the land of Egypt.

摩西把约瑟的骸骨一同带去，因为约瑟曾叫以色列人严严地起誓，对他们说，神必眷顾你们，你们要把我的骸骨从这里一同带上去。
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for Joseph had made the children of Israel take an oath, saying, God will certainly keep you in mind; and you are to take my bones away with you.

他们从疏割起行，在旷野边的以倘安营。
Then they went on their journey from Succoth, and put up their tents in Etham at the edge of the waste land.

日间，耶和华在云柱中领他们的路，夜间，在火柱中光照他们，使他们日夜都可以行走。
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, guiding them on their way; and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light: so that they were able to go on day and night:

日间云柱，夜间火柱，总不离开百姓的面前。
The pillar of cloud went ever before them by day, and the pillar of fire by night.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人转回，安营在比哈希录前，密夺和海的中间，对着巴力洗分，靠近海边安营。
Give orders to the children of Israel to go back and put up their tents before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, in front of Baal-zephon, opposite to which you are to put up your tents by the sea.

法老必说，以色列人在地中绕迷了，旷野把他们困住了。
And Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are wandering without direction, they are shut in by the waste land.

我要使法老的心刚硬，他要追赶他们，我便在法老和他全军身上得荣耀，埃及人就知道我是耶和华。于是以色列人这样行了。
And I will make Pharaoh's heart hard, and he will come after them and I will be honoured over Pharaoh and all his army, so that the Egyptians may see that I am the Lord. And they did so.

有人告诉埃及王说，百姓逃跑。法老和他的臣仆就向百姓变心，说，我们容以色列人去，不再服事我们，这作的是什么事呢？
And word came to Pharaoh of the flight of the people: and the feeling of Pharaoh and of his servants about the people was changed, and they said, Why have we let Israel go, so that they will do no more work for us?

法老就预备他的车辆，带领军兵同去，
So he had his war-carriage made ready and took his people with him:

并带着六百辆特选的车和埃及所有的车，每辆都有车兵长。
And he took six hundred carriages, all the carriages of Egypt, and captains over all of them.

耶和华使埃及王法老的心刚硬，他就追赶以色列人，因为以色列人是昂然无惧地出埃及。
And the Lord made the heart of Pharaoh hard, and he went after the children of Israel: for the children of Israel had gone out without fear.

埃及人追赶他们，法老一切的马匹，车辆，马兵，与军兵就在海边上，靠近比哈希录，对着巴力洗分，在他们安营的地方追上了。
But the Egyptians went after them, all the horses and carriages of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them in their tents by the sea, by Pihahiroth, before Baal-zephon.

法老临近的时候，以色列人举目看见埃及人赶来，就甚惧怕，向耶和华哀求。
And when Pharaoh came near, the children of Israel, lifting up their eyes, saw the Egyptians coming after them, and were full of fear; and their cry went up to God.

他们对摩西说，难道在埃及没有坟地，你把我们带来死在旷野吗？你为什么这样待我们，将我们从埃及领出来呢？
And they said to Moses, Was there no resting-place for the dead in Egypt, that you have taken us away to come to our death in the waste land? why have you taken us out of Egypt?

我们在埃及岂没有对你说过，不要搅扰我们，容我们服事埃及人吗？因为服事埃及人比死在旷野还好。
Did we not say to you in Egypt, Let us be as we are, working for the Egyptians? for it is better to be the servants of the Egyptians than to come to our death in the waste land.

摩西对百姓说，不要惧怕，只管站住，看耶和华今天向你们所要施行的救恩。因为，你们今天所看见的埃及人必永远不再看见了。
But Moses said, Keep where you are and have no fear; now you will see the salvation of the Lord which he will give you today; for the Egyptians whom you see today you will never see again.

耶和华必为你们争战，你们只管静默，不要作声。
The Lord will make war for you, you have only to keep quiet.

耶和华对摩西说，你为什么向我哀求呢？你吩咐以色列人往前走。
And the Lord said to Moses, Why are you crying out to me? give the children of Israel the order to go forward.

你举手向海伸杖，把水分开。以色列人要下海中走干地。
And let your rod be lifted up and your hand stretched out over the sea, and it will be parted in two; and the children of Israel will go through on dry land.

我要使埃及人的心刚硬，他们就跟着下去。我要在法老和他的全军，车辆，马兵上得荣耀。
And I will make the heart of the Egyptians hard, and they will go in after them: and I will be honoured over Pharaoh and over his army, his war-carriages, and his horsemen.

我在法老和他的车辆，马兵上得荣耀的时候，埃及人就知道我是耶和华了。
And the Egyptians will see that I am the Lord, when I get honour over Pharaoh and his war-carriages and his horsemen.

在以色列营前行走神的使者，转到他们后边去，云柱也从他们前边转到他们后边立住。
Then the angel of God, who had been before the tents of Israel, took his place at their back; and the pillar of cloud, moving from before them, came to rest at their back:

在埃及营和以色列营中间有云柱，一边黑暗，一边发光，终夜两下不得相近。
And it came between the army of Egypt and the army of Israel; and there was a dark cloud between them, and they went on through the night; but the one army came no nearer to the other all the night.

摩西向海伸杖，耶和华便用大东风，使海水一夜退去，水便分开，海就成了干地。
And when Moses' hand was stretched out over the sea, the Lord with a strong east wind made the sea go back all night, and the waters were parted in two and the sea became dry land.

以色列人下海中走干地，水在他们的左右作了墙垣。
And the children of Israel went through the sea on dry land: and the waters were a wall on their right side and on their left.

埃及人追赶他们，法老一切的马匹，车辆，和马兵都跟着下到海中。
Then the Egyptians went after them into the middle of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses and his war-carriages and his horsemen.

到了晨更的时候，耶和华从云火柱中向埃及的军兵观看，使埃及的军兵混乱了，
And in the morning watch, the Lord, looking out on the armies of the Egyptians from the pillar of fire and cloud, sent trouble on the army of the Egyptians;

又使他们的车轮脱落，难以行走，以致埃及人说，我们从以色列人面前逃跑吧，因耶和华为他们攻击我们了。
And made the wheels of their war-carriages stiff, so that they had hard work driving them: so the Egyptians said, Let us go in flight from before the face of Israel, for the Lord is fighting for them against the Egyptians.

耶和华对摩西说，你向海伸杖，叫水仍合在埃及人并他们的车辆，马兵身上。
And the Lord said to Moses, Let your hand be stretched out over the sea, and the waters will come back again on the Egyptians, and on their war-carriages and on their horsemen.

摩西就向海伸杖，到了天一亮，海水仍旧复原。埃及人避水逃跑的时候，耶和华把他们推翻在海中，
And when Moses' hand was stretched out over the sea, at dawn the sea came flowing back, meeting the Egyptians in their flight, and the Lord sent destruction on the Egyptians in the middle of the sea.

水就回流，淹没了车辆和马兵。那些跟着以色列人下海法老的全军，连一个也没有剩下。
And the waters came back, covering the war-carriages and the horsemen and all the army of Pharaoh which went after them into the middle of the sea; not one of them was to be seen.

以色列人却在海中走干地，水在他们的左右作了墙垣。
But the children of Israel went through the sea walking on dry land, and the waters were a wall on their right side and on their left.

当日，耶和华这样拯救以色列人脱离埃及人的手，以色列人看见埃及人的死尸都在海边了。
So that day the Lord gave Israel salvation from the hands of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the sea's edge.

以色列人看见耶和华向埃及人所行的大事，就敬畏耶和华，又信服他和他的仆人摩西。
And Israel saw the great work which the Lord had done against the Egyptians, and the fear of the Lord came on the people and they had faith in the Lord and in his servant Moses.

那时，摩西和以色列人向耶和华唱歌说，我要向耶和华歌唱，因他大大战胜，将马和骑马的投在海中。
Then Moses and the children of Israel made this song to the Lord, and said, I will make a song to the Lord, for he is lifted up in glory: the horse and the horseman he has sent down into the sea.

耶和华是我的力量，我的诗歌，也成了我的拯救。这是我的神，我要赞美他，是我父亲的神，我要尊崇他。
The Lord is my strength and my strong helper, he has become my salvation: he is my God and I will give him praise; my father's God and I will give him glory.

耶和华是战士，他的名是耶和华。
The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name.

法老的车辆，军兵，耶和华已抛在海中，他特选的军长都沉于红海。
Pharaoh's war-carriages and his army he has sent down into the sea: the best of his captains have gone down into the Red Sea.

深水淹没他们，他们如同石头坠到深处。
They were covered by the deep waters: like a stone they went down under the waves.

耶和华阿，你的右手施展能力，显出荣耀，耶和华阿，你的右手摔碎仇敌。
Full of glory, O Lord, is the power of your right hand; by your right hand those who came against you are broken.

你大发威严，推翻那些起来攻击你的，你发出烈怒如火，烧灭他们像烧碎秸一样。
When you are lifted up in power, all those who come against you are crushed: when you send out your wrath, they are burned up like dry grass.

你发鼻中的气，水便聚起成堆，大水直立如垒，海中的深水凝结。
By your breath the waves were massed together, the flowing waters were lifted up like a pillar; the deep waters became solid in the heart of the sea.

仇敌说，我要追赶，我要追上，我要分掳物，我要在他们身上称我的心愿。我要拔出刀来，亲手杀灭他们。
Egypt said, I will go after them, I will overtake, I will make division of their goods: my desire will have its way with them; my sword will be uncovered, my hand will send destruction on them.

你叫风一吹，海就把他们淹没，他们如铅沉在大水之中。
You sent your wind and the sea came over them: they went down like lead into the great waters.

耶和华阿，众神之中，谁能象你。谁能象你，至圣至荣，可颂可畏，施行奇事。
Who is like you, O Lord, among the gods? who is like you, in holy glory, to be praised with fear, doing wonders?

你伸出右手，地便吞灭他们。
When your right hand was stretched out, the mouth of the earth was open for them.

你凭慈爱，领了你所赎的百姓，你凭能力，引他们到了你的圣所。
In your mercy you went before the people whom you have made yours; guiding them in your strength to your holy place.

外邦人听见就发颤，疼痛抓住非利士的居民。
Hearing of you the peoples were shaking in fear: the people of Philistia were gripped with pain.

那时，以东的族长惊惶，摩押的英雄被战兢抓住，迦南的居民心都消化了。
The chiefs of Edom were troubled in heart; the strong men of Moab were in the grip of fear: all the people of Canaan became like water.

惊骇恐惧临到他们。耶和华阿，因你膀臂的大能，他们如石头寂然不动，等候你的百姓过去，等候你所赎的百姓过去。
Fear and grief came on them; by the strength of your arm they were turned to stone; till your people went over, O Lord, till the people went over whom you have made yours.

你要将他们领进去，栽于你产业的山上。耶和华阿，就是你为自己所造的住处，主阿，就是你手所建立的圣所。
You will take them in, planting them in the mountain of your heritage, the place, O Lord, where you have made your house, the holy place, O Lord, the building of your hands.

耶和华必作王，直到永永远远。
The Lord is King for ever and ever.

法老的马匹，车辆，和马兵下到海中，耶和华使海水回流，淹没他们，惟有以色列人在海中走干地。
For the horses of Pharaoh, with his war-carriages and his horsemen, went into the sea, and the Lord sent the waters of the sea back over them; but the children of Israel went through the sea on dry land.

亚伦的姐姐，女先知米利暗，手里拿着鼓，众妇女也跟她出去拿鼓跳舞。
And Miriam, the woman prophet, the sister of Aaron, took an instrument of music in her hand; and all the women went after her with music and dances.

米利暗应声说，你们要歌颂耶和华，因他大大战胜，将马和骑马的投在海中。
And Miriam, answering, said, Make a song to the Lord, for he is lifted up in glory; the horse and the horseman he has sent into the sea.

摩西领以色列人从红海往前行，到了书珥的旷野，在旷野走了三天，找不着水。
Then Moses took Israel forward from the Red Sea, and they went out into the waste land of Shur; and for three days they were in the waste land where there was no water.

到了玛拉，不能喝那里的水，因为水苦，所以那地名叫玛拉。
And when they came to Marah, the water was no good for drinking, for the waters of Marah were bitter, which is why it was named Marah.

百姓就向摩西发怨言，说，我们喝什么呢？
And the people, crying out against Moses, said, What are we to have for drink?

摩西呼求耶和华，耶和华指示他一棵树。他把树丢在水里，水就变甜了。耶和华在那里为他们定了律例，典章，在那里试验他们，
And in answer to his prayer, the Lord made him see a tree, and when he put it into the water, the water was made sweet. There he gave them a law and an order, testing them;

又说，你若留意听耶和华你神的话，又行我眼中看为正的事，留心听我的诫命，守我一切的律例，我就不将所加与埃及人的疾病加在你身上，因为我耶和华是医治你的。
And he said, If with all your heart you will give attention to the voice of the Lord your God, and do what is right in his eyes, giving ear to his orders and keeping his laws, I will not put on you any of the diseases which I put on the Egyptians: for I am the Lord your life-giver.

他们到了以琳，在那里有十二股水泉，七十棵棕树，他们就在那里的水边安营。
And they came to Elim where there were twelve water-springs and seventy palm-trees: and they put up their tents there by the waters.

以色列全会众从以琳起行，在出埃及后第二个月十五日到了以琳和西乃中间，汛的旷野。
And they went on their way from Elim, and all the children of Israel came into the waste land of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after they went out of the land of Egypt.

以色列全会众在旷野向摩西，亚伦发怨言，
And all the children of Israel were crying out against Moses and Aaron in the waste land:

说，巴不得我们早死在埃及地，耶和华的手下，那时我们坐在肉锅旁边，吃得饱足。你们将我们领出来，到这旷野，是要叫这全会众都饿死啊。
And the children of Israel said to them, It would have been better for the Lord to have put us to death in the land of Egypt, where we were seated by the flesh-pots and had bread enough for our needs; for you have taken us out to this waste of sand, to put all this people to death through need of food.

耶和华对摩西说，我要将粮食从天降给你们。百姓可以出去，每天收每天的分，我好试验他们遵不遵我的法度。
Then the Lord said to Moses, See, I will send down bread from heaven for you; and the people will go out every day and get enough for the day's needs; so that I may put them to the test to see if they will keep my laws or not.

到第六天，他们要把所收进来的预备好了，比每天所收的多一倍。
And on the sixth day they are to make ready what they get in, and it will be twice as much as they get on the other days.

摩西，亚伦对以色列众人说，到了晚上，你们要知道是耶和华将你们从埃及地领出来的。
And Moses and Aaron said to all the children of Israel, This evening it will be clear to you that it is the Lord who has taken you out of the land of Egypt:

早晨，你们要看见耶和华的荣耀，因为耶和华听见你们向他所发的怨言了。我们算什么，你们竟向我们发怨言呢？
And in the morning you will see the glory of the Lord; for your angry words against the Lord have come to his ears: and what are we that you are crying out against us?

摩西又说，耶和华晚上必给你们肉吃，早晨必给你们食物得饱，因为你们向耶和华发的怨言，他都听见了。我们算什么，你们的怨言不是向我们发的，乃是向耶和华发的。
And Moses said, The Lord will give you meat for your food at evening, and in the morning bread in full measure; for your outcry against the Lord has come to his ears: for what are we? your outcry is not against us but against the Lord.

摩西对亚伦说，你告诉以色列全会众说，你们就近耶和华面前，因为他已经听见你们的怨言了。
And Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the people of Israel, Come near before the Lord for he has given ear to your outcry.

亚伦正对以色列全会众说话的时候，他们向旷野观看，不料，耶和华的荣光在云中显现。
And while Aaron was talking to the children of Israel, their eyes were turned in the direction of the waste land, and they saw the glory of the Lord shining in the cloud.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

我已经听见以色列人的怨言。你告诉他们说，到黄昏的时候，你们要吃肉，早晨必有食物得饱，你们就知道我是耶和华你们的神。
The outcry of the children of Israel has come to my ears: say to them now, At nightfall you will have meat for your food, and in the morning bread in full measure; and you will see that I am the Lord your God.

到了晚上，有鹌鹑飞来，遮满了营，早晨在营四围的地上有露水。
And it came about that in the evening little birds came up and the place was covered with them: and in the morning there was dew all round about the tents.

露水上升之后，不料，野地面上有如白霜的小圆物。
And when the dew was gone, on the face of the earth was a small round thing, like small drops of ice on the earth.

以色列人看见，不知道是什么，就彼此对问说，这是什么呢？摩西对他们说，这就是耶和华给你们吃的食物。
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said to one another, What is it? for they had no idea what it was. And Moses said to them, It is the bread which the Lord has given you for your food.

耶和华所吩咐的是这样，你们要按着各人的饭量，为帐棚里的人，按着人数收起来，各拿一俄梅珥。
This is what the Lord has said, Let every man take up as much as he has need of; at the rate of one omer for every person, let every man take as much as is needed for his family.

以色列人就这样行，有多收的，有少收的。
And the children of Israel did so, and some took more and some less.

及至用俄梅珥量一量，多收的也没有余，少收的也没有缺，各人按着自己的饭量收取。
And when it was measured, he who had taken up much had nothing over, and he who had little had enough; every man had taken what he was able to make use of.

摩西对他们说，所收的，不许什么人留到早晨。
And Moses said to them, Let nothing be kept till the morning.

然而他们不听摩西的话，内中有留到早晨的，就生虫变臭了，摩西便向他们发怒。
But they gave no attention to Moses, and some of them kept it till the morning and there were worms in it and it had an evil smell: and Moses was angry with them.

他们每日早晨，按着各人的饭量收取，日头一发热，就消化了。
And they took it up morning by morning, every man as he had need: and when the sun was high it was gone.

到第六天，他们收了双倍的食物，每人两俄梅珥。会众的官长来告诉摩西，
And on the sixth day they took up twice as much of the bread, two omers for every person: and all the rulers of the people gave Moses word of it.

摩西对他们说，耶和华这样说，明天是圣安息日，是向耶和华守的圣安息日。你们要烤的就烤了，要煮的就煮了，所剩下的都留到早晨。
And he said, This is what the Lord has said, Tomorrow is a day of rest, a holy Sabbath to the Lord: what has to be cooked may be cooked; and what is over, put on one side to be kept till the morning.

他们就照摩西的吩咐留到早晨，也不臭，里头也没有虫子。
And they kept it till the morning as Moses had said: and no smell came from it, and it had no worms.

摩西说，你们今天吃这个吧，因为今天是向耶和华守的安息日，你们在田野必找不着了。
And Moses said, Make your meal today of what you have, for this day is a Sabbath to the Lord: today you will not get any in the fields.

六天可以收取，第七天乃是安息日，那一天必没有了。
For six days you will get it, but on the seventh day, the Sabbath, there will not be any.

第七天，百姓中有人出去收，什么也找不着。
But still on the seventh day some of the people went out to get it, and there was not any.

耶和华对摩西说，你们不肯守我的诫命和律法，要到几时呢？
And the Lord said to Moses, How long will you go against my orders and my laws?

你们看，耶和华既将安息日赐给你们，所以第六天他赐给你们两天的食物，第七天各人要住在自己的地方，不许什么人出去。
See, because the Lord has given you the Sabbath, he gives you on the sixth day bread enough for two days; let every man keep where he is; let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.

于是百姓第七天安息了。
So the people took their rest on the seventh day.

这食物，以色列家叫吗哪，样子像芫荽子，颜色是白的，滋味如同搀蜜的薄饼。
And this bread was named manna by Israel: it was white, like a grain seed, and its taste was like cakes made with honey.

摩西说，耶和华所吩咐的是这样，要将一满俄梅珥吗哪留到世世代代，使后人可以看见我当日将你们领出埃及地，在旷野所给你们吃的食物。
And Moses said, This is the order which the Lord has given: Let one omer of it be kept for future generations, so that they may see the bread which I gave you for your food in the waste land, when I took you out from the land of Egypt.

摩西对亚伦说，你拿一个罐子，盛一满俄梅珥吗哪，存在耶和华面前，要留到世世代代。
And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot and put one omer of manna in it, and put it away before the Lord, to be kept for future generations.

耶和华怎么吩咐摩西，亚伦就怎么行，把吗哪放在法柜前存留。
So Aaron put it away in front of the holy chest to be kept, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

以色列人吃吗哪共四十年，直到进了有人居住之地，就是迦南的境界。
And the children of Israel had manna for their food for forty years, till they came to a land with people in it, till they came to the edge of the land of Canaan.

（俄梅珥乃伊法十分之一）。
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

以色列全会众都遵耶和华的吩咐，按着站口从汛的旷野往前行，在利非订安营。百姓没有水喝，
And the children of Israel went on from the waste land of Sin, by stages as the Lord gave them orders, and put up their tents in Rephidim: and there was no drinking-water for the people.

所以与摩西争闹，说，给我们水喝吧。摩西对他们说，你们为什么与我争闹？为什么试探耶和华呢？
So the people were angry with Moses, and said, Give us water for drinking. And Moses said, Why are you angry with me? and why do you put God to the test?

百姓在那里甚渴，要喝水，就向摩西发怨言，说，你为什么将我们从埃及领出来，使我们和我们的儿女并牲畜都渴死呢？
And the people were in great need of water; and they made an outcry against Moses, and said, Why have you taken us out of Egypt to send death on us and our children and our cattle through need of water?

摩西就呼求耶和华说，我向这百姓怎样行呢？他们几乎要拿石头打死我。
And Moses, crying out to the Lord, said, What am I to do to this people? they are almost ready to put me to death by stoning.

耶和华对摩西说，你手里拿着你先前击打河水的杖，带领以色列的几个长老，从百姓面前走过去。
And the Lord said to Moses, Go on before the people, and take some of the chiefs of Israel with you, and take in your hand the rod which was stretched out over the Nile, and go.

我必在何烈的磐石那里，站在你面前。你要击打磐石，从磐石里必有水流出来，使百姓可以喝。摩西就在以色列的长老眼前这样行了。
See, I will take my place before you on the rock in Horeb; and when you give the rock a blow, water will come out of it, and the people will have drink. And Moses did so before the eyes of the chiefs of Israel.

他给那地方起名叫玛撒（就是试探的意思），又叫米利巴（就是争闹的意思），因以色列人争闹，又因他们试探耶和华，说，耶和华是在我们中间不是。
And he gave that place the name Massah and Meribah, because the children of Israel were angry, and because they put the Lord to the test, saying, Is the Lord with us or not?

那时，亚玛力人来在利非订，和以色列人争战。
Then Amalek came and made war on Israel in Rephidim.

摩西对约书亚说，你为我们选出人来，出去和亚玛力人争战。明天我手里要拿着神的杖，站在山顶上。
And Moses said to Joshua, Get together a band of men for us and go out, make war on Amalek: tomorrow I will take my place on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.

于是约书亚照着摩西对他所说的话行，和亚玛力人争战。摩西，亚伦，与户珥都上了山顶。
So Joshua did as Moses said to him, and went to war with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.

摩西何时举手，以色列人就得胜，何时垂手，亚玛力人就得胜。
Now while Moses' hand was lifted up, Israel was the stronger: but when he let his hand go down, Amalek became the stronger.

但摩西的手发沉，他们就搬石头来，放在他以下，他就坐在上面。亚伦与户珥扶着他的手，一个在这边，一个在那边，他的手就稳住，直到日落的时候。
But Moses' hands became tired; so they put a stone under him and he took his seat on it, Aaron and Hur supporting his hands, one on one side and one on the other; so his hands were kept up without falling till the sun went down.

约书亚用刀杀了亚玛力王和他的百姓。
And Joshua overcame Amalek and his people with the sword.

耶和华对摩西说，我要将亚玛力的名号从天下全然涂抹了，你要将这话写在书上作纪念，又念给约书亚听。
And the Lord said to Moses, Make a record of this in a book, so that it may be kept in memory, and say it again in the ears of Joshua: that all memory of Amalek is to be completely uprooted from the earth.

摩西筑了一座坛，起名叫耶和华尼西（就是耶和华是我旌旗的意思），
Then Moses put up an altar and gave it the name of Yahweh-nissi:

又说，耶和华已经起了誓，必世世代代和亚玛力人争战。
For he said, The Lord has taken his oath that there will be war with Amalek from generation to generation.

摩西的岳父，米甸祭司叶忒罗，听见神为摩西和神的百姓以色列所行的一切事，就是耶和华将以色列从埃及领出来的事，
Now news came to Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, of all God had done for Moses and for Israel his people, and how the Lord had taken Israel out of Egypt.

便带着摩西的妻子西坡拉，就是摩西从前打发回去的，
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,

又带着西坡拉的两个儿子，一个名叫革舜，因为摩西说，我在外邦作了寄居的，
And her two sons, one of whom was named Gershom, for he said, I have been living in a strange land:

一个名叫以利以谢，因为他说，我父亲的神帮助了我，救我脱离法老的刀。
And the name of the other was Eliezer, for he said, The God of my father was my help, and kept me safe from the sword of Pharaoh:

摩西的岳父叶忒罗带着摩西的妻子和两个儿子来到神的山，就是摩西在旷野安营的地方。
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to where Moses had put up his tent in the waste land, by the mountain of God.

他对摩西说，我是你岳父叶忒罗，带着你的妻子和两个儿子来到你这里。
And he said to Moses, I, your father-in-law, have come to you, with your wife and your two sons.

摩西迎接他的岳父，向他下拜，与他亲嘴，彼此问安，都进了帐棚。
And Moses went out to his father-in-law, and went down on his face before him and gave him a kiss; and they said to one another, Are you well? and they came into the tent.

摩西将耶和华为以色列的缘故向法老和埃及人所行的一切事，以及路上所遭遇的一切艰难，并耶和华怎样搭救他们，都述说与他岳父听。
And Moses gave his father-in-law an account of all the Lord had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians because of Israel, and of all the troubles which had come on them by the way, and how the Lord had given them salvation.

叶忒罗因耶和华待以色列的一切好处，就是拯救他们脱离埃及人的手，便甚欢喜。
And Jethro was glad because the Lord had been good to Israel, freeing them from the power of the Egyptians.

叶忒罗说，耶和华是应当称颂的，他救了你们脱离埃及人和法老的手，将这百姓从埃及人的手下救出来。
And Jethro said, Praise be to the Lord, who has taken you out of the hand of Pharaoh and out of the hand of the Egyptians; freeing the people from the yoke of the Egyptians.

我现今在埃及人向这百姓发狂傲的事上得知，耶和华比万神都大。
Now I am certain that the Lord is greater than all gods, for he has overcome them in their pride.

摩西的岳父叶忒罗把燔祭和平安祭献给神。亚伦和以色列的众长老都来了，与摩西的岳父在神面前吃饭。
Then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, made a burned offering to God: and Aaron came, with the chiefs of Israel, and had a meal with Moses' father-in-law, before God.

第二天，摩西坐着审判百姓，百姓从早到晚都站在摩西的左右。
Now on the day after, Moses took his seat to give decisions for the people: and the people were waiting before Moses from morning till evening.

摩西的岳父看见他向百姓所作的一切事，就说，你向百姓作的是什么事呢？你为什么独自坐着，众百姓从早到晚都站在你的左右呢？
And when Moses' father-in-law saw all he was doing, he said, What is this you are doing for the people? why are you seated here by yourself, with all the people waiting before you from morning till evening?

摩西对岳父说，这是因百姓到我这里来求问神。
And Moses said to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to get directions from God:

他们有事的时候就到我这里来，我便在两造之间施行审判，我又叫他们知道神的律例和法度。
And if they have any question between themselves, they come to me, and I am judge between a man and his neighbour, and I give them the orders and laws of God.

摩西的岳父说，你这作得不好。
And Moses' father-in-law said to him, What you are doing is not good.

你和这些百姓必都疲惫，因为这事太重，你独自一人办理不了。
Your strength and that of the people will be completely used up: this work is more than you are able to do by yourself.

现在你要听我的话。我为你出个主意，愿神与你同在。你要替百姓到神面前，将案件奏告神，
Give ear now to my suggestion, and may God be with you: you are to be the people's representative before God, taking their causes to him:

又要将律例和法度教训他们，指示他们当行的道，当作的事，
Teaching them his rules and his laws, guiding them in the way they have to go, and making clear to them the work they have to do.

并要从百姓中拣选有才能的人，就是敬畏神，诚实无妄，恨不义之财的人，派他们作千夫长，百夫长，五十夫长，十夫长，管理百姓，
But for the rest, take from among the people able men, such as have the fear of God, true men hating profits wrongly made; and put such men over them, to be captains of thousands, captains of hundreds and of fifties and of tens;

叫他们随时审判百姓，大事都要呈到你这里，小事他们自己可以审判。这样，你就轻省些，他们也可以同当此任。
And let them be judges in the causes of the people at all times: and let them put before you all important questions, but in small things let them give decisions themselves: in this way, it will be less hard for you, and they will take the weight off you.

你若这样行，神也这样吩咐你，你就能受得住，这百姓也都平平安安归回他们的住处。
If you do this, and God gives approval, then you will be able to go on without weariness, and all this people will go to their tents in peace.

于是，摩西听从他岳父的话，按着他所说的去行。
So Moses took note of the words of his father-in-law, and did as he had said.

摩西从以色列人中拣选了有才能的人，立他们为百姓的首领，作千夫长，百夫长，五十夫长，十夫长。
And he made selection of able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, captains of thousands, captains of hundreds and of fifties and of tens.

他们随时审判百姓，有难断的案件就呈到摩西那里，但各样小事他们自己审判。
And they were judges in the causes of the people at all times: the hard questions they put before Moses; but on every small point they gave decisions themselves.

此后，摩西让他的岳父去，他就往本地去了。
And Moses let his father-in-law go away, and he went back to his land.

以色列人出埃及地以后，满了三个月的那一天，就来到西乃的旷野。
In the third month after the children of Israel went out from Egypt, on the same day, they came into the waste land of Sinai.

他们离了利非订，来到西乃的旷野，就在那里的山下安营。
And when they had gone away from Rephidim and had come into the waste land of Sinai, they put up their tents in the waste land before the mountain: there Israel put up its tents.

摩西到神那里，耶和华从山上呼唤他说，你要这样告诉雅各家，晓谕以色列人说，
And Moses went up to God, and the voice of the Lord came to him from the mountain, saying, Say to the family of Jacob, and give word to the children of Israel:

我向埃及人所行的事，你们都看见了，且看见我如鹰将你们背在翅膀上，带来归我。
You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I took you, as on eagles' wings, guiding you to myself.

如今你们若实在听从我的话，遵守我的约，就要在万民中作属我的子民，因为全地都是我的。
If now you will truly give ear to my voice and keep my agreement, you will be my special property out of all the peoples: for all the earth is mine:

你们要归我作祭司的国度，为圣洁的国民。这些话你要告诉以色列人。
And you will be a kingdom of priests to me, and a holy nation. These are the words which you are to say to the children of Israel.

摩西去召了民间的长老来，将耶和华所吩咐他的话都在他们面前陈明。
And Moses came and sent for the chiefs of the people and put before them all these words which the Lord had given him orders to say.

百姓都同声回答说，凡耶和华所说的，我们都要遵行。摩西就将百姓的话回覆耶和华。
And all the people, answering together, said, Whatever the Lord has said we will do. And Moses took back to the Lord the words of the people.

耶和华对摩西说，我要在密云中临到你那里，叫百姓在我与你说话的时候可以听见，也可以永远信你了。于是，摩西将百姓的话奏告耶和华。
And the Lord said to Moses, See, I will come to you in a thick cloud, so that what I say to you may come to the ears of the people and they may have belief in you for ever. And Moses gave the Lord word of what the people had said.

耶和华又对摩西说，你往百姓那里去，叫他们今天明天自洁，又叫他们洗衣服。
And the Lord said to Moses, Go to the people and make them holy today and tomorrow, and let their clothing be washed.

到第三天要预备好了，因为第三天耶和华要在众百姓眼前降临在西乃山上。
And by the third day let them be ready: for on the third day the Lord will come down on Mount Sinai, before the eyes of all the people.

你要在山的四围给百姓定界限，说，你们当谨慎，不可上山去，也不可摸山的边界，凡摸这山的，必要治死他。
And let limits be marked out for the people round the mountain, and say to them, Take care not to go up the mountain or near the sides of it: whoever puts his foot on the mountain will certainly come to his death:

不可用手摸他，必用石头打死，或用箭射透，无论是人是牲畜，都不得活。到角声拖长的时候，他们才可到山根来。
He is not to be touched by a hand, but is to be stoned or have an arrow put through him; man or beast, he is to be put to death: at the long sounding of a horn they may come up to the mountain.

摩西下山往百姓那里去，叫他们自洁，他们就洗衣服。
Then Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and made the people holy; and their clothing was washed.

他对百姓说，到第三天要预备好了。不可亲近女人。
And he said to the people, Be ready by the third day: do not come near a woman.

到了第三天早晨，在山上有雷轰，闪电，和密云，并且角声甚大，营中的百姓尽都发颤。
And when morning came on the third day, there were thunders and flames and a thick cloud on the mountain, and a horn sounding very loud; and all the people in the tents were shaking with fear.

摩西率领百姓出营迎接神，都站在山下。
And Moses made the people come out of their tents and take their places before God; and they came to the foot of the mountain,

西乃全山冒烟，因为耶和华在火中降于山上。山的烟气上腾，如烧窑一般，遍山大大地震动。
And all the mountain of Sinai was smoking, for the Lord had come down on it in fire: and the smoke of it went up like the smoke of a great burning; and all the mountain was shaking.

角声渐渐地高而又高，摩西就说话，神有声音答应他。
And when the sound of the horn became louder and louder, Moses' words were answered by the voice of God.

耶和华降临在西乃山顶上，耶和华召摩西上山顶，摩西就上去。
Then the Lord came down on to Mount Sinai, to the top of the mountain, and the Lord sent for Moses to come up to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.

耶和华对摩西说，你下去嘱咐百姓，不可闯过来到我面前观看，恐怕他们有多人死亡，
And the Lord said to Moses, Go down and give the people orders to keep back, for fear that a great number of them, forcing their way through to see the Lord, may come to destruction.

又叫亲近我的祭司自洁，恐怕我忽然出来击杀他们。
And let the priests who come near to the Lord make themselves holy, for fear that the Lord may come on them suddenly.

摩西对耶和华说，百姓不能上西乃山，因为你已经嘱咐我们说，要在山的四围定界限，叫山成圣。
And Moses said to the Lord, The people will not be able to come up the mountain, for you gave us orders to put limits round the mountain, marking it out and making it holy.

耶和华对他说，下去吧，你要和亚伦一同上来，只是祭司和百姓不可闯过来上到我面前，恐怕我忽然出来击杀他们。
And the Lord said to him, Go down, and you and Aaron may come up; but let not the priests and the people make their way through to the Lord, or he will come on them suddenly.

于是摩西下到百姓那里告诉他们。
So Moses went down to the people and said this to them.

神吩咐这一切的话说，
And God said all these words:

我是耶和华你的神，曾将你从埃及地为奴之家领出来。
I am the Lord your God who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

除了我以外，你不可有别的神。
You are to have no other gods but me.

不可为自己雕刻偶像，也不可作什么形像仿佛上天，下地，和地底下，水中的百物。
You are not to make an image or picture of anything in heaven or on the earth or in the waters under the earth:

不可跪拜那些像，也不可事奉它，因为我耶和华你的神是忌邪的神。恨我的，我必追讨他的罪，自父及子，直到三四代，
You may not go down on your faces before them or give them worship: for I, the Lord your God, am a God who will not give his honour to another; and I will send punishment on the children for the wrongdoing of their fathers, to the third and fourth generation of my haters;

爱我，守我诫命的，我必向他们发慈爱，直到千代。
And I will have mercy through a thousand generations on those who have love for me and keep my laws.

不可妄称耶和华你神的名，因为妄称耶和华名的，耶和华必不以他为无罪。
You are not to make use of the name of the Lord your God for an evil purpose; whoever takes the Lord's name on his lips for an evil purpose will be judged a sinner by the Lord

当记念安息日，守为圣日。
Keep in memory the Sabbath and let it be a holy day.

六日要劳碌作你一切的工，
On six days do all your work:

但第七日是向耶和华你神当守的安息日。这一日你和你的儿女，仆婢，牲畜，并你城里寄居的客旅，无论何工都不可作，
But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God; on that day you are to do no work, you or your son or your daughter, your man-servant or your woman-servant, your cattle or the man from a strange country who is living among you:

因为六日之内，耶和华造天，地，海，和其中的万物，第七日便安息，所以耶和华赐福与安息日，定为圣日。
For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and the sea, and everything in them, and he took his rest on the seventh day: for this reason the Lord has given his blessing to the seventh day and made it holy.

当孝敬父母，使你的日子在耶和华你神所赐你的地上得以长久。
Give honour to your father and to your mother, so that your life may be long in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

不可杀人。
Do not put anyone to death without cause.

不可奸淫。
Do not be false to the married relation.

不可偷盗。
Do not take the property of another.

不可作假见证陷害人。
Do not give false witness against your neighbour.

不可贪恋人的房屋，也不可贪恋人的妻子，仆婢，牛驴，并他一切所有的。
Let not your desire be turned to your neighbour's house, or his wife or his man-servant or his woman-servant or his ox or his ass or anything which is his.

众百姓见雷轰，闪电，角声，山上冒烟，就都发颤，远远地站立。
And all the people were watching the thunderings and the flames and the sound of the horn and the mountain smoking; and when they saw it, they kept far off, shaking with fear.

对摩西说，求你和我们说话，我们必听，不要神和我们说话，恐怕我们死亡。
And they said to Moses, To your words we will give ear, but let not the voice of God come to our ears, for fear death may come on us.

摩西对百姓说，不要惧怕，因为神降临是要试验你们，叫你们时常敬畏他，不致犯罪。
And Moses said to the people, Have no fear: for God has come to put you to the test, so that fearing him you may be kept from sin.

于是百姓远远地站立，摩西就挨近神所在的幽暗之中。
And the people kept their places far off, but Moses went near to the dark cloud where God was.

耶和华对摩西说，你要向以色列人这样说，你们自己看见我从天上和你们说话了。
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to the children of Israel, You yourselves have seen that my voice has come to you from heaven

你们不可作什么神像与我相配，不可为自己作金银的神像。
Gods of silver and gods of gold you are not to make for yourselves.

你要为我筑土坛，在上面以牛羊献为燔祭和平安祭。凡记下我名的地方，我必到那里赐福给你。
Make for me an altar of earth, offering on it your burned offerings and your peace-offerings, your sheep and your oxen: in every place where I have put the memory of my name, I will come to you and give you my blessing.

你若为我筑一座石坛，不可用凿成的石头，因你在上头一动家具，就把坛污秽了。
And if you make me an altar of stone do not make it of cut stones: for the touch of an instrument will make it unclean.

你上我的坛，不可用台阶，免得露出你的下体来。
And do not go up by steps to my altar, for fear that your bodies may be seen uncovered.

你在百姓面前所要立的典章是这样，
Now these are the laws which you are to put before them.

你若买希伯来人作奴仆，他必服事你六年，第七年他可以自由，白白地出去。
If you get a Hebrew servant for money, he is to be your servant for six years, and in the seventh year you are to let him go free without payment.

他若孤身来，就可以孤身去，他若有妻，他的妻就可以同他出去。
If he comes to you by himself, let him go away by himself: if he is married, let his wife go away with him.

他主人若给他妻子，妻子给他生了儿子或女儿，妻子和儿女要归主人，他要独自出去。
If his master gives him a wife, and he gets sons or daughters by her, the wife and her children will be the property of the master, and the servant is to go away by himself.

倘或奴仆明说，我爱我的主人和我的妻子儿女，不愿意自由出去。
But if the servant says clearly, My master and my wife and children are dear to me; I have no desire to be free:

他的主人就要带他到审判官那里（审判官或作神下同），又要带他到门前，靠近门框，用锥子穿他的耳朵，他就永远服事主人。
Then his master is to take him to the gods of the house, and at the door, or at its framework, he is to make a hole in his ear with a sharp-pointed instrument; and he will be his servant for ever.

人若卖女儿作婢女，婢女不可像男仆那样出去。
And if a man gives his daughter for a price to be a servant, she is not to go away free as the men-servants do.

主人选定她归自己，若不喜欢她，就要许她赎身，主人既然用诡诈待她，就没有权柄卖给外邦人。
If she is not pleasing to her master who has taken her for himself, let a payment be made for her so that she may go free; her master has no power to get a price for her and send her to a strange land, because he has been false to her.

主人若选定她给自己的儿子，就当待她如同女儿。
And if he gives her to his son, he is to do everything for her as if she was his daughter.

若另娶一个，那女子的吃食，衣服，并好合的事，仍不可减少。
And if he takes another woman, her food and clothing and her married rights are not to be less.

若不向她行这三样，她就可以不用钱赎，白白地出去。
And if he does not do these three things for her, she has the right to go free without payment.

打人以致打死的，必要把他治死。
He who gives a man a death-blow is himself to be put to death.

人若不是埋伏着杀人，乃是神交在他手中，我就设下一个地方，他可以往那里逃跑。
But if he had no evil purpose against him, and God gave him into his hand, I will give you a place to which he may go in flight.

人若任意用诡计杀了他的邻舍，就是逃到我的坛那里，也当捉去把他治死。
But if a man makes an attack on his neighbour on purpose, to put him to death by deceit, you are to take him from my altar and put him to death.

打父母的，必要把他治死。
Any man who gives a blow to his father or his mother is certainly to be put to death.

拐带人口，或是把人卖了，或是留在他手下，必要把他治死。
Any man who gets another into his power in order to get a price for him is to be put to death, if you take him in the act.

咒骂父母的，必要把他治死。
Any man cursing his father or his mother is to be put to death.

人若彼此相争，这个用石头或是拳头打那个，尚且不至于死，不过躺卧在床，
If, in a fight, one man gives another a blow with a stone, or with the shut hand, not causing his death, but making him keep in bed;

若再能起来扶杖而出，那打他的可算无罪，但要将他耽误的工夫用钱赔补，并要将他全然医好。
If he is able to get up again and go about with a stick, the other will be let off; only he will have to give him payment for the loss of his time, and see that he is cared for till he is well.

人若用棍子打奴仆或婢女，立时死在他的手下，他必要受刑。
If a man gives his man-servant or his woman-servant blows with a rod, causing death, he is certainly to undergo punishment.

若过一两天才死，就可以不受刑，因为是用钱买的。
But, at the same time, if the servant goes on living for a day or two, the master is not to get punishment, for the servant is his property.

人若彼此争斗，伤害有孕的妇人，甚至坠胎，随后却无别害，那伤害她的，总要按妇人的丈夫所要的，照审判官所断的，受罚。
If men, while fighting, do damage to a woman with child, causing the loss of the child, but no other evil comes to her, the man will have to make payment up to the amount fixed by her husband, in agreement with the decision of the judges.

若有别害，就要以命偿命，
But if damage comes to her, let life be given in payment for life,

以眼还眼，以牙还牙，以手还手，以脚还脚，
Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,

以烙还烙，以伤还伤，以打还打。
Burning for burning, wound for wound, blow for blow.

人若打坏了他奴仆或是婢女的一只眼，就要因他的眼放他去得以自由。
If a man gives his man-servant or his woman-servant a blow in the eye, causing its destruction, he is to let him go free on account of the damage to his eye.

若打掉了他奴仆或是婢女的一个牙，就要因他的牙放他去得以自由。
Or if the loss of a tooth is caused by his blow, he will let him go free on account of his tooth.

牛若触死男人或是女人，总要用石头打死那牛，却不可吃它的肉，牛的主人可算无罪。
If an ox comes to be the cause of death to a man or a woman, the ox is to be stoned, and its flesh may not be used for food; but the owner will not be judged responsible.

倘若那牛素来是触人的，有人报告了牛主，他竟不把牛拴着，以致把男人或是女人触死，就要用石头打死那牛，牛主也必治死。
But if the ox has frequently done such damage in the past, and the owner has had word of it and has not kept it under control, so that it has been the cause of the death of a man or woman, not only is the ox to be stoned, but its owner is to be put to death.

若罚他赎命的价银，他必照所罚的赎他的命。
If a price is put on his life, let him make payment of whatever price is fixed.

牛无论触了人的儿子或是女儿，必照这例办理。
If the death of a son or of a daughter has been caused, the punishment is to be in agreement with this rule.

牛若触了奴仆或是婢女，必将银子三十舍客勒给他们的主人，也要用石头把牛打死。
If the death of a man-servant or of a woman-servant is caused by the ox, the owner is to give their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox is to be stoned.

人若敞着井口，或挖井不遮盖，有牛或驴掉在里头，
If a man makes a hole in the earth without covering it up, and an ox or an ass dropping into it comes to its death;

井主要拿钱赔还本主人，死牲畜要归自己。
The owner of the hole is responsible; he will have to make payment to their owner, but the dead beast will be his.

这人的牛若伤了那人的牛，以致于死，他们要卖了活牛，平分价值，也要平分死牛。
And if one man's ox does damage to another man's ox, causing its death, then the living ox is to be exchanged for money, and division made of the price of it, and of the price of the dead one.

人若知道这牛素来是触人的，主人竟不把牛拴着，他必要以牛还牛，死牛要归自己。
But if it is common knowledge that the ox has frequently done such damage in the past, and its owner has not kept it under control, he will have to give ox for ox; and the dead beast will be his.

人若偷牛或羊，无论是宰了，是卖了，他就要以五牛赔一牛，四羊赔一羊。
If a man takes without right another man's ox or his sheep, and puts it to death or gets a price for it, he is to give five oxen for an ox, or four sheep for a sheep, in payment: the thief will have to make payment for what he has taken; if he has no money, he himself will have to be exchanged for money, so that payment may be made.

人若遇见贼挖窟窿，把贼打了，以致于死，就不能为他有流血的罪。
If a thief is taken in the act of forcing his way into a house, and his death is caused by a blow, the owner of the house is not responsible for his blood.

若太阳已经出来，就为他有流血的罪。贼若被拿，总要赔还。若他一无所有，就要被卖，顶他所偷的物。
But if it is after dawn, he will be responsible.

若他所偷的，或牛，或驴，或羊，仍在他手下存活，他就要加倍赔还。
If he still has what he had taken, whatever it is, ox or ass or sheep, he is to give twice its value.

人若在田间或在葡萄园里放牲畜，任凭牲畜上别人的田里去吃，就必拿自己田间上好的和葡萄园上好的赔还。
If a man makes a fire in a field or a vine-garden, and lets the fire do damage to another man's field, he is to give of the best produce of his field or his vine-garden to make up for it.

若点火焚烧荆棘，以致将别人堆积的禾捆，站着的禾稼，或是田园，都烧尽了，那点火的必要赔还。
If there is a fire and the flames get to the thorns at the edge of the field, causing destruction of the cut grain or of the living grain, or of the field, he who made the fire will have to make up for the damage.

人若将银钱或家具交付邻舍看守，这物从那人的家被偷去，若把贼找到了，贼要加倍赔还，
If a man puts money or goods in the care of his neighbour to keep for him, and it is taken from the man's house, if they get the thief, he will have to make payment of twice the value.

若找不到贼，那家主必就近审判官，要看看他拿了原主的物件没有。
If they do not get the thief, let the master of the house come before the judges and take an oath that he has not put his hand on his neighbour's goods.

两个人的案件，无论是为什么过犯，或是为牛，为驴，为羊，为衣裳，或是为什么失掉之物，有一人说，这是我的，两造就要将案件禀告审判官，审判官定谁有罪，谁就要加倍赔还。
In any question about an ox or an ass or a sheep or clothing, or about the loss of any property which anyone says is his, let the two sides put their cause before God; and he who is judged to be in the wrong is to make payment to his neighbour of twice the value.

人若将驴，或牛，或羊，或别的牲畜，交付邻舍看守，牲畜或死，或受伤，或被赶去，无人看见，
If a man puts an ass or an ox or a sheep or any beast into the keeping of his neighbour, and it comes to death or is damaged or is taken away, without any person seeing it:

那看守的人要凭着耶和华起誓，手里未曾拿邻舍的物，本主就要罢休，看守的人不必赔还。
If he takes his oath before the Lord that he has not put his hand to his neighbour's goods, the owner is to take his word for it and he will not have to make payment for it.

牲畜若从看守的那里被偷去，他就要赔还本主，
But if it is taken from him by a thief, he is to make up for the loss of it to its owner.

若被野兽撕碎，看守的要带来当作证据，所撕的不必赔还。
But if it has been damaged by a beast, and he is able to make this clear, he will not have to make payment for what was damaged.

人若向邻舍借什么，所借的或受伤，或死，本主没有同在一处，借的人总要赔还，
If a man gets from his neighbour the use of one of his beasts, and it is damaged or put to death when the owner is not with it, he will certainly have to make payment for the loss.

若本主同在一处，他就不必赔还，若是雇的，也不必赔还，本是为雇价来的。
If the owner is with it, he will not have to make payment: if he gave money for the use of it, the loss is covered by the payment.

人若引诱没有受聘的处女，与她行淫，他总要交出聘礼，娶她为妻。
If a man takes a virgin, who has not given her word to another man, and has connection with her, he will have to give a bride-price for her to be his wife.

若女子的父亲决不肯将女子给他，他就要按处女的聘礼，交出钱来。
If her father will not give her to him on any account, he will have to give the regular payment for virgins.

行邪术的女人，不可容她存活。
Any woman using unnatural powers or secret arts is to be put to death.

凡与兽淫合的，总要把他治死。
Any man who has sex connection with a beast is to be put to death.

祭祀别神，不单单祭祀耶和华的，那人必要灭绝。
Complete destruction will come on any man who makes offerings to any other god but the Lord.

不可亏负寄居的，也不可欺压他，因为你们在埃及地也作过寄居的。
Do no wrong to a man from a strange country, and do not be hard on him; for you yourselves were living in a strange country, in the land of Egypt.

不可苦待寡妇和孤儿，
Do no wrong to a widow, or to a child whose father is dead.

若是苦待他们一点，他们向我一哀求，我总要听他们的哀声，
If you are cruel to them in any way, and their cry comes up to me, I will certainly give ear;

并要发烈怒，用刀杀你们，使你们的妻子为寡妇，儿女为孤儿。
And in the heat of my wrath I will put you to death with the sword, so that your wives will be widows and your children without fathers.

我民中有贫穷人与你同住，你若借钱给他，不可如放债的向他取利。
If you let any of the poor among my people have the use of your money, do not be a hard creditor to him, and do not take interest.

你即或拿邻舍的衣服作当头，必在日落以先归还他，
If ever you take your neighbour's clothing in exchange for the use of your money, let him have it back before the sun goes down:

因他只有这一件当盖头，是他盖身的衣服，若是没有，他拿什么睡觉呢？他哀求我，我就应允，因为我是有恩惠的。
For it is the only thing he has for covering his skin; what is he to go to sleep in? and when his cry comes up to me, I will give ear, for my mercy is great.

不可毁谤神，也不可毁谤你百姓的官长。
You may not say evil of the judges, or put a curse on the ruler of your people.

你要从你庄稼中的谷和酒榨中滴出来的酒拿来献上，不可迟延。你要将头生的儿子归给我。
Do not keep back your offerings from the wealth of your grain and your vines. The first of your sons you are to give to me.

你牛羊头生的，也要这样，七天当跟着母，第八天要归给我。
In the same way with your oxen and your sheep: for seven days let the young one be with its mother; on the eighth day give it to me.

你要在我面前为圣洁的人。因此，田间被野兽撕裂牲畜的肉，你们不可吃，要丢给狗吃。
You are to be holy men to me: the flesh of no animal whose death has been caused by the beasts of the field may be used for your food; it is to be given to the dogs.

不可随伙布散谣言，不可与恶人连手妄作见证。
Do not let a false statement go further; do not make an agreement with evil-doers to be a false witness.

不可随众行恶，不可在争讼的事上随众偏行，作见证屈枉正直，
Do not be moved to do wrong by the general opinion, or give the support of your words to a wrong decision:

也不可在争讼的事上偏护穷人。
But, on the other hand, do not be turned from what is right in order to give support to a poor man's cause.

若遇见你仇敌的牛或驴失迷了路，总要牵回来交给他。
If you come across the ox or the ass of one who is no friend to you wandering from its way, you are to take it back to him.

若看见恨你人的驴压卧在重驮之下，不可走开，务要和驴主一同抬开重驮。
If you see the ass of one who has no love for you bent down to the earth under the weight which is put on it, you are to come to its help, even against your desire.

不可在穷人争讼的事上屈枉正直。
Let no wrong decisions be given in the poor man's cause.

当远离虚假的事。不可杀无辜和有义的人，因我必不以恶人为义。
Keep yourselves far from any false business; never let the upright or him who has done no wrong be put to death: for I will make the evil-doer responsible for his sin.

不可受贿赂，因为贿赂能叫明眼人变瞎了，又能颠倒义人的话。
Take no rewards in a cause: for rewards make blind those who have eyes to see, and make the decisions of the upright false.

不可欺压寄居的，因为你们在埃及地作过寄居的，知道寄居的心。
Do not be hard on the man from a strange country who is living among you; for you have had experience of the feelings of one who is far from the land of his birth, because you yourselves were living in Egypt, in a strange land.

六年你要耕种田地，收藏土产，
For six years put seed into your fields and get in the increase;

只是第七年要叫地歇息，不耕不种，使你民中的穷人有吃的，他们所剩下的，野兽可以吃。你的葡萄园和橄榄园也要照样办理。
But in the seventh year let the land have a rest and be unplanted; so that the poor may have food from it: and let the beasts of the field take the rest. Do the same with your vine-gardens and your olive-trees.

六日你要作工，第七日要安息，使牛，驴可以歇息，并使你婢女的儿子和寄居的都可以舒畅。
For six days do your work, and on the seventh day keep the Sabbath; so that your ox and your ass may have rest, together with the son of your servant and the man from a strange land living among you.

凡我对你们说的话，你们要谨守。别神的名，你不可提，也不可从你口中传说。
Take note of all these things which I have said to you, and let not the names of other gods come into your minds or from your lips.

一年三次，你要向我守节。
Three times in the year you are to keep a feast to me.

你要守除酵节，照我所吩咐你的，在亚笔月内所定的日期，吃无酵饼七天。谁也不可空手朝见我，因为你是这月出了埃及。
You are to keep the feast of unleavened bread; for seven days let your bread be without leaven, as I gave you orders, at the regular time in the month Abib (for in it you came out of Egypt); and let no one come before me without an offering:

又要守收割节，所收的是你田间所种，劳碌得来初熟之物。并在年底收藏，要守收藏节。
And the feast of the grain-cutting, the first-fruits of your planted fields: and the feast at the start of the year, when you have got in all the fruit from your fields.

一切的男丁要一年三次朝见主耶和华。
Three times in the year let all your males come before the Lord God.

不可将我祭牲的血和有酵的饼一同献上，也不可将我节上祭牲的脂油留到早晨。
Do not give the blood of my offering with leavened bread; and do not let the fat of my feast be kept all night till the morning.

地里首先初熟之物要送到耶和华你神的殿。不可用山羊羔母的奶煮山羊羔。
The best of the first-fruits of your land are to be taken into the house of the Lord your God. The young goat is not to be cooked in its mother's milk.

看哪，我差遣使者在你前面，在路上保护你，领你到我所预备的地方去。
See, I am sending an angel before you, to keep you on your way and to be your guide into the place which I have made ready for you.

他是奉我名来的，你们要在他面前谨慎，听从他的话，不可惹他（惹或作违背），因为他必不赦免你们的过犯。
Give attention to him and give ear to his voice; do not go against him; for your wrongdoing will not be overlooked by him, because my name is in him.

你若实在听从他的话，照着我一切所说的去行，我就向你的仇敌作仇敌，向你的敌人作敌人。
But if you truly give ear to his voice, and do whatever I say, then I will be against those who are against you, fighting those who are fighting you.

我的使者要在你前面行，领你到亚摩利人，赫人，比利洗人，迦南人，希未人，耶布斯人那里去，我必将他们剪除。
And my angel will go before you, guiding you into the land of the Amorite and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Canaanite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, and they will be cut off by my hand.

你不可跪拜他们的神，不可事奉他，也不可效法他们的行为，却要把神像尽行拆毁，打碎他们的柱像。
Do not go down on your faces and give worship to their gods, or do as they do; but overcome them completely, and let their pillars be broken down.

你们要事奉耶和华你们的神，他必赐福与你的粮与你的水，也必从你们中间除去疾病。
And give worship to the Lord your God, who will send his blessing on your bread and on your water; and I will take all disease away from among you.

你境内必没有坠胎的，不生产的。我要使你满了你年日的数目。
All your animals will give birth without loss, not one will be without young in all your land; I will give you a full measure of life.

凡你所到的地方，我要使那里的众民在你面前惊骇，扰乱，又要使你一切仇敌转背逃跑。
I will send my fear before you, putting to flight all the people to whom you come; all those who are against you will go in flight, turning their backs before you.

我要打发黄蜂飞在你前面，把希未人，迦南人，赫人撵出去。
I will send hornets before you, driving out the Hivite and the Canaanite and the Hittite before your face.

我不在一年之内将他们从你面前撵出去，恐怕地成为荒凉，野地的兽多起来害你。
I will not send them all out in one year, for fear that their land may become waste, and the beasts of the field be increased overmuch against you.

我要渐渐地将他们从你面前撵出去，等到你的人数加多，承受那地为业。
Little by little I will send them away before you, till your numbers are increased and you take up your heritage in the land.

我要定你的境界，从红海直到非利士海，又从旷野直到大河。我要将那地的居民交在你手中，你要将他们从你面前撵出去。
I will let the limits of your land be from the Red Sea to the sea of the Philistines, and from the waste land to the river Euphrates: for I will give the people of those lands into your power; and you will send them out before you.

不可和他们并他们的神立约。
Make no agreement with them or with their gods.

他们不可住在你的地上，恐怕他们使你得罪我。你若事奉他们的神，这必成为你的网罗。
Let them not go on living in your land, or they will make you do evil against me: for if you give worship to their gods, it will certainly be a cause of sin to you.

耶和华对摩西说，你和亚伦，拿答，亚比户，并以色列长老中的七十人，都要上到我这里来，远远地下拜。
And he said to Moses, Come up to the Lord, you and Aaron, and Nadab and Abihu and seventy of the chiefs of Israel; and give me worship from a distance.

惟独你可以亲近耶和华，他们却不可亲近，百姓也不可和你一同上来。
And Moses only may come near to the Lord; but the others are not to come near, and the people may not come up with them.

摩西下山，将耶和华的命令典章都述说与百姓听。众百姓齐声说，耶和华所吩咐的，我们都必遵行。
Then Moses came and put before the people all the words of the Lord and his laws: and all the people, answering with one voice, said, Whatever the Lord has said we will do.

摩西将耶和华的命令都写上。清早起来，在山下筑一座坛，按以色列十二支派立十二根柱子，
Then Moses put down in writing all the words of the Lord, and he got up early in the morning and made an altar at the foot of the mountain, with twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel.

又打发以色列人中的少年人去献燔祭，又向耶和华献牛为平安祭。
And he sent some of the young men of the children of Israel to make burned offerings and peace-offerings of oxen to the Lord.

摩西将血一半盛在盆中，一半洒在坛上，
And Moses took half the blood and put it in basins; draining out half of the blood over the altar.

又将约书念给百姓听。他们说，耶和华所吩咐的，我们都必遵行。
And he took the book of the agreement, reading it in the hearing of the people: and they said, Everything which the Lord has said we will do, and we will keep his laws.

摩西将血洒在百姓身上，说，你看，这是立约的血，是耶和华按这一切话与你们立约的凭据。
Then Moses took the blood and let it come on the people, and said, This blood is the sign of the agreement which the Lord has made with you in these words.

摩西，亚伦，拿答，亚比户，并以色列长老中的七十人，都上了山。
Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the chiefs of Israel went up:

他们看见以色列的神，他脚下仿佛有平铺的蓝宝石，如同天色明净。
And they saw the God of Israel; and under his feet there was, as it seemed, a jewelled floor, clear as the heavens.

他的手不加害在以色列的尊者身上。他们观看神，他们又吃又喝。
And he put not his hand on the chiefs of the children of Israel: they saw God, and took food and drink.

耶和华对摩西说，你上山到我这里来，住在这里，我要将石版并我所写的律法和诫命赐给你，使你可以教训百姓。
And the Lord said to Moses, Come up to me on the mountain, and take your place there: and I will give you the stones on which I have put in writing the law and the orders, so that you may give the people knowledge of them.

摩西和他的帮手约书亚起来，上了神的山。
Then Moses and Joshua his servant got up; and Moses went up into the mountain of God.

摩西对长老说，你们在这里等着，等到我们再回来，有亚伦，户珥与你们同在。凡有争讼的，都可以就近他们去。
And he said to the chiefs, Keep your places here till we come back to you: Aaron and Hur are with you; if anyone has any cause let him go to them.

摩西上山，有云彩把山遮盖。
And Moses went up into the mountain, and it was covered by the cloud.

耶和华的荣耀停于西乃山，云彩遮盖山六天，第七天他从云中召摩西。
And the glory of the Lord was resting on Mount Sinai, and the cloud was over it for six days; and on the seventh day he said Moses' name out of the cloud.

耶和华的荣耀在山顶上，在以色列人眼前，形状如烈火。
And the glory of the Lord was like a flame on the top of the mountain before the eyes of the children of Israel.

摩西进入云中上山，在山上四十昼夜。
And Moses went up the mountain, into the cloud, and was there for forty days and forty nights.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你告诉以色列人当为我送礼物来，凡甘心乐意的，你们就可以收下归我。
Say to the children of Israel that they are to make me an offering; from every man who has the impulse in his heart take an offering for me.

所要收的礼物，就是金，银，铜，
And this is the offering you are to take from them: gold and silver and brass;

蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，细麻，山羊毛，
And blue and purple and red, and the best linen, and goats' hair;

染红的公羊皮，海狗皮，皂荚木，
And sheepskins coloured red, and leather, and hard wood;

点灯的油并作膏油和香的香料，
Oil for the light, spices for the sweet-smelling oil, sweet perfumes for burning;

红玛瑙与别样的宝石，可以镶嵌在以弗得和胸牌上。
Beryls and stones of value to be put on the ephod and on the priest's bag.

又当为我造圣所，使我可以住在他们中间。
And let them make me a holy place, so that I may be ever present among them.

制造帐幕和其中的一切器具都要照我所指示你的样式。
Make the House and everything in it from the designs which I will give you.

要用皂荚木作一柜，长二肘半，宽一肘半，高一肘半。
And they are to make an ark of hard wood; two and a half cubits long, and a cubit and a half wide and high.

要里外包上精金，四围镶上金牙边。
It is to be plated inside and out with the best gold, with an edge of gold all round it

也要铸四个金环，安在柜的四脚上，这边两环，那边两环。
And make four rings of gold for it, to be fixed on its four feet, two rings on one side of it and two on the other.

要用皂荚木作两根杠，用金包裹。
And make rods of the same wood, plating them with gold.

要把杠穿在柜旁的环内，以便抬柜。
And put the rods through the rings at the sides of the ark, for lifting it.

这杠要常在柜的环内，不可抽出来。
The rods are to be kept in the rings, and never taken out.

必将我所要赐给你的法版放在柜里。
Inside the ark you are to put the record which I will give you.

要用精金作施恩座（施恩或作蔽罪下同），长二肘半，宽一肘半。
And you are to make a cover of the best gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.

要用金子锤出两个基路伯来，安在施恩座的两头。
And at the two ends of the cover you are to make two winged ones of hammered gold,

这头作一个基路伯，那头作一个基路伯，二基路伯要接连一块，在施恩座的两头。
One at one end and one at the other; the winged ones are to be part of the cover.

二基路伯要高张翅膀，遮掩施恩座。基路伯要脸对脸，朝着施恩座。
And their wings are to be outstretched over the cover, and the winged ones are to be opposite one another, facing the cover.

要将施恩座安在柜的上边，又将我所要赐给你的法版放在柜里。
And put the cover over the ark, and in the ark the record which I will give you.

我要在那里与你相会，又要从法柜施恩座上二基路伯中间，和你说我所要吩咐你传给以色列人的一切事。
And there, between the two winged ones on the cover of the ark, I will come to you, face to face, and make clear to you all the orders I have to give you for the children of Israel.

要用皂荚木作一张桌子，长二肘，宽一肘，高一肘半。
And you are to make a table of the same wood, two cubits long, a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high,

要包上精金，四围镶上金牙边。
Plated with the best gold, with a gold edge all round it;

桌子的四围各作一掌宽的横梁，横梁上镶着金牙边。
And make a frame all round it, as wide as a man's hand, with a gold edge to the frame.

要作四个金环，安在桌子的四角上，就是桌子四脚上的四角。
And make four gold rings and put them at the four angles, on the four feet of the table;

安环子的地方要挨近横梁，可以穿杠抬桌子。
The rings are to be fixed under the frame to take the rods with which the table is to be lifted.

要用皂荚木作两根杠，用金包裹，以便抬桌子。
Make rods of the same wood, plated with gold, for lifting the table.

要作桌子上的盘子，调羹，并奠酒的爵和瓶，这都要用精金制作。
And make the table-vessels, the spoons and the cups and the basins for liquids, all of the best gold.

又要在桌子上，在我面前，常摆陈设饼。
And on the table at all times you are to keep my holy bread.

要用精金作一个灯台。灯台的座和干与杯，球，花，都要接连一块锤出来。
And you are to make a support for lights, of the best gold; its base and its pillar are to be of hammered gold; its cups, its buds, and its flowers are to be made of the same metal.

灯台两旁要杈出六个枝子，这旁三个，那旁三个。
It is to have six branches coming out from its sides; three branches from one side and three from the other.

这旁每枝上有三个杯，形状像杏花，有球，有花，那旁每枝上也有三个杯，形状像杏花，有球，有花。从灯台杈出来的六个枝子都是如此。
Every branch having three cups made like almond flowers, every cup with a bud and a flower, on all the branches.

灯台上有四个杯，形状像杏花，有球，有花。
And on the pillar, four cups like almond flowers, every one with its bud and its flower:

灯台每两个枝子以下有球与枝子接连一块。灯台出的六个枝子都是如此。
And under every two branches a bud, made with the branch, for all the six branches of it.

球和枝子要接连一块，都是一块精金锤出来的。
The buds and the branches are to be made of the same metal; all together one complete work of hammered gold.

要作灯台的七个灯盏。祭司要点这灯，使灯光对照。
Then you are to make its seven vessels for the lights, putting them in their place so that they give light in front of it.

灯台的蜡剪和蜡花盘也是要精金的。
And the instruments and trays for use with it are all to be of the best gold.

作灯台和这一切的器具要用精金一他连得。
A talent of gold will be needed for it, with all these vessels.

要谨慎作这些物件，都要照着在山上指示你的样式。
And see that you make them from the design which you saw on the mountain.

你要用十幅幔子作帐幕。这些幔子要用捻的细麻和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线制造，并用巧匠的手工绣上基路伯。
And you are to make a House for me, with ten curtains of the best linen, blue and purple and red, worked with designs of winged ones by a good workman.

每幅幔子要长二十八肘，宽四肘，幔子都要一样的尺寸。
Every curtain is to be twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

这五幅幔子要幅幅相连，那五幅幔子也要幅幅相连。
Five curtains are to be joined together, and the other five are to be joined together.

在这相连的幔子末幅边上要作蓝色的钮扣，在那相连的幔子末幅边上也要照样作。
And you are to put twists of blue cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group of five, and on the edge of the outside curtain of the second group of five;

要在这相连的幔子上作五十个钮扣，在那相连的幔子上也作五十个钮扣，都要两两相对。
Fifty twists on one curtain and fifty on the other, the twists to be opposite one another.

又要作五十个金钩，用钩使幔子相连，这才成了一个帐幕。
Then make fifty gold hooks, joining the curtains together by the hooks, and in this way the House will be made.

你要用山羊毛织十一幅幔子，作为帐幕以上的罩棚。
And you are to make curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the House, eleven curtains.

每幅幔子要长三十肘，宽四肘，十一幅幔子都要一样的尺寸。
Every curtain is to be thirty cubits long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

要把五幅幔子连成一幅，又把六幅幔子连成一幅，这第六幅幔子要在罩棚的前面摺上去。
Five of these curtains are to be joined together, and the other six are to be joined together, the sixth being folded over to make a hanging in front of the tent.

在这相连的幔子末幅边上要作五十个钮扣，在那相连的幔子末幅边上也作五十个钮扣。
And you are to put fifty twists of cord on the edge of the outside curtain of one group, and fifty twists on the edge of the outside curtain of the other group.

又要作五十个铜钩，钩在钮扣中，使罩棚连成一个。
Then make fifty brass hooks and put the hooks into the twists, joining the tent together to make it one.

罩棚的幔子所余那垂下来的半幅幔子，要垂在帐幕的后头。
And the folded part which is over of the curtains of the tent, the half-curtain which is folded back, will be hanging down over the back of the House.

罩棚的幔子所余长的，这边一肘，那边一肘，要垂在帐幕的两旁，遮盖帐幕。
And the cubit which is over of the ten curtains at the sides will be hanging over the two sides of the House as a cover.

又要用染红的公羊皮作罩棚的盖，再用海狗皮作一层罩棚上的顶盖。
And then you are to make a cover for the tent, of sheepskins coloured red, and a cover of leather over that.

你要用皂荚木作帐幕的竖板。
And you are to make upright boards of hard wood for the House.

每块要长十肘，宽一肘半，
Every board is to be ten cubits high and a cubit and a half wide.

每块必有两榫相对。帐幕一切的板都要这样作。
Every board is to be joined to the one nearest to it by two tongues, and so for every board in the House.

帐幕的南面要作板二十块。
These are the boards needed for the house; twenty boards for the south side,

在这二十块板底下要作四十个带卯的银座，两卯接这块板上的两榫，两卯接那块板上的两榫。
With forty silver bases under the twenty boards, two bases under every board to take its tongues.

帐幕第二面，就是北面，也要作板二十块
And twenty boards for the second side of the house on the north,

和带卯的银座四十个，这板底下有两卯，那板底下也有两卯。
With their forty silver bases, two under every board.

帐幕的后面，就是西面，要作板六块。
And six boards for the back of the House on the west,

帐幕后面的拐角要作板两块。
With two boards for the angles of the House at the back.

板的下半截要双的，上半截要整的，直顶到第一个环子，两块都要这样作两个拐角。
The two are to be joined together at the base and at the top to one ring, forming the two angles.

必有八块板和十六个带卯的银座，这板底下有两卯，那板底下也有两卯。
So there are to be eight boards, with their sixteen silver bases, two bases under every board.

你要用皂荚木作闩，为帐幕这面的板作五闩，
And make rods of the same wood, five for the boards on the one side,

为帐幕那面的板作五闩，又为帐幕后面的板作五闩。
And five for the boards on the other side of the House, and five for the west side of the House at the back.

板腰间的中闩要从这一头通到那一头。
And the middle rod is to go through the rings of all the boards from end to end.

板要用金子包裹，又要作板上的金环套闩，闩也要用金子包裹。
And the boards are to be plated with gold, having gold rings for the rods to go through: and the rods are to be plated with gold.

要照着在山上指示你的样式立起帐幕。
And you are to make the House from the design which you saw on the mountain.

你要用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻织幔子，以巧匠的手工绣上基路伯。
And you are to make a veil of the best linen, blue and purple and red, worked with designs of winged ones by a good workman:

要把幔子挂在四根包金的皂荚木柱子上，柱子上当有金钩，柱子安在四个带卯的银座上。
Hanging it by gold hooks from four pillars of wood, plated with gold and fixed in silver bases.

要使幔子垂在钩子下，把法柜抬进幔子内，这幔子要将圣所和至圣所隔开。
And you are to put up the veil under the hooks, and put inside it the ark of the law: the veil is to be a division between the holy place and the most holy.

又要把施恩座安在至圣所内的法柜上，
You are to put the cover on the ark of the law, inside the most holy place.

把桌子安在幔子外帐幕的北面，把灯台安在帐幕的南面，彼此相对。
And outside the veil you are to put the table, and the support for the lights opposite the table on the south side of the House; and the table is to be on the north side.

你要拿蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻，用绣花的手工织帐幕的门帘。
And you are to make a curtain for the doorway of the Tent, of the best linen with needlework of blue and purple and red.

要用皂荚木为帘子作五根柱子，用金子包裹。柱子上当有金钩，又要为柱子用铜铸造五个带卯的座。
And make five pillars for the curtain, of hard wood plated with gold; their hooks are to be of gold and their bases of brass

你要用皂荚木作坛。这坛要四方的，长五肘，宽五肘，高三肘。
And make an altar of hard wood, a square altar, five cubits long, five cubits wide and three cubits high.

要在坛的四拐角上作四个角，与坛接连一块，用铜把坛包裹。
Put horns at the four angles of it, made of the same, plating it all with brass.

要作盆，收去坛上的灰，又作铲子，盘子，肉锸子，火鼎，坛上一切的器具都用铜作。
And make all its vessels, the baskets for taking away the dust of the fire, the spades and basins and meat-hooks and fire-trays, of brass.

要为坛作一个铜网，在网的四角上作四个铜环，
And make a network of brass, with four brass rings at its four angles.

把网安在坛四面的围腰板以下，使网从下达到坛的半腰。
And put the network under the shelf round the altar so that the net comes half-way up the altar.

又要用皂荚木为坛作杠，用铜包裹。
And make rods for the altar, of hard wood, plated with brass.

这杠要穿在坛两旁的环子内，用以抬坛。
And put the rods through the rings at the two opposite sides of the altar, for lifting it.

要用板作坛，坛是空的，都照着在山上指示你的样式作。
The altar is to be hollow, boarded in with wood; make it from the design which you saw on the mountain.

你要作帐幕的院子。院子的南面要用捻的细麻作帷子，长一百肘。
And let there be an open space round the House, with hangings for its south side of the best linen, a hundred cubits long.

帷子的柱子要二十根，带卯的铜座二十个。柱子上的钩子和杆子都要用银子作。
Their twenty pillars and their twenty bases are to be of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their bands are to be of silver.

北面也当有帷子，长一百肘，帷子的柱子二十根，带卯的铜座二十个。柱子上的钩子和杆子都要用银子作。
And on the north side in the same way, hangings a hundred cubits long, with twenty pillars of brass on bases of brass; their hooks and their bands are to be of silver.

院子的西面当有帷子，宽五十肘，帷子的柱子十根，带卯的座十个。
And for the open space on the west side, the hangings are to be fifty cubits wide, with ten pillars and ten bases;

院子的东面要宽五十肘。
And on the east side the space is to be fifty cubits wide.

门这边的帷子要十五肘，帷子的柱子三根，带卯的座三个。
On the one side of the doorway will be hangings fifteen cubits long, with three pillars and three bases;

门那边的帷子也要十五肘，帷子的柱子三根，带卯的座三个。
And on the other side, hangings fifteen cubits long, with three pillars and three bases.

院子的门当有帘子，长二十肘，要拿蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻，用绣花的手工织成，柱子四根，带卯的座四个。
And across the doorway, a veil of twenty cubits of the best linen, made of needlework of blue and purple and red, with four pillars and four bases.

院子四围一切的柱子都要用银杆连络，柱子上的钩子要用银作，带卯的座要用铜作。
All the pillars round the open space are to have silver bands, with hooks of silver and bases of brass.

院子要长一百肘，宽五十肘，高五肘，帷子要用捻的细麻作，带卯的座要用铜作。
The open space is to be a hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, with sides five cubits high, curtained with the best linen, with bases of brass.

帐幕各样用处的器具，并帐幕一切的橛子，和院子里一切的橛子，都要用铜作。
All the instruments for the work of the House, and all its nails, and the nails of the open space are to be of brass.

你要吩咐以色列人，把那为点灯捣成的清橄榄油拿来给你，使灯常常点着。
Give orders to the children of Israel to give you clear olive oil for the lights, so that a light may be burning there at all times.

在会幕中法柜前的幔外，亚伦和他的儿子，从晚上到早晨，要在耶和华面前经理这灯。这要作以色列人世世代代永远的定例。
Let Aaron and his sons put this in order, evening and morning, before the Lord, inside the Tent of meeting, outside the veil which is before the ark; this is to be an order for ever, from generation to generation, to be kept by the children of Israel.

你要从以色列人中，使你的哥哥亚伦和他的儿子拿答，亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛一同就近你，给我供祭司的职分。
Now let Aaron your brother, and his sons with him, come near from among the children of Israel, so that they may be my priests, even Aaron, and Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, his sons.

你要给你哥哥亚伦作圣衣为荣耀，为华美。
And make holy robes for Aaron your brother, so that he may be clothed with glory and honour.

又要吩咐一切心中有智慧的，就是我用智慧的灵所充满的，给亚伦作衣服，使他分别为圣，可以给我供祭司的职分。
Give orders to all the wise-hearted workmen, whom I have made full of the spirit of wisdom, to make robes for Aaron, so that he may be made holy as my priest.

所要作的就是胸牌，以弗得，外袍，杂色的内袍，冠冕，腰带，使你哥哥亚伦和他儿子穿这圣服，可以给我供祭司的职分。
This is what they are to make: a priest's bag, an ephod, and a robe, and a coat of coloured needlework, a head-dress, and a linen band; they are to make holy robes for Aaron your brother and for his sons, so that they may do the work of priests for me.

要用金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并细麻去作。
They are to take the gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen,

他们要拿金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻，用巧匠的手工作以弗得。
And make the ephod of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen, the work of a designer.

以弗得当有两条肩带，接上两头，使它相连。
It is to have two bands stitched to it at the top of the arms, joining it together.

其上巧工织的带子，要和以弗得一样的作法，用以束上，与以弗得接连一块，要用金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作成。
And the beautifully worked band, which goes on it, is to be of the same work and the same material, of gold and blue and purple and red and twisted linen-work.

要取两块红玛瑙，在上面刻以色列儿子的名字，
You are to take two beryl stones, on which the names of the children of Israel are to be cut:

六个名字在这块宝石上，六个名字在那块宝石上，都照他们生来的次序。
Six names on the one stone and six on the other, in the order of their birth.

要用刻宝石的手工，仿佛刻图书，按着以色列儿子的名字，刻这两块宝石，要镶在金槽上。
With the work of a jeweller, like the cutting of a stamp, the names of the children of Israel are to be cut on them, and they are to be fixed in twisted frames of gold.

要将这两块宝石安在以弗得的两条肩带上，为以色列人作纪念石。亚伦要在两肩上担他们的名字，在耶和华面前作为纪念。
And the two stones are to be placed on the ephod, over the arm-holes, to be stones of memory for the children of Israel: Aaron will have their names on his arms when he goes in before the Lord, to keep the Lord in mind of them.

要用金子作二槽，
And you are to make twisted frames of gold;

又拿精金，用拧工仿佛拧绳子，作两条链子，把这拧成的链子搭在二槽上。
And two chains of the best gold, twisted like cords; and have the chains fixed on to the frames.

你要用巧匠的手工作一个决断的胸牌。要和以弗得一样的作法，用金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作成。
And make a priest's bag for giving decisions, designed like the ephod, made of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen.

这胸牌要四方的，叠为两层，长一虎口，宽一虎口。
It is to be square, folded in two, a hand-stretch long and a hand-stretch wide.

要在上面镶宝石四行，第一行是红宝石，红璧玺，红玉，
And on it you are to put four lines of jewels; the first line is to be a cornelian, a chrysolite, and an emerald;

第二行是绿宝石，蓝宝石，金钢石，
The second, a ruby, a sapphire, and an onyx;

第三行是紫玛瑙，白玛瑙，紫晶，
The third, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;

第四行是水苍玉，红玛瑙，碧玉。这都要镶在金槽中。
The fourth, a topaz, a beryl, and a jasper; they are to be fixed in twisted frames of gold.

这些宝石都要按着以色列十二个儿子的名字，仿佛刻图书，刻十二个支派的名字。
The jewels are to be twelve in number, for the names of the children of Israel; every jewel having the name of one of the twelve tribes cut on it as on a stamp.

要在胸牌上用精金拧成如绳的链子。
And you are to make two chains of gold, twisted like cords, to be fixed to the priest's bag.

在胸牌上也要作两个金环，安在胸牌的两头。
And put two gold rings on the two ends of the bag.

要把那两条拧成的金链子，穿过胸牌两头的环子。
Put the two gold chains on the two rings at the ends of the bag;

又要把链子的那两头接在两槽上，安在以弗得前面肩带上。
Joining the other ends of the chains to the gold frames and putting them on the front of the ephod, at the top of the arms.

要作两个金环，安在胸牌的两头，在以弗得里面的边上。
Then make two gold rings and put them on the lower ends of the bag, at the edge of it on the inner side nearest to the ephod.

又要作两个金环，安在以弗得前面两条肩带的下边，挨近相接之处，在以弗得巧工织的带子以上。
And make two more gold rings and put them on the front of the ephod at the top of the arms, at the join, over the worked band:

要用蓝细带子把胸牌的环子与以弗得的环子系住，使胸牌贴在以弗得巧工织的带子上，不可与以弗得离缝。
So that the rings on the bag may be fixed to the rings of the ephod by a blue cord and on to the band of the ephod, so that the bag may not come loose from the ephod.

亚伦进圣所的时候，要将决断胸牌，就是刻着以色列儿子名字的，带在胸前，在耶和华面前常作纪念。
And so Aaron will have the names of the children of Israel on the priest's bag over his heart whenever he goes into the holy place, to keep the memory of them before the Lord.

又要将乌陵和土明放在决断的胸牌里，亚伦进到耶和华面前的时候，要带在胸前，在耶和华面前常将以色列人的决断牌带在胸前。
And in the bag you are to put the Urim and Thummim, so that they may be on Aaron's heart whenever he goes in before the Lord; and Aaron may have the power of making decisions for the children of Israel before the Lord at all times.

你要作以弗得的外袍，颜色全是蓝的。
The robe which goes with the ephod is to be made all of blue;

袍上要为头留一领口，口的周围织出领边来，仿佛铠甲的领口，免得破裂。
With a hole at the top, in the middle of it; the hole is to be edged with a band to make it strong like the hole in the coat of a fighting-man, so that it may not be broken open.

袍子周围底边上要用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线作石榴。在袍子周围的石榴中间要有金铃铛，
And round the skirts of it put fruits in blue and purple and red, with bells of gold between;

一个金铃铛一个石榴，一个金铃铛一个石榴，在袍子周围的底边上。
A gold bell and a fruit in turn all round the skirts of the robe.

亚伦供职的时候要穿这袍子。他进圣所到耶和华面前，以及出来的时候，袍上的响声必被听见，使他不至于死亡。
Aaron is to put it on for his holy work; and the sound of it will be clear, when he goes into the holy place before the Lord, and when he comes out, keeping him safe from death.

你要用精金作一面牌，在上面按刻图书之法刻着‘归耶和华为圣’。
You are to make a plate of the best gold, cutting on it, as on a stamp, these words: HOLY TO THE LORD.

要用一条蓝细带子将牌系在冠冕的前面。
Put a blue cord on it and put it on the front of the twisted head-dress:

这牌必在亚伦的额上，亚伦要担当干犯圣物条例的罪孽，这圣物是以色列人在一切的圣礼物上所分别为圣的。这牌要常在他的额上，使他们可以在耶和华面前蒙悦纳。
And it will be over Aaron's brow, so that Aaron will be responsible for any error in all the holy offerings made by the children of Israel; it will be on his brow at all times, so that their offerings may be pleasing to the Lord.

要用杂色细麻线织内袍，用细麻布作冠冕，又用绣花的手工作腰带。
The coat is to be made of the best linen, worked in squares; and you are to make a head-dress of linen, and a linen band worked in needlework.

你要为亚伦的儿子作内袍，腰带，裹头巾，为荣耀，为华美。
And for Aaron's sons you are to make coats, and bands, and head-dresses, so that they may be clothed with glory and honour.

要把这些给你的哥哥亚伦和他的儿子穿戴，又要膏他们，将他们分别为圣，好给我供祭司的职分。
These you are to put on Aaron, your brother, and on his sons, putting oil on them, separating them and making them holy, to do the work of priests to me.

要给他们作细麻布裤子，遮掩下体，裤子当从腰达到大腿。
And you are to make them linen trousers, covering their bodies from the middle to the knee;

亚伦和他儿子进入会幕，或就近坛，在圣所供职的时候必穿上，免得担罪而死。这要为亚伦和他的后裔作永远的定例。
Aaron and his sons are to put these on whenever they go into the Tent of meeting or come near the altar, when they are doing the work of the holy place, so that they may be free from any sin causing death: this is to be an order for him and his seed after him for ever.

你使亚伦和他儿子成圣，给我供祭司的职分，要如此行，取一只公牛犊，两只无残疾的公绵羊，
This is what you are to do to make them holy, to do the work of priests to me: Take one young ox and two male sheep, without any mark on them,

无酵饼和调油的无酵饼，与抹油的无酵薄饼，这都要用细麦面作成。
And unleavened bread, and unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and thin unleavened cakes on which oil has been put, made of the best bread-meal;

这饼要装在一个筐子里，连筐子带来，又把公牛和两只公绵羊牵来。
Put these in a basket and take them, with the ox and the two sheep.

要使亚伦和他儿子到会幕门口来，用水洗身。
And let Aaron and his sons come to the door of the Tent of meeting, and there let them be washed with water.

要给亚伦穿上内袍和以弗得的外袍，并以弗得，又带上胸牌，束上以弗得巧工织的带子。
Take the robes, and put the coat and the dress and the ephod and the priest's bag on Aaron; put the band of needlework round him,

把冠冕戴在他头上，将圣冠加在冠冕上，
And let the head-dress be placed on his head and the holy crown on the head-dress.

就把膏油倒在他头上膏他。
Then take the oil and put it on his head.

要叫他的儿子来，给他们穿上内袍。
And take his sons and put their robes on them;

给亚伦和他儿子束上腰带，包上裹头巾，他们就凭永远的定例得了祭司的职任。又要将亚伦和他儿子分别为圣。
And put the linen bands round Aaron and his sons, and the head-dresses on them, to make them priests by my order for ever: so you are to make Aaron and his sons holy to me.

你要把公牛牵到会幕前，亚伦和他儿子要按手在公牛的头上。
Then let the ox be taken in front of the Tent of meeting: and let Aaron and his sons put their hands on its head.

你要在耶和华面前，在会幕门口，宰这公牛。
And you are to put the ox to death before the Lord at the door of the Tent of meeting.

要取些公牛的血，用指头抹在坛的四角上，把血都倒在坛脚那里。
Then take some of the blood of the ox, and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger, draining out all the rest of the blood at the base of the altar.

要把一切盖脏的脂油与肝上的网子，并两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，都烧在坛上。
And take all the fat covering the inside of the ox, and the fat joining the liver and the two kidneys with the fat round them, and let them be burned on the altar;

只是公牛的皮，肉，粪都要用火烧在营外。这牛是赎罪祭。
But the flesh of the ox and its skin and its waste parts are to be burned outside the circle of the tents, for it is a sin-offering.

你要牵一只公绵羊来，亚伦和他儿子要按手在这羊的头上。
Then take one of the sheep, and let Aaron and his sons put their hands on its head.

要宰这羊，把血洒在坛的周围。
Then let it be put to death, so that the sides of the altar are marked with its blood.

要把羊切成块子，洗净五脏和腿，连块子带头，都放在一处。
Then the sheep is to be cut up into its parts, and after washing its legs and its inside parts, you are to put them with the parts and the head,

要把全羊烧在坛上，是给耶和华献的燔祭，是献给耶和华为馨香的火祭。
And let them all be burned on the altar as a burned offering to the Lord: a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

你要将那一只公绵羊牵来，亚伦和他儿子要按手在羊的头上。
Then take the other sheep; and after Aaron and his sons have put their hands on its head,

你要宰这羊，取点血抹在亚伦的右耳垂上和他儿子的右耳垂上，又抹在他们右手的大拇指上和右脚的大拇指上，并要把血洒在坛的四围。
You are to put the sheep to death, and take some of its blood and put it on the point of Aaron's right ear, and of the right ears of his sons, and on the thumbs of their right hands and the great toes of their right feet, dropping the rest of the blood on the sides of the altar.

你要取点膏油和坛上的血，弹在亚伦和他的衣服上，并他儿子和他儿子的衣服上，他们和他们的衣服就一同成圣。
Then take some of the blood on the altar, and the oil, and put it on Aaron and his robes and on his sons and on their robes, so that he and his robes and his sons and their robes may be made holy.

你要取这羊的脂油和肥尾巴，并盖脏的脂油与肝上的网子，两个腰子和腰子上的脂油并右腿（这是承接圣职所献的羊）。
Then take the fat of the sheep, the fat tail, the fat covering the insides, and the fat joining the liver and the two kidneys with the fat round them, and the right leg; for by the offering of this sheep they are to be marked out as priests:

再从耶和华面前装无酵饼的筐子中取一个饼，一个调油的饼和一个薄饼，
And take one bit of bread and one cake of oiled bread and one thin cake out of the basket of unleavened bread which is before the Lord:

都放在亚伦的手上和他儿子的手上，作为摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇。
And put them all on the hands of Aaron and of his sons, to be waved for a wave offering before the Lord.

要从他们手中接过来，烧在耶和华面前坛上的燔祭上，是献给耶和华为馨香的火祭。
Then take them from their hands, and let them be burned on the burned offering on the altar, a sweet smell before the Lord, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

你要取亚伦承接圣职所献公羊的胸，作为摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，这就可以作你的分。
Then take the breast of Aaron's sheep, waving it before the Lord; and it is to be your part of the offering.

那摇祭的胸和举祭的腿，就是承接圣职所摇的，所举的，是归亚伦和他儿子的。这些你都要成为圣，
So you are to make holy the breast of the sheep which is waved and the leg which is lifted up on high, that is, of the sheep which is offered for Aaron and his sons;

作亚伦和他子孙从以色列人中永远所得的分，因为是举祭。这要从以色列人的平安祭中，作为献给耶和华的举祭。
And it will be their part as a right for ever from the children of Israel, it is a special offering from the children of Israel, made from their peace-offerings, a special offering lifted up to the Lord.

亚伦的圣衣要留给他的子孙，可以穿着受膏，又穿着承接圣职。
And Aaron's holy robes will be used by his sons after him; they will put them on when they are made priests.

他的子孙接续他当祭司的，每逢进会幕在圣所供职的时候，要穿七天。
For seven days the son who becomes priest in his place will put them on when he comes into the Tent of meeting to do the work of the holy place.

你要将承接圣职所献公羊的肉煮在圣处。
Then take the sheep of the wave offering and let its flesh be cooked in water in a holy place.

亚伦和他儿子要在会幕门口吃这羊的肉和筐内的饼。
And let Aaron and his sons make a meal of it, with the bread in the basket, at the door of the Tent of meeting.

他们吃那些赎罪之物，好承接圣职，使他们成圣，只是外人不可吃，因为这是圣物。
All those things which were used as offerings to take away sin, and to make them holy to be priests, they may have for food: but no one who is not a priest may have them, for they are holy food.

那承接圣职所献的肉或饼，若有一点留到早晨，就要用火烧了，不可吃这物，因为是圣物。
And if any of the flesh of the offering or of the bread is over till the morning, let it be burned with fire; it is not to be used for food, for it is holy.

你要这样照我一切所吩咐的，向亚伦和他儿子行承接圣职的礼七天。
All these things you are to do to Aaron and his sons as I have given you orders: for seven days the work of making them priests is to go on.

每天要献公牛一只为赎罪祭。你洁净坛的时候，坛就洁净了，且要用膏抹坛，使坛成圣。
Every day an ox is to be offered as a sin-offering, to take away sins: and by this offering on it, you will make the altar clean from sin; and you are to put oil on it and make it holy.

要洁净坛七天，使坛成圣，坛就成为至圣。凡挨着坛的都成为圣。
For seven days you are to make offerings for the altar and make it holy, so that it may become completely holy, and anything touching it will become holy.

你每天所要献在坛上的就是两只一岁的羊羔，
Now this is the offering which you are to make on the altar: two lambs in their first year, every day regularly.

早晨要献这一只，黄昏的时候要献那一只。
One lamb is to be offered in the morning and the other in the evening:

和这一只羊羔同献的，要用细面伊法十分之一与捣成的油一欣四分之一调和，又用酒一欣四分之一作为奠祭。
And with the one lamb, a tenth part of an ephah of the best meal, mixed with a fourth part of a hin of clear oil; and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering.

那一只羊羔要在黄昏的时候献上，照着早晨的素祭和奠祭的礼办理，作为献给耶和华馨香的火祭。
And the other lamb is to be offered in the evening, and with it the same meal offering and drink offering, for a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

这要在耶和华面前，会幕门口，作你们世世代代常献的燔祭。我要在那里与你们相会，和你们说话。
This is to be a regular burned offering made from generation to generation, at the door of the Tent of meeting before the Lord, where I will come face to face with you and have talk with you.

我要在那里与以色列人相会，会幕就要因我的荣耀成为圣。
There I will come face to face with the children of Israel, and the Tent will be made holy by my glory

我要使会幕和坛成圣，也要使亚伦和他的儿子成圣，给我供祭司的职分。
I will make holy the Tent of meeting and the altar: and Aaron and his sons I will make holy, to be my priests

我要住在以色列人中间，作他们的神。
Among the children of Israel I will make my living-place, and I will be their God.

他们必知道我是耶和华他们的神，是将他们从埃及地领出来的，为要住在他们中间。我是耶和华他们的神。
And they will see that I am the Lord their God, who took them out of the land of Egypt, so that I might be ever with them: I am the Lord their God.

你要用皂荚木作一座烧香的坛。
And you are to make an altar for the burning of perfume; of hard wood let it be made.

这坛要四方的，长一肘，宽一肘，高二肘，坛的四角要与坛接连一块。
The altar is to be square, a cubit long and a cubit wide, and two cubits high, and its horns are to be made of the same.

要用精金把坛的上面与坛的四围，并坛的四角，包裹，又要在坛的四围镶上金牙边。
It is to be plated with the best gold, the top of it and the sides and the horns, with an edging of gold all round it.

要作两个金环安在牙子边以下，在坛的两旁，两根横撑上，作为穿杠的用处，以便抬坛。
Under the edge on the two opposite sides, you are to make two gold rings, to take the rods for lifting it.

要用皂荚木作杠，用金包裹。
And make these rods of the same wood, plating them with gold.

要把坛放在法柜前的幔子外，对着法柜上的施恩座，就是我要与你相会的地方。
And let it be placed in front of the veil before the ark of the law, before the cover which is over the law, where I will come face to face with you.

亚伦在坛上要烧馨香料作的香，每早晨他收拾灯的时候，要烧这香。
And on this altar sweet spices are to be burned by Aaron every morning when he sees to the lights.

黄昏点灯的时候，他要在耶和华面前烧这香，作为世世代代常烧的香。
And every evening, when he puts the lights up in their places, the spices are to be burned, a sweet-smelling smoke going up before the Lord from generation to generation for ever.

在这坛上不可奉上异样的香，不可献燔祭，素祭，也不可浇上奠祭。
No strange perfume, no burned offering or meal offering, and no drink offering is to be offered on it.

亚伦一年一次要在坛的角上行赎罪之礼。他一年一次要用赎罪祭牲的血在坛上行赎罪之礼，作为世世代代的定例。这坛在耶和华面前为至圣。
And once every year Aaron is to make its horns clean: with the blood of the sin-offering he is to make it clean once every year from generation to generation: it is most holy to the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要按以色列人被数的，计算总数，你数的时候，他们各人要为自己的生命把赎价奉给耶和华，免得数的时候在他们中间有灾殃。
When you are taking the number of the children of Israel, let every man who is numbered give to the Lord a price for his life, so that no disease may come on them when they are numbered.

凡过去归那些被数之人的，每人要按圣所的平，拿银子半舍客勒，这半舍客勒是奉给耶和华的礼物，一舍客勒是二十季拉。
And this is what they are to give; let every man who is numbered give half a shekel, by the scale of the holy place: (the shekel being valued at twenty gerahs:) this money is an offering to the Lord.

凡过去归那些被数的人，从二十岁以外的，要将这礼物奉给耶和华。
Everyone who is numbered, from twenty years old and over, is to give an offering to the Lord.

他们为赎生命将礼物奉给耶和华，富足的不可多出，贫穷的也不可少出，各人要出半舍客勒。
The man of wealth is to give no more and the poor man no less than the half-shekel of silver, when the offering is made to the Lord as the price for your lives.

你要从以色列人收这赎罪银，作为会幕的使用，可以在耶和华面前为以色列人作纪念，赎生命。
And you are to take this money from the children of Israel to be used for the work of the Tent of meeting, to keep the memory of the children of Israel before the Lord and to be the price of your lives.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要用铜作洗濯盆和盆座，以便洗濯。要将盆放在会幕和坛的中间，在盆里盛水。
You are to make a brass washing-vessel, with a brass base; and put it between the Tent of meeting and the altar, with water in it;

亚伦和他的儿子要在这盆里洗手洗脚。
That it may be used by Aaron and his sons for washing their hands and feet;

他们进会幕，或是就近坛前供职给耶和华献火祭的时候，必用水洗濯，免得死亡。
Whenever they go into the Tent of meeting they are to be washed with water, to keep them from death; and whenever they come near to do the work of the altar, or to make an offering by fire to the Lord,

他们洗手洗脚就免得死亡。这要作亚伦和他后裔世世代代永远的定例。
Their hands and feet are to be washed. so that they may be safe from death: this is an order to them for ever; to him and his seed from generation to generation.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要取上品的香料，就是流质的没药五百舍客勒，香肉桂一半，就是二百五十舍客勒，菖蒲二百五十舍客勒，
Take the best spices, five hundred shekels' weight of liquid myrrh, and of sweet cinnamon half as much, that is, two hundred and fifty shekels, and two hundred and fifty shekels of sweet calamus,

桂皮五百舍客勒，都按着圣所的平，又取橄榄油一欣，
And of cassia, five hundred shekels' weight measured by the scale of the holy place, and of olive oil a hin:

按作香之法调和作成圣膏油。
And make these into a holy oil, a perfume made by the art of the perfume-maker; it is to be a holy oil.

要用这膏油抹会幕和法柜，
This oil is to be put on the Tent of meeting, and on the ark of the law,

桌子与桌子的一切器具，灯台和灯台的器具，并香坛，
And on the table and all its vessels, and on the support for the lights, with its vessels, and on the altar for burning spices,

燔祭坛，和坛的一切器具，洗濯盆和盆座。
And on the altar of burned offerings with its vessels, and on the washing-vessel and its base.

要使这些物成为圣，好成为至圣，凡挨着的都成为圣。
And you are to make them most holy; anything touching them will become holy.

要膏亚伦和他的儿子，使他们成为圣，可以给我供祭司的职分。
And put the oil on Aaron and his sons, making them holy to do the work of priests to me.

你要对以色列人说，这油，我要世世代代以为圣膏油。
And say to the children of Israel, This is to be the Lord's holy oil, from generation to generation.

不可倒在别人的身上，也不可按这调和之法作与此相似的。这膏油是圣的，你们也要以为圣。
It is not to be used for man's flesh, and no other is to be made like it: holy it is, and you are to keep it holy.

凡调和与此相似的，或将这膏膏在别人身上的，这人要从民中剪除。
Whoever makes any like it, or puts it on one who is not a priest, will be cut off from his people.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你要取馨香的香料，就是拿他弗，施喜列，喜利比拿，这馨香的香料和净乳香各样要一般大的分量。
And the Lord said to Moses, Take sweet spices, stacte and onycha and galbanum, with the best frankincense, in equal weights;

你要用这些加上盐，按作香之法作成清净圣洁的香。
And make from them a perfume, such as is made by the art of the perfume-maker, mixed with salt, and clean and holy.

这香要取点捣得极细，放在会幕内，法柜前，我要在那里与你相会。你们要以这香为至圣。
And put some of it, crushed very small, in front of the ark in the Tent of meeting, where I will come face to face with you; it is to be most holy.

你们不可按这调和之法为自己作香，要以这香为圣，归耶和华。
You are not to make any perfume like it for yourselves: it is to be kept holy to the Lord.

凡作香和这香一样，为要闻香味的，这人要从民中剪除。
Whoever makes any like it, for its sweet smell, will be cut off from his people.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

看哪，犹大支派中，户珥的孙子，乌利的儿子比撒列，我已经提他的名召他。
I have made selection of Bezalel, the son of Uri, by name, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

我也以我的灵充满了他，使他有智慧，有聪明，有知识，能作各样的工，
And I have given him the spirit of God and made him wise and full of knowledge and expert in every sort of handwork,

能想出巧工，用金，银，铜制造各物，
To do all sorts of delicate work in gold and silver and brass;

又能刻宝石，可以镶嵌，能雕刻木头，能作各样的工。
In cutting stones for framing, and to do every form of woodwork.

我分派但支派中，亚希撒抹的儿子亚何利亚伯与他同工。凡心里有智慧的，我更使他们有智慧，能作我一切所吩咐的，
And I have made selection of Oholiab with him, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of all who are wise I have put the knowledge to make whatever I have given you orders to have made;

就是会幕和法柜，并其上的施恩座，与会幕中一切的器具，
The Tent of meeting, and the ark of the law, and the cover which is on it, and all the things for the tent,

桌子和桌子的器具，精金的灯台和灯台的一切器具并香坛，
And the table with its vessels, and the holy light-support with all its vessels, and the altar for the burning of spices,

燔祭坛和坛的一切器具，并洗濯盆与盆座，
And the altar of burned offerings with all its vessels, and the washing-vessel with its base,

精工作的礼服，和祭司亚伦并他儿子用以供祭司职分的圣衣，
And the robes of needlework, the holy robes for Aaron and for his sons, for their use when acting as priests,

膏油和为圣所用馨香的香料。他们都要照我一切所吩咐的去作。
And the holy oil, and the perfume of sweet spices for the holy place; they will do whatever I have given you orders to have done.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要吩咐以色列人说，你们务要守我的安息日，因为这是你我之间世世代代的证据，使你们知道我耶和华是叫你们成为圣的。
Say to the children of Israel that they are to keep my Sabbaths; for the Sabbath day is a sign between me and you through all your generations; so that you may see that I am the Lord who makes you holy.

所以你们要守安息日，以为圣日。凡干犯这日的，必要把他治死，凡在这日作工的，必从民中剪除。
So you are to keep the Sabbath as a holy day; and anyone not honouring it will certainly be put to death: whoever does any work on that day will be cut off from his people.

六日要作工，但第七日是安息圣日，是向耶和华守为圣的。凡在安息日作工的，必要把他治死。
Six days may work be done, but the seventh day is a Sabbath of complete rest, holy to the Lord; whoever does any work on the Sabbath day is to be put to death.

故此，以色列人要世世代代守安息日为永远的约。
And the children of Israel are to keep the Sabbath holy, from generation to generation, by an eternal agreement.

这是我和以色列人永远的证据，因为六日之内耶和华造天地，第七日便安息舒畅。
It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; because in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he took his rest and had pleasure in it.

耶和华在西乃山和摩西说完了话，就把两块法版交给他，是神用指头写的石版。
And when his talk with Moses on Mount Sinai was ended, he gave him the two stones of the law, two stones on which was the writing made by the finger of God.

百姓见摩西迟延不下山，就大家聚集到亚伦那里，对他说，起来，为我们作神像，可以在我们前面引路，因为领我们出埃及地的那个摩西，我们不知道他遭了什么事。
And when the people saw that Moses was a long time coming down from the mountain, they all came to Aaron and said to him, Come, make us a god to go before us: as for this Moses, who took us up out of the land of Egypt, we have no idea what has become of him.

亚伦对他们说，你们去摘下你们妻子，儿女耳上的金环，拿来给我。
Then Aaron said to them, Take off the gold rings which are in the ears of your wives and your sons and your daughters, and give them to me.

百姓就都摘下他们耳上的金环，拿来给亚伦。
And all the people took the gold rings from their ears and gave them to Aaron.

亚伦从他们手里接过来，铸了一只牛犊，用雕刻的器具作成。他们就说，以色列阿，这是领你出埃及地的神。
And he took the gold from them and, hammering it with an instrument, he made it into the metal image of a young ox: and they said, This is your god, O Israel, who took you out of the land of Egypt.

亚伦看见，就在牛犊面前筑坛，且宣告说，明日要向耶和华守节。
And when Aaron saw this, he made an altar before it, and made a public statement, saying, Tomorrow there will be a feast to the Lord.

次日清早，百姓起来献燔祭和平安祭，就坐下吃喝，起来玩耍。
So early on the day after they got up and made burned offerings and peace-offerings; and took their seats at the feast, and then gave themselves to pleasure.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，下去吧，因为你的百姓，就是你从埃及地领出来的，已经败坏了。
And the Lord said to Moses, Go down quickly; for your people, whom you took out of the land of Egypt, are turned to evil ways;

他们快快偏离了我所吩咐的道，为自己铸了一只牛犊，向它下拜献祭，说，以色列阿，这就是领你出埃及地的神。
Even now they are turned away from the rule I gave them, and have made themselves a metal ox and given worship to it and offerings, saying, This is your god, O Israel, who took you up out of the land of Egypt.

耶和华对摩西说，我看这百姓真是硬着颈项的百姓。
And the Lord said to Moses, I have been watching this people, and I see that they are a stiff-necked people.

你且由着我，我要向他们发烈怒，将他们灭绝，使你的后裔成为大国。
Now do not get in my way, for my wrath is burning against them; I will send destruction on them, but of you I will make a great nation.

摩西便恳求耶和华他的神说，耶和华阿，你为什么向你的百姓发烈怒呢？这百姓是你用大力和大能的手从埃及地领出来的。
But Moses made prayer to God, saying, Lord, why is your wrath burning against your people whom you took out of the land of Egypt, with great power and with the strength of your hand?

为什么使埃及人议论说，他领他们出去，是要降祸与他们，把他们杀在山中，将他们从地上除灭。求你转意，不发你的烈怒，后悔，不降祸与你的百姓。
Why let the Egyptians say, He took them out to an evil fate, to put them to death on the mountains, cutting them off from the earth? Let your wrath be turned away from them, and send not this evil on your people.

求你记念你的仆人亚伯拉罕，以撒，以色列。你曾指着自己起誓说，我必使你们的后裔像天上的星那样多，并且我所应许的这全地，必给你们的后裔，他们要永远承受为业。
Have in mind Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, to whom you gave your oath, saying, I will make your seed like the stars of heaven in number, and all this land will I give to your seed, as I said, to be their heritage for ever.

于是耶和华后悔，不把所说的祸降与他的百姓。
So the Lord let himself be turned from his purpose of sending punishment on his people.

摩西转身下山，手里拿着两块法版。这版是两面写的，这面那面都有字，
Then Moses came down the mountain with the two stones of the law in his hand; the stones had writing on their two sides, on the front and on the back.

是神的工作，字是神写的，刻在版上。
The stones were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, cut on the stones.

约书亚一听见百姓呼喊的声音，就对摩西说，在营里有争战的声音。
Now when the noise and the voices of the people came to the ears of Joshua, he said to Moses, There is a noise of war in the tents.

摩西说，这不是人打胜仗的声音，也不是人打败仗的声音，我所听见的乃是人歌唱的声音。
And Moses said, It is not the voice of men who are overcoming in the fight, or the cry of those who have been overcome; it is the sound of songs which comes to my ear.

摩西挨近营前就看见牛犊，又看见人跳舞，便发烈怒，把两块版扔在山下摔碎了，
And when he came near the tents he saw the image of the ox, and the people dancing; and in his wrath Moses let the stones go from his hands, and they were broken at the foot of the mountain.

又将他们所铸的牛犊用火焚烧，磨得粉碎，撒在水面上，叫以色列人喝。
And he took the ox which they had made, burning it in the fire and crushing it to powder, and he put it in the water and made the children of Israel take a drink of it.

摩西对亚伦说，这百姓向你作了什么？你竟使他们陷在大罪里。
And Moses said to Aaron, What did the people do to you that you let this great sin come on them?

亚伦说，求我主不要发烈怒。这百姓专于作恶，是你知道的。
And Aaron said, Let not my lord be angry; you have seen how the purposes of this people are evil.

他们对我说，你为我们作神像，可以在我们前面引路，因为领我们出埃及地的那个摩西，我们不知道他遭了什么事。
For they said to me, Make us a god to go before us: as for this Moses, who took us up out of the land of Egypt, we have no idea what has come to him.

我对他们说，凡有金环的可以摘下来，他们就给了我。我把金环扔在火中，这牛犊便出来了。
Then I said to them, Whoever has any gold, let him take it off; so they gave it to me, and I put it in the fire, and this image of an ox came out.

摩西见百姓放肆（亚伦纵容他们，使他们在仇敌中间被讥刺），
And Moses saw that the people were out of control, for Aaron had let them loose to their shame before their haters:

就站在营门中，说，凡属耶和华的，都要到我这里来。于是利未的子孙都到他那里聚集。
Then Moses took his place at the way into the tents, and said, Whoever is on the Lord's side, let him come to me. And all the sons of Levi came together to him.

他对他们说，耶和华以色列的神这样说，你们各人把刀跨在腰间，在营中往来，从这门到那门，各人杀他的弟兄与同伴并邻舍。
And he said to them, This is the word of the Lord, the God of Israel: Let every man take his sword at his side, and go from one end of the tents to the other, putting to death his brother and his friend and his neighbour.

利未的子孙照摩西的话行了。那一天百姓中被杀的约有三千。
And the sons of Levi did as Moses said; and about three thousand of the people were put to death that day.

摩西说，今天你们要自洁，归耶和华为圣，各人攻击他的儿子和弟兄，使耶和华赐福与你们。
And Moses said, You have made yourselves priests to the Lord this day; for every one of you has made the offering of his son and his brother; the blessing of the Lord is on you this day.

到了第二天，摩西对百姓说，你们犯了大罪。我如今要上耶和华那里去，或者可以为你们赎罪。
And on the day after, Moses said to the people, Great has been your sin: but I will go up to the Lord, and see if I may get forgiveness for your sin.

摩西回到耶和华那里，说，唉，这百姓犯了大罪，为自己作了金像。
Then Moses went back to the Lord and said, This people has done a great sin, making themselves a god of gold;

倘或你肯赦免他们的罪，……不然，求你从你所写的册上涂抹我的名。
But now, if you will give them forgiveness--but if not, let my name be taken out of your book.

耶和华对摩西说，谁得罪我，我就从我的册上涂抹谁的名。
And the Lord said to Moses, Whoever has done evil against me will be taken out of my book.

现在你去领这百姓，往我所告诉你的地方去，我的使者必在你前面引路，只是到我追讨的日子，我必追讨他们的罪。
But now, go, take the people into that place of which I have given you word; see, my angel will go before you: but when the time of my judging has come, I will send punishment on them for their sin.

耶和华杀百姓的缘故是因他们同亚伦作了牛犊。
And the Lord sent punishment on the people because they gave worship to the ox which Aaron made.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，我曾起誓应许亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各说，要将迦南地赐给你的后裔。现在你和你从埃及地所领出来的百姓，要从这里往那地去。
And the Lord said to Moses, Go forward from this place, you and the people whom you have taken up out of the land of Egypt, to that land about which I made an oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, To your seed will I give it.

我要差遣使者在你前面，撵出迦南人，亚摩利人，赫人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人，
And I will send an angel before you, driving out the Canaanite and the Amorite and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite:

领你到那流奶与蜜之地。我自己不同你们上去，因为你们是硬着颈项的百姓，恐怕我在路上把你们灭绝。
Go up to that land flowing with milk and honey; but I will not go up among you, for you are a stiff-necked people, for fear that I send destruction on you while you are on the way.

百姓听见这凶信就悲哀，也没有人佩戴妆饰。
Hearing this bad news the people were full of grief, and no one put on his ornaments.

耶和华对摩西说，你告诉以色列人说，耶和华说，你们是硬着颈项的百姓，我若一霎时临到你们中间，必灭绝你们。现在你们要把身上的妆饰摘下来，使我可以知道怎样待你们。
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to the children of Israel, You are a stiff-necked people: if I come among you, even for a minute, I will send destruction on you; so take off all your ornaments, so that I may see what to do with you.

以色列人从住何烈山以后，就把身上的妆饰摘得干净。
So the children of Israel took off their ornaments at Mount Horeb, and did not put them on again.

摩西素常将帐棚支搭在营外，离营却远，他称这帐棚为会幕。凡求问耶和华的，就到营外的会幕那里去。
Now it was Moses' way to put up the Tent of meeting outside the tent-circle, at some distance away; giving it the name of The Tent of meeting. And everyone desiring to make his prayer to the Lord went to the Tent of meeting outside the tent-circle.

当摩西出营到会幕去的时候，百姓就都起来，各人站在自己帐棚的门口，望着摩西，直等到他进了会幕。
And whenever Moses went out to the Tent of meeting, all the people got up and everyone went to the door of his tent, looking after Moses till he went inside the Tent.

摩西进会幕的时候，云柱降下来，立在会幕的门前，耶和华便与摩西说话。
And whenever Moses went into the Tent, the pillar of cloud came down, and took its place by the door of the Tent, as long as the Lord was talking with Moses.

众百姓看见云柱立在会幕门前，就都起来，各人在自己帐棚的门口下拜。
And all the people saw the cloud at the door of the Tent, and they went down on their faces, everyone at the door of his tent.

耶和华与摩西面对面说话，好像人与朋友说话一般。摩西转到营里去，惟有他的帮手，一个少年人嫩的儿子约书亚，不离开会幕。
And the Lord had talk with Moses face to face, as a man may have talk with his friend. And when Moses came back to the tents, his servant, the young man Joshua, the son of Nun, did not come away from the Tent.

摩西对耶和华说，你吩咐我说，将这百姓领上去，却没有叫我知道你要打发谁与我同去，只说，我按你的名认识你，你在我眼前也蒙了恩。
And Moses said to the Lord, See, you say to me, Be this people's guide on their journey, but you have not made clear to me whom you will send with me. But you have said, I have knowledge of you by name, and you have grace in my eyes.

我如今若在你眼前蒙恩，求你将你的道指示我，使我可以认识你，好在你眼前蒙恩。求你想到这民是你的民。
If then I have grace in your eyes, let me see your ways, so that I may have knowledge of you and be certain of your grace; and my prayer is that you will keep in mind that this nation is your people.

耶和华说，我必亲自和你同去，使你得安息。
And he said, I myself will go with you and give you rest.

摩西说，你若不亲自和我同去，就不要把我们从这里领上去。
And Moses said, If you yourself are not going with us, do not send us on from here.

人在何事上得以知道我和你的百姓在你眼前蒙恩呢？岂不是因你与我们同去，使我和你的百姓与地上的万民有分别吗？
For is not the fact of your going with us the sign that I and this people have grace in your eyes, so that we, that is, I and your people, are separate from all other people on the face of the earth?

耶和华对摩西说，你这所求的我也要行，因为你在我眼前蒙了恩，并且我按你的名认识你。
And the Lord said to Moses, I will do as you say: for you have grace in my eyes, and I have knowledge of you by your name.

摩西说，求你显出你的荣耀给我看。
And Moses said, O Lord, let me see your glory.

耶和华说，我要显我一切的恩慈，在你面前经过，宣告我的名。我要恩待谁就恩待谁，要怜悯谁就怜悯谁，
And he said, I will make all the light of my being come before you, and will make clear to you what I am; I will be kind to those to whom I will be kind, and have mercy on those on whom I will have mercy.

又说，你不能看见我的面，因为人见我的面不能存活。
But it is not possible for you to see my face, for no man may see me and still go on living.

耶和华说，看哪，在我这里有地方，你要站在磐石上。
And the Lord said, See, there is a place near me, and you may take your place on the rock:

我的荣耀经过的时候，我必将你放在磐石穴中，用我的手遮掩你，等我过去，
And when my glory goes by, I will put you in a hole in the rock, covering you with my hand till I have gone past:

然后我要将我的手收回，你就得见我的背，却不得见我的面。
Then I will take away my hand, and you will see my back: but my face is not to be seen.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你要凿出两块石版，和先前你摔碎的那版一样，其上的字我要写在这版上。
And the Lord said to Moses, Make two other stones like the first two; and I will put on them the words which were on the first stones, which were broken by you.

明日早晨，你要预备好了，上西乃山，在山顶上站在我面前。
And be ready by the morning, and come up on Mount Sinai, and come before me there in the morning, on the top of the mountain.

谁也不可和你一同上去，遍山都不可有人，在山根也不可叫羊群牛群吃草。
No one is to come up with you, and let no man be seen anywhere on the mountain; let no flocks or herds come near to get their food at its foot.

摩西就凿出两块石版，和先前的一样。清晨起来，照耶和华所吩咐的上西乃山去，手里拿着两块石版。
So Moses got two stones cut like the first; and early in the morning he went up Mount Sinai, as the Lord had said, with the two stones in his hand.

耶和华在云中降临，和摩西一同站在那里，宣告耶和华的名。
And the Lord came down in the cloud and took his place by the side of Moses, and Moses gave worship to the name of the Lord.

耶和华在他面前宣告说，耶和华，耶和华，是有怜悯有恩典的神，不轻易发怒，并有丰盛的慈爱和诚实。
And the Lord went past before his eyes, saying, The Lord, the Lord, a God full of pity and grace, slow to wrath and great in mercy and faith;

为千万人存留慈爱，赦免罪孽，过犯，和罪恶，万不以有罪的为无罪，必追讨他的罪，自父及子，直到三，四代。
Having mercy on thousands, overlooking evil and wrongdoing and sin; he will not let wrongdoers go free, but will send punishment on children for the sins of their fathers, and on their children's children to the third and fourth generation.

摩西急忙伏地下拜，
Then Moses quickly went down on his face in worship.

说，主阿，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你在我们中间同行，因为这是硬着颈项的百姓。又求你赦免我们的罪孽和罪恶，以我们为你的产业。
And he said, If now I have grace in your eyes, let the Lord go among us, for this is a stiff-necked people, and give us forgiveness for our wrongdoing and our sin, and take us for your heritage.

耶和华说，我要立约，要在百姓面前行奇妙的事，是在遍地万国中所未曾行的。在你四围的外邦人就要看见耶和华的作为，因我向你所行的是可畏惧的事。
And the Lord said, See, this is what I will undertake: before the eyes of your people I will do wonders, such as have not been done in all the earth or in any nation: and all your people will see the work of the Lord, for what I am about to do for you is greatly to be feared.

我今天所吩咐你的，你要谨守。我要从你面前撵出亚摩利人，迦南人，赫人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人。
Take care to do the orders which I give you today; I will send out from before you the Amorite and the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Perizzite and the Hivite and the Jebusite.

你要谨慎，不可与你所去那地的居民立约，恐怕成为你们中间的网罗，
But take care, and do not make any agreement with the people of the land where you are going, for it will be a cause of sin to you.

却要拆毁他们的祭坛，打碎他们的柱像，砍下他们的木偶。
But their altars are to be overturned and their pillars broken and their images cut down:

不可敬拜别神，因为耶和华是忌邪的神，名为忌邪者。
For you are to be worshippers of no other god: for the Lord is a God who will not give his honour to another.

只怕你与那地的居民立约，百姓随从他们的神，就行邪淫，祭祀他们的神，有人叫你，你便吃他的祭物，
So see that you make no agreement with the people of the land, and do not go after their gods, or take part in their offerings, or be guests at their feasts,

又为你的儿子娶他们的女儿为妻，他们的女儿随从他们的神，就行邪淫，使你的儿子也随从他们的神行邪淫。
Or take their daughters for your sons; for when their daughters give worship before their gods, they will make your sons take part with them.

不可为自己铸造神像。
Make for yourselves no gods of metal.

你要守除酵节，照我所吩咐你的，在亚笔月内所定的日期吃无酵饼七天，因为你是这亚笔月内出了埃及。
Keep the feast of unleavened bread; for seven days your food is to be bread without leaven, as I gave you orders, at the regular time in the month Abib; for in that month you came out of Egypt.

凡头生的都是我的，一切牲畜头生的，无论是牛是羊，公的都是我的。
Every first male child is mine; the first male birth of your cattle, the first male of every ox and sheep.

头生的驴要用羊羔代赎，若不代赎就要打折它的颈项。凡头生的儿子都要赎出来。谁也不可空手朝见我。
A lamb may be given in payment for the young of an ass, but if you will not make payment for it, its neck will have to be broken. For all the first of your sons you are to make payment. No one is to come before me without an offering.

你六日要作工，第七日要安息，虽在耕种收割的时候也要安息。
Six days let work be done, but on the seventh day take your rest: at ploughing time and at the grain-cutting you are to have a day for rest.

在收割初熟麦子的时候要守七七节，又在年底要守收藏节。
And you are to keep the feast of weeks when you get in the first-fruits of the grain, and the feast at the turn of the year when you take in the produce of your fields.

你们一切男丁要一年三次朝见主耶和华以色列的神。
Three times in the year let all your males come before the Lord, the God of Israel.

我要从你面前赶出外邦人，扩张你的境界。你一年三次上去朝见耶和华你神的时候，必没有人贪慕你的地土。
For I will send out the nations before you and make wide the limits of your land; and no man will make an attempt to take your land while you go up to give worship to the Lord, three times in the year.

你不可将我祭物的血和有酵的饼一同献上。逾越节的祭物也不可留到早晨。
No leaven is to be offered with the blood of my offering, and the offering of the Passover feast may not be kept till the morning.

地里首先初熟之物要送到耶和华你神的殿。不可用山羊羔母的奶煮山羊羔。
Take the first-fruits of your land as an offering to the house of the Lord your God. Let not the young goat be cooked in its mother's milk

耶和华吩咐摩西说，你要将这些话写上，因为我是按这话与你和以色列人立约。
And the Lord said to Moses, Put all these words in writing; for on them is based the agreement which I will make with you.

摩西在耶和华那里四十昼夜，也不吃饭也不喝水。耶和华将这约的话，就是十条诫，写在两块版上。
And for forty days and forty nights Moses was there with the Lord, and in that time he had no food or drink. And he put in writing on the stones the words of the agreement, the ten rules of the law.

摩西手里拿着两块法版下西乃山的时候，不知道自己的面皮因耶和华和他说话就发了光。
Now when Moses came down from Mount Sinai, with the two stones in his hand, he was not conscious that his face was shining because of his talk with God.

亚伦和以色列众人看见摩西的面皮发光就怕挨近他。
But when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, and the shining of his face, they would not come near him for fear.

摩西叫他们来，于是亚伦和会众的官长都到他那里去，摩西就与他们说话。
Then Moses sent for them; and Aaron, with the chiefs of the people, came to him; and Moses had talk with them.

随后以色列众人都近前来，他就把耶和华在西乃山与他所说的一切话都吩咐他们。
And later, all the children of Israel came near, and he gave them all the orders which the Lord had given him on Mount Sinai.

摩西与他们说完了话就用帕子蒙上脸。
And at the end of his talk with them, Moses put a veil over his face.

但摩西进到耶和华面前与他说话就揭去帕子，及至出来的时候便将耶和华所吩咐的告诉以色列人。
But whenever Moses went in before the Lord to have talk with him, he took off the veil till he came out. And whenever he came out he said to the children of Israel what he had been ordered to say;

以色列人看见摩西的面皮发光。摩西又用帕子蒙上脸，等到他进去与耶和华说话，就揭去帕子。
And the children of Israel saw that the face of Moses was shining: so Moses put the veil over his face again till he went to the Lord.

摩西招聚以色列全会众，对他们说，这是耶和华所吩咐的话，叫你们照着行，
And Moses sent for all the children of Israel to come together, and said to them, This is what the Lord has said and these are his orders.

六日要作工，第七日乃为圣日，当向耶和华守为安息圣日。凡这日之内作工的，必把他治死。
Six days let work be done, but the seventh day is to be a holy day to you, a Sabbath of rest to the Lord; whoever does any work on that day is to be put to death.

当安息日，不可在你们一切的住处生火。
No fire is to be lighted in any of your houses on the Sabbath day.

摩西对以色列全会众说，耶和华所吩咐的是这样，
And Moses said to all the meeting of the children of Israel, This is the order which the Lord has given:

你们中间要拿礼物献给耶和华，凡乐意献的可以拿耶和华的礼物来，就是金，银，铜，
Take from among you an offering to the Lord; everyone who has the impulse in his heart, let him give his offering to the Lord; gold and silver and brass;

蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，细麻，山羊毛，
And blue and purple and red and the best linen and goats' hair,

染红的公羊皮，海狗皮，皂荚木，
And sheepskins coloured red, and leather, and hard wood,

点灯的油，并作膏油和香的香料，
And oil for the lights, and spices for the holy oil and for the sweet perfumes for burning.

红玛瑙与别样的宝石，可以镶嵌在以弗得和胸牌上。
And beryls and jewels to be cut for the ephod and for the priest's bag.

你们中间凡心里有智慧的都要来作耶和华一切所吩咐的，
And let every wise-hearted man among you come and make whatever has been ordered by the Lord;

就是帐幕和帐幕的罩棚，并帐幕的盖，钩子，板，闩，柱子，带卯的座，
The House and its tent and its cover, its hooks and its boards, its rods and its pillars and its bases;

柜和柜的杠，施恩座和遮掩柜的幔子，
The ark with its cover and its rods and the veil hanging before it;

桌子和桌子的杠与桌子的一切器具，并陈设饼，
The table and its rods and all its vessels, and the holy bread;

灯台和灯台的器具，灯盏并点灯的油，
And the support for the lights, with its vessels and its lights and the oil for the light;

香坛和坛的杠，膏油和馨香的香料，并帐幕门口的帘子，
And the altar for burning spices, with its rods, and the holy oil and the sweet perfume, and the curtain for the door, at the door of the House;

燔祭坛和坛的铜网，坛的杠并坛的一切器具，洗濯盆和盆座，
The altar of burned offerings, with its network of brass, its rods, and all its vessels, the washing-vessel and its base;

院子的帷子和帷子的柱子，带卯的座和院子的门帘，
The hangings for the open space, its pillars and their bases, and the curtain for the doorway;

帐幕的橛子并院子的橛子，和这两处的绳子，
The nails for the House, and the nails for the open space and their cords;

精工作的礼服和祭司亚伦并他儿子在圣所用以供祭司职分的圣衣。
The robes of needlework for the work of the holy place, the holy robes for Aaron the priest, and the robes for his sons when acting as priests.

以色列全会众从摩西面前退去。
And all the children of Israel went away from Moses.

凡心里受感和甘心乐意的都拿耶和华的礼物来，用以作会幕和其中一切的使用，又用以作圣衣。
And everyone whose heart was moved, everyone who was guided by the impulse of his spirit, came with his offering for the Lord, for whatever was needed for the Tent of meeting and its work and for the holy robes.

凡心里乐意献礼物的，连男带女，各将金器，就是胸前针，耳环（或作鼻环），打印的戒指，和手钏带来献给耶和华。
They came, men and women, all who were ready to give, and gave pins and nose-rings and finger-rings and neck-ornaments, all of gold; everyone gave an offering of gold to the Lord.

凡有蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，细麻，山羊毛，染红的公羊皮，海狗皮的，都拿了来，
And everyone who had blue and purple and red and the best linen and goats' hair and sheepskins coloured red and leather, gave them.

凡献银子和铜给耶和华为礼物的都拿了来，凡有皂荚木可作什么使用的也拿了来。
Everyone who had silver and brass gave an offering of them to the Lord; and everyone who had hard wood, such as was needed for the work, gave it.

凡心中有智慧的妇女亲手纺线，把所纺的蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和细麻都拿了来。
And all the women who were expert with their hands, made cloth, and gave the work of their hands, blue and purple and red and the best linen.

凡有智慧，心里受感的妇女就纺山羊毛。
And those women who had the knowledge, made the goats' hair into cloth.

众官长把红玛瑙和别样的宝石，可以镶嵌在以弗得与胸牌上的，都拿了来，
And the rulers gave the beryls and the cut jewels for the ephod and the priest's bag;

又拿香料作香，拿油点灯，作膏油。
And the spice and the oil for the light, and the holy oil and the sweet perfumes.

以色列人，无论男女，凡甘心乐意献礼物给耶和华的，都将礼物拿来，作耶和华借摩西所吩咐的一切工。
The children of Israel, every man and woman, from the impulse of their hearts, gave their offerings freely to the Lord for the work which the Lord had given Moses orders to have done.

摩西对以色列人说，犹大支派中，户珥的孙子，乌利的儿子比撒列，耶和华已经提他的名召他，
And Moses said to the children of Israel, See, the Lord has made selection of Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;

又以神的灵充满了他，使他有智慧，聪明，知识，能作各样的工，
And he has made him full of the spirit of God, in all wisdom and knowledge and art of every sort;

能想出巧工，用金，银，铜制造各物，
As an expert designer of beautiful things, working in gold and silver and brass;

又能刻宝石，可以镶嵌，能雕刻木头，能作各样的巧工。
Trained in the cutting of stones and the ornamenting of wood and in every sort of handwork.

耶和华又使他，和但支派中亚希撒抹的儿子亚何利亚伯，心里灵明，能教导人。
And he has given to him, and to Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, the power of training others.

耶和华使他们的心满有智慧，能作各样的工，无论是雕刻的工，巧匠的工，用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和细麻，绣花的工，并机匠的工，他们都能作，也能想出奇巧的工。
To them he has given knowledge of all the arts of the handworker, of the designer, and the expert workman; of the maker of needlework in blue and purple and red and the best linen, and of the maker of cloth; in all the arts of the designer and the trained workman they are expert.

比撒列和亚何利亚伯，并一切心里有智慧的，就是蒙耶和华赐智慧聪明，叫他知道作圣所各样使用之工的，都要照耶和华所吩咐的作工。
So let Bezalel and Oholiab get to work, with every wise-hearted man to whom the Lord has given wisdom and knowledge, to do whatever is necessary for the ordering of the holy place, as the Lord has given orders.

凡耶和华赐他心里有智慧，而且受感前来作这工的，摩西把他们和比撒列并亚何利亚伯一同召来。
Then Moses sent for Bezalel and Oholiab, and for all the wise-hearted men to whom the Lord had given wisdom, even everyone who was moved by the impulse of his heart to come and take part in the work:

这些人就从摩西收了以色列人为作圣所并圣所使用之工所拿来的礼物。百姓每早晨还把甘心献的礼物拿来。
And they took from Moses all the offerings which the children of Israel had given for the building of the holy place. And still they went on giving him more free offerings every morning.

凡作圣所一切工的智慧人各都离开他所作的工，
Then the wise men, who were doing all the work of the holy place, came from their work;

来对摩西说，百姓为耶和华吩咐使用之工所拿来的，富富有余。
And said to Moses, The people are giving much more than is needed for the work which the Lord has given us orders to do.

摩西传命，他们就在全营中宣告说，无论男女，不必再为圣所拿什么礼物来。这样才拦住百姓不再拿礼物来。
So Moses made an order and had it given out through all the tents, saying, Let no man or woman make any more offerings for the holy place. So the people were kept from giving more.

因为他们所有的材料够作一切当作的物，而且有余。
For the material they had was enough and more than enough for all the work which had to be done.

他们中间，凡心里有智慧作工的，用十幅幔子作帐幕。这幔子是比撒列用捻的细麻和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线制造的，并用巧匠的手工绣上基路伯。
Then all the expert workmen among them made the House with its ten curtains; of the best linen, blue and purple and red, they made them, with winged ones worked by expert designers.

每幅幔子长二十八肘，宽四肘，都是一样的尺寸。
Every curtain was twenty-eight cubits long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

他使这五幅幔子幅幅相连，又使那五幅幔子幅幅相连，
And five curtains were joined together, and the other five curtains were joined together.

在这相连的幔子末幅边上作蓝色的钮扣，在那相连的幔子末幅边上也照样作，
And they put twists of blue cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group, and in the same way on the outside curtain of the second group.

在这相连的幔子上作五十个钮扣，在那相连的幔子上也作五十个钮扣，都是两两相对，
Fifty twists on the one curtain and fifty on the edge of the curtain of the other group; the twists being opposite to one another.

又作五十个金钩，使幔子相连。这才成了一个帐幕。
And they made fifty hooks of gold, joining the curtains one to another with the hooks; and so the House was made.

他用山羊毛织十一幅幔子，作为帐幕以上的罩棚。
And they made curtains of goats' hair for the tent; eleven curtains were made.

每幅幔子长三十肘，宽四肘，十一幅幔子都是一样的尺寸。
Every curtain was thirty cubits long and four cubits wide, all of the same measure.

他把五幅幔子连成一幅，又把六幅幔子连成一幅，
Five curtains were joined together to make one group, and six curtains were joined together to make the other group.

在这相连的幔子末幅边上作五十个钮扣，在那相连的幔子末幅边上也作五十个钮扣，
And they put fifty twists of cord on the edge of the outside curtain of the first group, and fifty twists on the edge of the outside curtain of the second group,

又作五十个铜钩，使罩棚连成一个，
And fifty hooks of brass for joining them together to make the tent.

并用染红的公羊皮作罩棚的盖，再用海狗皮作一层罩棚上的顶盖。
And they made a cover of sheepskins coloured red, to go over the tent, and a cover of leather over that.

他用皂荚木作帐幕的竖板。
And for the uprights of the House they made boards of hard wood.

每块长十肘，宽一肘半，
The boards were ten cubits long and one cubit and a half wide.

每块有两榫相对。帐幕一切的板都是这样作。
Every board had two tongues fixed into it; all the boards were made in this way.

帐幕的南面作板二十块。
They made twenty boards for the south side of the House:

在这二十块板底下又作四十个带卯的银座，两卯接这块板上的两榫，两卯接那块板上的两榫。
And for these twenty boards, forty silver bases, two bases under every board, to take its tongues.

帐幕的第二面，就是北面，也作板二十块
And for the second side of the House, on the north, they made twenty boards,

和带卯的银座四十个，这板底下有两卯，那板底下也有两卯。
With their forty silver bases, two bases for every board.

帐幕的后面，就是西面，作板六块。
And for the west side of the House, at the back, they made six boards,

帐幕后面的拐角作板两块。
And two boards for the angles at the back.

板的下半截是双的，上半截是整的，直到第一个环子，在帐幕的两个拐角上都是这样作。
These were joined together at the base and at the top to one ring, so forming the two angles.

有八块板和十六个带卯的银座，每块板底下有两卯。
So there were eight boards with sixteen bases of silver, two bases under every board.

他用皂荚木作闩，为帐幕这面的板作五闩，
And they made rods of hard wood; five for the boards on one side of the House,

为帐幕那面的板作五闩，又为帐幕后面的板作五闩，
And five for the boards on the other side of the House, and five for the boards at the back, on the west.

使板腰间的中闩从这一头通到那一头。
The middle rod was made to go right through the rings of all the boards from one end to the other.

用金子将板包裹，又作板上的金环套闩，闩也用金子包裹。
All the boards were plated with gold, and the rings through which the rods went were of gold, and the rods were plated with gold.

他用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻织幔子，以巧匠的手工绣上基路伯。
And he made the veil of the best linen, blue and purple and red, worked with winged ones designed by expert workmen.

为幔子作四根皂荚木柱子，用金包裹，柱子上有金钩，又为柱子铸了四个带卯的银座。
And they made four pillars for it of hard wood plated with gold: they had hooks of gold and four silver bases.

拿蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻，用绣花的手工织帐幕的门帘，
And they made a curtain for the door of the tent, of the best linen with needlework of blue and purple and red;

又为帘子作五根柱子和柱子上的钩子，用金子把柱顶和柱子上的杆子包裹。柱子有五个带卯的座，是铜的。
And five pillars for the curtain, with their hooks; the heads of the pillars were of gold and they were circled with bands of gold; and their five bases were of brass.

比撒列用皂荚木作柜，长二肘半，宽一肘半，高一肘半。
And Bezalel made the ark of hard wood, two and a half cubits long, a cubit and a half wide and a cubit and a half high;

里外包上精金，四围镶上金牙边，
Plating it inside and out with the best gold, and putting an edge of gold all round it.

又铸四个金环，安在柜的四脚上，这边两环，那边两环。
And he made four gold rings for its four angles, two on one side and two on the other,

用皂荚木作两根杠，用金包裹。
And rods of the same wood plated with gold.

把杠穿在柜旁的环内，以便抬柜。
These rods he put in the rings at the sides of the ark, for lifting it.

用精金作施恩座，长二肘半，宽一肘半。
And he made the cover all of gold, two and a half cubits long and a cubit and a half wide.

用金子锤出两个基路伯来，安在施恩座的两头，
And he made two winged ones, hammered out of one bit of gold, for the two ends of the cover;

这头作一个基路伯，那头作一个基路伯，二基路伯接连一块，在施恩座的两头。
Placing one at one end and one at the other; the winged ones were part of the cover.

二基路伯高张翅膀，遮掩施恩座，基路伯是脸对脸，朝着施恩座。
And their wings were stretched out over the cover; the faces of the winged ones were opposite one another and facing the cover.

他用皂荚木作一张桌子，长二肘，宽一肘，高一肘半，
And he made the table of hard wood, two cubits long, a cubit wide and a cubit and a half high;

又包上精金，四围镶上金牙边。
Plating it with the best gold and putting a gold edge all round it.

桌子的四围各作一掌宽的横梁，横梁上镶着金牙边，
And he made a frame all round it about as wide as a man's hand, edged with gold all round.

又铸了四个金环，安在桌子四脚的四角上。
And he made four gold rings, and put the rings at the angles of its four feet.

安环子的地方是挨近横梁，可以穿杠抬桌子。
The rings were fixed under the frame to take the rods with which the table was to be lifted.

他用皂荚木作两根杠，用金包裹，以便抬桌子，
The rods for lifting the table he made of hard wood plated with gold.

又用精金作桌子上的器皿，就是盘子，调羹，并奠酒的瓶和爵。
And all the table-vessels, the plates and spoons and basins and the cups for liquids, he made of the best gold.

他用精金作一个灯台，这灯台的座和干，与杯，球，花，都是接连一块锤出来的。
Then he made the support for the lights, all of the best gold; its base and its pillar were of hammered gold; its cups and buds and flowers were all made out of the same metal:

灯台两旁杈出六个枝子，这旁三个，那旁三个。
It had six branches coming out from its sides, three from one side and three from the other;

这旁每枝上有三个杯，形状像杏花，有球有花，那旁每枝上也有三个杯，形状像杏花，有球有花。从灯台杈出来的六个枝子都是如此。
Every branch having three cups made like almond flowers, every cup with a bud and a flower on all the branches;

灯台上有四个杯，形状像杏花，有球有花。
And on its pillar, four cups like almond flowers, every one with its bud and its flower;

灯台每两个枝子以下有球，与枝子接连一块，灯台杈出的六个枝子都是如此。
And under every two branches a bud, made with the branch, for all six branches of it.

球和枝子是接连一块，都是一块精金锤出来的。
The buds and the branches were made of the same metal, all together one complete work of the best hammered gold.

用精金作灯台的七个灯盏，并灯台的蜡剪和蜡花盘。
And he made the seven vessels for the lights, and all the necessary instruments for it, of gold.

他用精金一他连得作灯台和灯台的一切器具。
A talent of the best gold was used for the making of it and its vessels.

他用皂荚木作香坛，是四方的，长一肘，宽一肘，高二肘，坛的四角与坛接连一块，
And he made the altar for the burning of spices, using the same hard wood; it was square, a cubit long and a cubit wide and two cubits high; the horns made of the same.

又用精金把坛的上面与坛的四面并坛的四角包裹，又在坛的四围镶上金牙边。
The top and the sides and the horns were all plated with the best gold; and he put an edge of gold all round it.

作两个金环，安在牙子边以下，在坛的两旁，两根横撑上，作为穿杠的用处，以便抬坛。
And he made two gold rings, placing them on the two opposite sides under the edge, to take the rods for lifting it.

用皂荚木作杠，用金包裹。
The rods he made of the same hard wood, plating them with gold.

又按作香之法作圣膏油和馨香料的净香。
And he made the holy oil and the perfume of sweet spices for burning, after the art of the perfume-maker.

他用皂荚木作燔祭坛，是四方的，长五肘，宽五肘，高三肘，
The altar of burned offerings he made of hard wood; a square altar, five cubits long, five cubits wide and three cubits high,

在坛的四拐角上作四个角，与坛接连一块，用铜把坛包裹。
And he put horns at its four angles made of the same, plating it all with brass;

他作坛上的盆，铲子，盘子，肉锸子，火鼎，这一切器具都是用铜作的。
And brass was used for all the vessels of the altar, the baskets and the spades, the basins and the meat-hooks and the fire-trays; all the vessels he made of brass

又为坛作一个铜网，安在坛四面的围腰板以下，从下达到坛的半腰。
And he made a network of brass for the altar, under the frame round it, stretching half-way up;

为铜网的四角铸四个环子，作为穿杠的用处。
And four rings for the four angles of this network, to take the rods.

用皂荚木作杠，用铜包裹，
The rods he made of hard wood plated with brass.

把杠穿在坛两旁的环子内，用以抬坛，并用板作坛，坛是空的。
He put the rods through the rings at the opposite sides of the altar for lifting it; he made the altar hollow, boarded in with wood.

他用铜作洗濯盆和盆座，是用会幕门前伺候的妇人之镜子作的。
And he made the washing-vessel of brass on a brass base, using the polished brass looking-glasses given by the women who did work at the doors of the Tent of meeting.

他作帐幕的院子。院子的南面用捻的细麻作帷子，宽一百肘。
To make the open space, he put hangings on the south side, of the best linen, a hundred cubits long:

帷子的柱子二十根，带卯的铜座二十个，柱子上的钩子和杆子都是用银子作的。
Their twenty pillars and their twenty bases were brass; and the hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver.

北面也有帷子，宽一百肘。帷子的柱子二十根，带卯的铜座二十个，柱子上的钩子和杆子都是用银子作的。
And for the north side. hangings a hundred cubits long, on twenty brass pillars in brass bases, with silver hooks and bands.

院子的西面有帷子，宽五十肘。帷子的柱子十根，带卯的座十个，柱子的钩子和杆子都是用银子作的。
And on the west side, hangings fifty cubits long, on ten pillars in ten bases, with silver bands.

院子的东面，宽五十肘。
And on the east side, the open space was fifty cubits long.

门这边的帷子十五肘，那边也是一样。帷子的柱子三根，带卯的座三个。在门的左右各有帷子十五肘，帷子的柱子三根，带卯的座三个。
The hangings on one side of the doorway were fifteen cubits long, on three pillars with their three bases;


And the same on the other side of the doorway; on this side and on that the hangings were fifteen cubits long, on three pillars with their three bases.

院子四面的帷子都是用捻的细麻作的。
All the hangings were of the best linen.

柱子带卯的座是铜的，柱子上的钩子和杆子是银的，柱顶是用银子包的。院子一切的柱子都是用银杆连络的。
And the bases of the pillars were of brass; their hooks and the bands round the tops of them were of silver; all the pillars were ringed with silver.

院子的门帘是以绣花的手工，用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和捻的细麻织的，宽二十肘，高五肘，与院子的帷子相配。
And the curtain for the doorway of the open space was of the best linen, with designs of blue and purple and red in needlework; it was twenty cubits long and five cubits high, to go with the hangings round the sides.

帷子的柱子四根，带卯的铜座四个，柱子上的钩子和杆子是银的，柱顶是用银子包的。
There were four pillars with their bases, all of brass, the hooks being of silver, and their tops and their bands being covered with silver.

帐幕一切的橛子和院子四围的橛子都是铜的。
All the nails used for the House and the open space round it were of brass.

这是法柜的帐幕中利未人所用物件的总数，是照摩西的吩咐，经祭司亚伦的儿子以他玛的手数点的。
This is the price of the making of the House, even the House of witness, as it was valued by the word of Moses, for the work of the Levites under the direction of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

凡耶和华所吩咐摩西的都是犹大支派户珥的孙子，乌利的儿子比撒列作的。
Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made everything as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

与他同工的有但支派中亚希撒抹的儿子亚何利亚伯，他是雕刻匠，又是巧匠，又能用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，和细麻绣花。
And with him was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; a designer and a trained workman, expert in needlework of blue and purple and red and the best linen.

为圣所一切工作使用所献的金子，按圣所的平，有二十九他连得并七百三十舍客勒。
The gold used for all the different work done for the holy place, the gold which was given, was twenty-nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels in weight, by the scale of the holy place.

会中被数的人所出的银子，按圣所的平，有一百他连得并一千七百七十五舍客勒。
And the silver given by those who were numbered of the people was a hundred talents, and a thousand, seven hundred and seventy-five shekels in weight, by the scale of the holy place.

凡过去归那些被数之人的，从二十岁以外，有六十万零三千五百五十人。按圣所的平，每人出银半舍客勒，就是一比加。
A beka, that is, half a shekel by the holy scale, for everyone who was numbered; there were six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty men of twenty years old and over.

用那一百他连得银子铸造圣所带卯的座，和幔子柱子带卯的座，一百他连得共一百带卯的座，每带卯的座用一他连得。
Of this silver, a hundred talents was used for making the bases of the pillars of the holy place and of the veil; a talent for every base.

用那一千七百七十五舍客勒银子作柱子上的钩子，包裹柱顶并柱子上的杆子。
And a thousand, seven hundred and seventy-five shekels of silver was used to make the hooks for the pillars, and for plating the tops of the pillars and for making their bands.

所献的铜有七十他连得并二千四百舍客勒。
The brass which was given was seventy talents, two thousand four hundred shekels;

用这铜作会幕门带卯的座和铜坛，并坛上的铜网和坛的一切器具，
From it he made the bases of the doorway of the Tent of meeting and the brass altar and the network for it and all the vessels for the altar,

并院子四围带卯的座和院门带卯的座，与帐幕一切的橛子和院子四围所有的橛子。
And the bases for the open space all round and for its doorway, and all the nails for the House and for the open space.

比撒列用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线作精致的衣服，在圣所用以供职，又为亚伦作圣衣，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And from the needlework of blue and purple and red they made the robes used for the work of the holy place, and the holy robes for Aaron, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

他用金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作以弗得，
The ephod he made of gold and blue and purple and red and the best linen;

把金子锤成薄片，剪出线来，与蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，用巧匠的手工一同绣上。
Hammering the gold into thin plates and cutting it into wires to be worked into the blue and the purple and the red and the linen by the designer.

又为以弗得作两条相连的肩带，接连在以弗得的两头。
And they made two bands for joining its edges together at the top of the arms.

其上巧工织的带子和以弗得一样的作法，用以束上，与以弗得接连一块，是用金线和蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作的，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And the beautifully worked band which went on it was of the same design and the same material, worked in gold and blue and purple and red and twisted linen-work, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

又琢出两块红玛瑙，镶在金槽上，仿佛刻图书，按着以色列儿子的名字雕刻，
Then they made the beryl stones, fixed in twisted frames of gold and cut like the cutting of a stamp, with the names of the children of Israel.

将这两块宝石安在以弗得的两条肩带上，为以色列人作纪念石，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
These he put on the ephod, over the arm-holes, to be stones of memory for the children of Israel, as the Lord had said to Moses.

他用巧匠的手工作胸牌，和以弗得一样的作法，用金线与蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作的。
The priest's bag was designed like the ephod, of the best linen worked with gold and blue and purple and red.

胸牌是四方的，叠为两层，这两层长一虎口，宽一虎口，
It was square and folded in two, as long and as wide as the stretch of a man's hand;

上面镶着宝石四行，第一行是红宝石，红璧玺，红玉，
And on it they put four lines of stones: in the first line was a carnelian, a chrysolite, and an emerald;

第二行是绿宝石，蓝宝石，金钢石，
In the second, a ruby, a sapphire, and an onyx;

第三行是紫玛瑙，白玛瑙，紫晶，
In the third, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst;

第四行是水苍玉，红玛瑙，碧玉。这都镶在金槽中。
In the fourth, a topaz, a beryl, and a jasper; they were fixed in twisted frames of gold.

这些宝石都是按着以色列十二个儿子的名字，仿佛刻图书，刻十二个支派的名字。
There were twelve stones for the twelve tribes of Israel; on every one the name of one of the tribes of Israel was cut, like the cutting of a stamp.

在胸牌上，用精金拧成如绳子的链子。
And on the bag they put gold chains, twisted like cords.

又作两个金槽和两个金环，安在胸牌的两头。
And they made two gold frames and two gold rings, the rings being fixed to the ends of the priest's bag;

把那两条拧成的金链子穿过胸牌两头的环子，
And they put the two twisted chains on the two rings at the ends of the priest's bag;

又把链子的那两头接在两槽上，安在以弗得前面肩带上。
And the other two ends of the chains were joined to the two frames and fixed to the front of the ephod over the arm-holes.

作两个金环，安在胸牌的两头，在以弗得里面的边上，
And they made two rings of gold and put them on the two lower ends of the bag, on the inner side nearest to the ephod.

又作两个金环，安在以弗得前面两条肩带的下边，挨近相接之处，在以弗得巧工织的带子以上。
And two other gold rings were put on the front of the ephod, over the arm-holes, at the join, and over the worked band.

用一条蓝细带子把胸牌的环子和以弗得的环子系住，使胸牌贴在以弗得巧工织的带子上，不可与以弗得离缝，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And the rings on the bag were fixed to the rings of the ephod by a blue cord, keeping it in place over the band, so that the bag might not get loose, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

他用织工作以弗得的外袍，颜色全是蓝的。
The robe which went with the ephod was made all of blue;

袍上留一领口，口的周围织出领边来，仿佛铠甲的领口，免得破裂。
With a hole at the top in the middle, like the hole in the coat of a fighting-man, edged with a band to make it strong.

在袍子底边上，用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻作石榴，
The skirts of the robe were worked all round with fruits in blue and purple and red made of twisted linen.

又用精金作铃铛，把铃铛钉在袍子周围底边上的石榴中间，
And between the fruits all round the skirt they put gold bells, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

一个铃铛，一个石榴，一个铃铛，一个石榴，在袍子周围底边上用以供职，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
All round the skirt of the robe were bells and fruits in turn.

他用织成的细麻布为亚伦和他的儿子作内袍，
The coats for Aaron and his sons they made of the best linen;

并用细麻布作冠冕和华美的裹头巾，用捻的细麻布作裤子，
And the twisted head-dress for Aaron, and beautiful head-dresses of linen, and linen trousers,

又用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线，并捻的细麻，以绣花的手工作腰带，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And a linen band worked with a design of blue and purple and red, as the Lord had said to Moses.

他用精金作圣冠上的牌，在上面按刻图书之法，刻着‘归耶和华为圣’。
The plate for the holy crown was made of the best gold, and on it were cut these words, HOLY TO THE LORD.

又用一条蓝细带子将牌系在冠冕上，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
It was fixed to the head-dress by a blue cord, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

帐幕，就是会幕，一切的工就这样作完了。凡耶和华所吩咐摩西的，以色列人都照样作了。
So all the work on the House of the Tent of meeting was done; as the Lord had given orders to Moses, so the children of Israel did it.

他们送到摩西那里，帐幕和帐幕的一切器具，就是钩子，板，闩，柱子，带卯的座，
Then they took the House to Moses, the tent with all the things for it; its hooks, its boards, its rods, its pillars, and its bases;

染红公羊皮的盖，海狗皮的顶盖，和遮掩柜的幔子，
The outer cover of sheepskins coloured red, and the cover of leather, and the veil for the doorway;

法柜和柜的杠并施恩座，
The ark of the law, with its rods and its cover;

桌子和桌子的一切器具并陈设饼，
The table, with all its vessels and the holy bread;

精金的灯台和摆列的灯盏，与灯台的一切器具，并点灯的油，
The support for the lights, with the vessels for the lights to be put in their places on it, and all its vessels, and the oil for the lights;

金坛，膏油，馨香的香料，会幕的门帘，
And the gold altar, and the holy oil, and the sweet perfume for burning, and the curtain for the doorway of the tent;

铜坛和坛上的铜网，坛的杠并坛的一切器具，洗濯盆和盆座，
And the brass altar, with its network of brass, and its rods and all its vessels, and the washing-vessel and its base;

院子的帷子和柱子，并带卯的座，院子的门帘，绳子，橛子，并帐幕和会幕中一切使用的器具，
The hangings for the open space, with the pillars and their bases, and the curtain for the doorway, and the cords and nails, and all the instruments necessary for the work of the House of the Tent of meeting;

精工作的礼服，和祭司亚伦并他儿子在圣所用以供祭司职分的圣衣。
The robes for use in the holy place, and the holy robes for Aaron and his sons when acting as priests.

这一切工作都是以色列人照耶和华所吩咐摩西作的。
The children of Israel did everything as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

耶和华怎样吩咐的，他们就怎样作了。摩西看见一切的工都作成了，就给他们祝福。
Then Moses, when he saw all their work and saw that they had done everything as the Lord had said, gave them his blessing.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

正月初一日，你要立起帐幕，
On the first day of the first month you are to put up the House of the Tent of meeting.

把法柜安放在里面，用幔子将柜遮掩。
And inside it put the ark of the law, hanging the veil before it.

把桌子搬进去，摆设上面的物。把灯台搬进去，点其上的灯。
And put the table inside, placing all the things on it in order; and put in the support for the lights, and let its lights be burning.

把烧香的金坛安在法柜前，挂上帐幕的门帘。
And put the gold altar for burning perfumes in front of the ark of the law, hanging the curtain over the doorway of the House.

把燔祭坛安在帐幕门前。
And put the altar of burned offerings before the doorway of the House of the Tent of meeting.

把洗濯盆安在会幕和坛的中间，在盆里盛水。
And let the washing-vessel, with water in it, be put between the Tent of meeting and the altar.

又在四围立院帷，把院子的门帘挂上。
And put up the hangings forming the open space all round it, with the curtain over its doorway.

用膏油把帐幕和其中所有的都抹上，使帐幕和一切器具成圣，就都成圣。
And take the holy oil and put it on the House and everything in it, and make it and everything in it holy:

又要抹燔祭坛和一切器具，使坛成圣，就都成为至圣。
And put oil on the altar of burned offering, and make it and all its vessels holy; this altar is to be most holy.

要抹洗濯盆和盆座，使盆成圣。
And put oil on the washing-vessel and its base, and make them holy.

要使亚伦和他儿子到会幕门口来，用水洗身。
Then let Aaron and his sons come to the door of the Tent of meeting; and after washing them with water,

要给亚伦穿上圣衣，又膏他，使他成圣，可以给我供祭司的职分，
You are to put on Aaron the holy robes; and you are to put oil on him, and make him holy, so that he may be my priest.

又要使他儿子来，给他们穿上内袍。
And take his sons with him and put coats on them;

怎样膏他们的父亲，也要照样膏他们，使他们给我供祭司的职分。他们世世代代凡受膏的，就永远当祭司的职任。
And put oil on them as you did on their father, so that they may be my priests: the putting on of oil will make them priests for ever, from generation to generation.

摩西这样行，都是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
And Moses did this; as the Lord gave him orders, so he did.

第二年正月初一日，帐幕就立起来。
So on the first day of the first month in the second year the House was put up.

摩西立起帐幕，安上带卯的座，立上板，穿上闩，立起柱子。
Moses put up the House; placing its bases in position and lifting up its uprights, putting in the rods and planting the pillars in their places;

在帐幕以上搭罩棚，把罩棚的顶盖盖在其上，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
Stretching the outer tent over it, and covering it, as the Lord had given him orders.

又把法版放在柜里，把杠穿在柜的两旁，把施恩座安在柜上。
And he took the law and put it inside the ark, and put the rods at its side and the cover over it;

把柜抬进帐幕，挂上遮掩柜的幔子，把法柜遮掩了，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
And he took the ark into the House, hanging up the veil before it as the Lord had given him orders.

又把桌子安在会幕内，在帐幕北边，在幔子外。
And he put the table in the Tent of meeting, on the north side outside the veil.

在桌子上将饼陈设在耶和华面前，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
And he put the bread on it in order before the Lord, as the Lord had said.

又把灯台安在会幕内，在帐幕南边，与桌子相对，
The support for the lights he put in the Tent of meeting, opposite the table, on the south side:

在耶和华面前点灯，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
Lighting the lights before the Lord, as the Lord had given him orders.

把金坛安在会幕内的幔子前，
And he put the gold altar in the Tent of meeting, in front of the veil:

在坛上烧了馨香料作的香，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
Burning sweet perfumes on it, as the Lord had given him orders.

又挂上帐幕的门帘。
And he put up the curtain at the doorway of the House.

在会幕的帐幕门前，安设燔祭坛，把燔祭和素祭献在其上，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
And at the door of the House of the Tent of meeting, he put the altar of burned offerings, offering on it the burned offering and the meal offering, as the Lord had given him orders.

把洗濯盆安在会幕和坛的中间，盆中盛水，以便洗濯。
And between the altar and the Tent of meeting he put the vessel with water in it for washing.

摩西和亚伦并亚伦的儿子在这盆里洗手洗脚。
In it the hands and feet of Moses and Aaron and his sons were washed,

他们进会幕或就近坛的时候，便都洗濯，是照耶和华所吩咐他的。
Whenever they went into the Tent of meeting, and when they came near the altar, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

在帐幕和坛的四围立了院帷，把院子的门帘挂上。这样，摩西就完了工。
And he put up the hangings forming the open space round the House and the altar, and put the curtain over the doorway. So Moses made the work complete.

当时，云彩遮盖会幕，耶和华的荣光就充满了帐幕。
Then the cloud came down covering the Tent of meeting, and the House was full of the glory of the Lord;

摩西不能进会幕，因为云彩停在其上，并且耶和华的荣光充满了帐幕。
So that Moses was not able to go into the Tent of meeting, because the cloud was resting on it, and the House was full of the glory of the Lord.

每逢云彩从帐幕收上去，以色列人就起程前往。
And whenever the cloud was taken up from the House, the children of Israel went forward on their journey:

云彩若不收上去，他们就不起程，直等到云彩收上去。
But while the cloud was there, they made no move till it was taken up.

日间，耶和华的云彩是在帐幕以上。夜间，云中有火，在以色列全家的眼前，在他们所行的路上，都是这样。
For the cloud of the Lord was resting on the House by day, and at night there was fire in the cloud, before the eyes of all the people of Israel, and so it was through all their journeys.

