列王记上 Kings


大卫王年纪老迈，虽用被遮盖，仍不觉暖。
Now King David was old and far on in years; and though they put covers over him, his body was cold.

所以臣仆对他说，不如为我主我王寻找一个处女，使她伺候王，奉养王，睡在王的怀中，好叫我主我王得暖。
So his servants said to him, Let search be made for a young virgin for my lord the king, to take care of him and be waiting on him; and you may take her in your arms, and so my lord the king will be warm.

于是在以色列全境寻找美貌的童女，寻得书念的一个童女亚比煞，就带到王那里。
So after searching through all the land of Israel for a fair young girl, they saw Abishag the Shunammite, and took her to the king.

这童女极其美貌，她奉养王，伺候王，王却没有与她亲近。
Now she was very beautiful; and she took care of the king, waiting on him at all times; but the king had no connection with her.

那时，哈及的儿子亚多尼雅自尊，说，我必作王，就为自己预备车辆，马兵，又派五十人在他前头奔走。
Then Adonijah, the son of Haggith, lifting himself up in pride, said, I will become king; and he made ready his carriages of war and his horsemen, with fifty runners to go before him.

他父亲素来没有使他忧闷，说，你是作什么呢？他甚俊美，生在押沙龙之后。
Now all his life his father had never gone against him or said to him, Why have you done so? and he was a very good-looking man, and younger than Absalom.

亚多尼雅与洗鲁雅的儿子约押，和祭司亚比亚他商议。二人就顺从他，帮助他。
And he had talk with Joab, the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest; and they were on his side and gave him their support.

但祭司撒督，耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，先知拿单，示每，利以，并大卫的勇士都不顺从亚多尼雅。
But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet and Shimei and Rei, and David's men of war did not take the side of Adonijah.

一日，亚多尼雅在隐罗结旁，琐希列磐石那里宰了牛羊，肥犊，请他的诸弟兄，就是王的众子，并所有作王臣仆的犹大人。
Then Adonijah put to death sheep and oxen and fat beasts by the stone of Zoheleth, by En-rogel; and he sent for all his brothers, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the king's servants, to come to him:

惟独先知拿单和比拿雅并勇士，与他的兄弟所罗门，他都没有请。
But he did not send for Nathan the prophet and Benaiah and the other men of war and Solomon his brother.

拿单对所罗门的母亲拔示巴说，哈及的儿子亚多尼雅作王了，你没有听见吗？我们的主大卫却不知道。
Then Nathan said to Bath-sheba, the mother of Solomon, Has it not come to your ears that Adonijah, the son of Haggith, has made himself king without the knowledge of David our lord?

现在我可以给你出个主意，好保全你和你儿子所罗门的性命。
So now, let me make a suggestion, so that you may keep your life safe and the life of your son Solomon.

你进去见大卫王，对他说，我主我王阿，你不曾向婢女起誓说，你儿子所罗门必接续我作王，坐在我的位上吗？现在亚多尼雅怎么作了王呢？
Come now, go to King David and say to him, Did you not, O my lord, take an oath to me, your servant, saying, Truly Solomon your son will be king after me, seated on the seat of my kingdom? why then is Adonijah acting as king?

你还与王说话的时候，我也随后进去，证实你的话。
And while you are still talking there with the king, see, I will come in after you and say that your story is true.

拔示巴进入内室见王，王甚老迈，书念的童女亚比煞正伺候王。
Then Bath-sheba went into the king's room; now the king was very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was waiting on him.

拔示巴向王屈身下拜。王说，你要什么。
And Bath-sheba went down on her face on the earth before the king giving him honour. And he said, What is your desire?

她说，我主阿，你曾向婢女指着耶和华你的神起誓说，你儿子所罗门必接续我作王，坐在我的位上。
And she said to him, My lord, you took an oath by the Lord your God and gave your word to your servant, saying, Truly, Solomon your son will be king after me, seated on the seat of my kingdom.

现在亚多尼雅作王了，我主我王却不知道。
And now, see, Adonijah has made himself king without my lord's knowledge;

他宰了许多牛羊，肥犊，请了王的众子和祭司亚比亚他，并元帅约押。惟独王的仆人所罗门，他没有请。
And has put to death oxen and fat beasts and sheep in great numbers, and has sent for all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab, the captain of the army; but he has not sent for Solomon your servant.

我主我王阿，以色列众人的眼目都仰望你，等你晓谕他们，在我主我王之后谁坐你的位。
And now, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are on you, waiting for you to say who is to take the place of my lord the king after him.

若不然，到我主我王与列祖同睡以后，我和我儿子所罗门必算为罪人了。
For as things are, it will come about, when my lord the king is sleeping with his fathers, that I and Solomon my son will be made outlaws.

拔示巴还与王说话的时候，先知拿单也进来了。
And while she was still talking with the king, Nathan the prophet came in.

有人奏告王说，先知拿单来了。拿单进到王前，脸伏于地。
And they said to the king, Here is Nathan the prophet. And when he came in before the king, he went down on his face on the earth.

拿单说，我主我王果然应许亚多尼雅说你必接续我作王，坐在我的位上吗？
And Nathan said, O my lord king, have you said, Adonijah is to be king after me, seated on the seat of my kingdom?

他今日下去，宰了许多牛羊，肥犊，请了王的众子和军长，并祭司亚比亚他。他们正在亚多尼雅面前吃喝，说，愿亚多尼雅王万岁。
Because today he has gone down and has put to death oxen and fat beasts and sheep in great numbers, and has sent for all the king's sons to come to him, with the captains of the army and Abiathar the priest; and they are feasting before him and crying, Long life to King Adonijah!

惟独我，就是你的仆人和祭司撒督，耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，并王的仆人所罗门，他都没有请。
But me, your servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and your servant Solomon, he has not sent for.

这事果然出乎我主我王吗？王却没有告诉仆人们，在我主我王之后谁坐你的位。
Has this thing been done by my lord the king, without giving word to your servants who was to be placed on my lord the king's seat after him?

大卫王吩咐说，叫拔示巴来。拔示巴就进来，站在王面前。
Then King David in answer said, Send for Bath-sheba to come to me. And she came in and took her place before the king.

王起誓说，我指着救我性命脱离一切苦难，永生的耶和华起誓。
And the king took an oath, and said, By the living Lord, who has been my saviour from all my troubles,

我既然指着耶和华以色列的神向你起誓说，你儿子所罗门必接续我作王，坐在我的位上。我今日就必照这话而行。
As I took an oath to you by the Lord, the God of Israel, saying, Certainly Solomon your son will become king after me, seated on my seat in my place; so will I do this day.

于是，拔示巴脸伏于地，向王下拜，说，愿我主大卫王万岁。
Then Bath-sheba went down on her face on the earth before the king giving him honour, and said, May my lord King David go on living for ever.

大卫王又吩咐说，将祭司撒督，先知拿单，耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅召来。他们就都来到王面前。
And King David said, Send for Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.

王对他们说，要带领你们主的仆人，使我儿子所罗门骑我的骡子，送他下到基训。
And the king said to them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and put Solomon my son on my beast, yes, mine, and take him down to Gihon;

在那里，祭司撒督和先知拿单要膏他作以色列的王。你们也要吹角，说，愿所罗门王万岁。
And there let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet put the holy oil on him to make him king over Israel; and sounding the horn say, Long life to King Solomon!

然后要跟随他上来，使他坐在我的位上，接续我作王。我已立他作以色列和犹大的君。
Then come up after him and he will come in and take his place on the seat of my kingdom; for he is to be king in my place, and I have given orders that he is to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.

耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅对王说，阿们。愿耶和华我主我王的神也这样命定。
And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, answering the king, said, So be it: and may the Lord, the God of my lord the king, say so.

耶和华怎样与我主我王同在，愿他照样与所罗门同在，使他的国位比我主大卫王的国位更大。
As the Lord has been with my lord the king, even so may he be with Solomon and make the seat of his authority greater than that of my lord King David.

于是，祭司撒督，先知拿单，耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，和基利提人，比利提人都下去使所罗门骑大卫王的骡子，将他送到基训。
So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, went down and put Solomon on King David's beast and took him to Gihon.

祭司撒督就从帐幕中取了盛膏油的角来，用膏膏所罗门。人就吹角，众民都说，愿所罗门王万岁。
And Zadok the priest took the vessel of oil out of the Tent, and put the holy oil on Solomon. And when the horn was sounded, all the people said, Long life to King Solomon!

众民跟随他上来，且吹笛，大大欢呼，声音震地。
And all the people came up after him, piping with pipes, and they were glad with great joy, so that the earth was shaking with the sound.

亚多尼雅和所请的众客筵宴方毕，听见这声音。约押听见角声就说，城中为何有这响声呢？
And it came to the ears of Adonijah and all the guests who were with him, when their meal was ended. And Joab, hearing the sound of the horn, said, What is the reason of this noise as if the town was worked up?

他正说话的时候，祭司亚比亚他的儿子约拿单来了。亚多尼雅对他说，进来吧。你是个忠义的人，必是报好信息。
And while the words were on his lips, Jonathan, the son of Abiathar the priest, came; and Adonijah said, Come in; for you are a man of good faith and the news which you have for us will be good.

约拿单对亚多尼雅说，我们的主大卫王诚然立所罗门为王了。
And Jonathan, answering, said to Adonijah, Not so, but our lord King David has made Solomon king:

王差遣祭司撒督，先知拿单，耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，和基利提人，比利提人都去使所罗门骑王的骡子。
And he sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and they put him on the king's beast:

祭司撒督和先知拿单在基训已经膏他作王。众人都从那里欢呼着上来，声音使城震动，这就是你们所听见的声音。
And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet put the holy oil on him and made him king in Gihon; and they came back from there with joy, and the town was all worked up. This is the noise which has come to your ears.

并且所罗门登了国位。
And now Solomon is seated on the seat of the kingdom.

王的臣仆也来为我们的主大卫王祝福，说，愿王的神使所罗门的名比王的名更尊荣。使他的国位比王的国位更大。王就在床上屈身下拜。
And the king's servants came to our lord King David, blessing him and saying, May God make the name of Solomon better than your name, and the seat of his authority greater than your seat; and the king was bent low in worship on his bed.

王又说，耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的。因他赐我一人今日坐在我的位上，我也亲眼看见了。
Then the king said, May the God of Israel be praised, who has given one of my seed to be king in my place this day and has let my eyes see it.

亚多尼雅的众客听见这话就都惊惧，起来四散。
And all the guests of Adonijah got up in fear and went away, every man to his place.

亚多尼雅惧怕所罗门，就起来，去抓住祭坛的角。
And Adonijah himself was full of fear because of Solomon; and he got up and went to the altar, and put his hands on its horns.

有人告诉所罗门说，亚多尼雅惧怕所罗门王，现在抓住祭坛的角，说，愿所罗门王今日向我起誓，必不用刀杀仆人。
And they gave Solomon word of it, saying, See, Adonijah goes in such fear of King Solomon, that he has put his hands on the horns of the altar, saying, Let King Solomon first give me his oath that he will not put his servant to death with the sword.

所罗门说，他若作忠义的人，连一根头发也不至落在地上。他若行恶，必要死亡。
And Solomon said, If he is seen to be a man of good faith, not a hair of him will be touched; but if any wrongdoing is seen in him, he is to be put to death.

于是所罗门王差遣人，使亚多尼雅从坛上下来，他就来，向所罗门王下拜。所罗门对他说，你回家去吧。
So King Solomon sent, and they took him down from the altar. And he came and gave honour to King Solomon; and Solomon said to him, Go to your house.

大卫的死期临近了，就嘱咐他儿子所罗门说，
Now the time of David's death came near; and he gave orders to Solomon his son, saying,

我现在要走世人必走的路。所以，你当刚强，作大丈夫，
I am going the way of all the earth: so be strong and be a man;

遵守耶和华你神所吩咐的，照着摩西律法上所写的行主的道，谨守他的律例，诫命，典章，法度。这样，你无论作什么事，不拘往何处去，尽都亨通。
And keep the orders of the Lord your God, walking in his ways, keeping his laws and his orders and his rules and his words, as they are recorded in the law of Moses; so that you may do well in all you do and wherever you go,

耶和华必成就向我所应许的话说，你的子孙若谨慎自己的行为，尽心尽意诚诚实实地行在我面前，就不断人坐以色列的国位。
So that the Lord may give effect to what he said of me, If your children give attention to their ways, living uprightly before me with all their heart and their soul, you will never be without a man to be king in Israel.

你知道洗鲁雅的儿子约押向我所行的，就是杀了以色列的两个元帅，尼珥的儿子押尼珥和益帖的儿子亚玛撒。他在太平之时流这二人的血，如在争战之时一样，将这血染了腰间束的带和脚上穿的鞋。
Now you have knowledge of what Joab, the son of Zeruiah, did to me, and to the two captains of the army of Israel, Abner, the son of Ner, and Amasa, the son of Jether, whom he put to death, taking payment for the blood of war in time of peace, and making the band of my clothing and the shoes on my feet red with the blood of one put to death without cause.

所以你要照你的智慧行，不容他白头安然下阴间。
So be guided by your wisdom, and let not his white head go down to the underworld in peace.

你当恩待基列人巴西莱的众子，使他们常与你同席吃饭。因为我躲避你哥哥押沙龙的时候，他们拿食物来迎接我。
But be good to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be guests at your table; for so they came to me when I went in flight from Absalom your brother.

在你这里有巴户琳的便雅悯人，基拉的儿子示每。我往玛哈念去的那日，他用狠毒的言语咒骂我，后来却下约旦河迎接我，我就指着耶和华向他起誓说，我必不用刀杀你。
Now you have with you Shimei, the son of Gera the Benjamite of Bahurim, who put a bitter curse on me on the day when I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to see me at Jordan, and I gave him my oath by the Lord, saying, I will not put you to death by the sword.

现在你不要以他为无罪。你是聪明人，必知道怎样待他，使他白头见杀，流血下到阴间。
But do not let him be free from punishment, for you are a wise man; and it will be clear to you what you have to do with him; see that his white head goes down to the underworld in blood.

大卫与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城。
Then David went to rest with his fathers, and his body was put into the earth in the town of David.

大卫作以色列王四十年，在希伯仑作王七年，在耶路撒冷作王三十三年。
David was king over Israel for forty years: for seven years he was king in Hebron and for thirty-three years in Jerusalem.

所罗门坐他父亲大卫的位，他的国甚是坚固。
And Solomon took his place on the seat of David his father, and his kingdom was made safe and strong.

哈及的儿子亚多尼雅去见所罗门的母亲拔示巴，拔示巴问他说，你来是为平安吗？回答说，是为平安。
Then Adonijah, the son of Haggith, came to Bath-sheba, the mother of Solomon. And she said, Come you in peace? And he said, Yes, in peace.

又说，我有话对你说。拔示巴说，你说吧。
Then he said, I have something to say to you. And she said, Say on.

亚多尼雅说，你知道国原是归我的，以色列众人也都仰望我作王，不料，国反归了我兄弟，因他得国是出乎耶和华。
And he said, You saw how the kingdom was mine, and all Israel had the idea that I would be their king; but now the kingdom is turned about, and has become my brother's, for it was given to him by the Lord.

现在我有一件事求你，望你不要推辞。拔示巴说，你说吧。
Now I have one request to make to you, and do not say, No, to me. And she said to him, Say on.

他说，求你请所罗门王将书念的女子亚比煞赐我为妻，因他必不推辞你。
Then he said, Will you go to Solomon the king (for he will not say, No, to you) and put before him my request that he will give me Abishag the Shunammite for a wife?

拔示巴说，好，我必为你对王提说。
And Bath-sheba said, Good! I will make your request to the king.

于是，拔示巴去见所罗门王，要为亚多尼雅提说。王起来迎接，向她下拜，就坐在位上，吩咐人为王母设一座位，她便坐在王的右边。
So Bath-sheba went to King Solomon to have talk with him on Adonijah's account. And the king got up to come to her, and went down low to the earth before her; then he took his place on the king's seat and had a seat made ready for the king's mother and she took her place at his right hand.

拔示巴说，我有一件小事求你，望你不要推辞。王说，请母亲说，我必不推辞。
Then she said, I have one small request to make to you; do not say, No, to me. And the king said, Say on, my mother, for I will not say, No, to you.

拔示巴说，求你将书念的女子亚比煞赐给你哥哥亚多尼雅为妻。
And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah your brother for a wife.

所罗门王对他母亲说，为何单替他求书念的女子亚比煞呢？也可以为他求国吧。他是我的哥哥，他有祭司亚比亚他和洗鲁雅的儿子约押为辅佐。
Then King Solomon made answer and said to his mother, Why are you requesting me to give Abishag the Shunammite to Adonijah? Take the kingdom for him in addition, for he is my older brother, and Abiathar the priest and Joab, the son of Zeruiah, are on his side.

所罗门王就指着耶和华起誓说，亚多尼雅这话是自己送命，不然，愿神重重地降罚与我。
Then King Solomon took an oath by the Lord, saying, May God's punishment be on me if Adonijah does not give payment for these words with his life.

耶和华坚立我，使我坐在父亲大卫的位上，照着所应许的话为我建立家室。现在我指着永生的耶和华起誓，亚多尼雅今日必被治死。
Now by the living Lord, who has given me my place on the seat of David my father, and made me one of a line of kings, as he gave me his word, truly Adonijah will be put to death this day.

于是所罗门王差遣耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，将亚多尼雅杀死。
And King Solomon sent Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, and he made an attack on him and put him to death.

王对祭司亚比亚他说，你回亚拿突归自己的田地去吧。你本是该死的，但因你在我父亲大卫面前抬过主耶和华的约柜，又与我父亲同受一切苦难，所以我今日不将你杀死。
And to Abiathar the priest the king said, Go to Anathoth, to your fields; for death would be your right reward; but I will not put you to death now, because you took up the ark of the Lord God before David my father, and you were with him in all his troubles.

所罗门就革除亚比亚他，不许他作耶和华的祭司。这样，便应验耶和华在示罗论以利家所说的话。
So Solomon let Abiathar be priest no longer, so that he might make the word of the Lord come true which he said about the sons of Eli in Shiloh.

约押虽然没有归从押沙龙，却归从了亚多尼雅。他听见这风声，就逃到耶和华的帐幕，抓住祭坛的角。
And news of this came to Joab; for Joab had been one of Adonijah's supporters, though he had not been on Absalom's side. Then Joab went in flight to the Tent of the Lord, and put his hands on the horns of the altar.

有人告诉所罗门王说，约押逃到耶和华的帐幕，现今在祭坛的旁边。所罗门就差遣耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，说，你去将他杀死。
And they said to King Solomon, Joab has gone in flight to the Tent of the Lord and is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, make an attack on him.

比拿雅来到耶和华的帐幕，对约押说，王吩咐说，你出来吧。他说，我不出去，我要死在这里。比拿雅就去回覆王，说约押如此如此回答我。
And Benaiah came to the Tent of the Lord and said to him, The king says, Come out. And he said, No; but let death come to me here. And Benaiah went back to the king and gave him word of the answer which Joab had given.

王说，你可以照着他的话行，杀死他，将他葬埋，好叫约押流无辜人血的罪不归我和我的父家了。
And the king said, Do as he has said and make an attack on him there, and put his body into the earth; so that you may take away from me and from my family the blood of one put to death by Joab without cause.

耶和华必使约押流人血的罪归到他自己的头上。因为他用刀杀了两个比他又义又好的人，就是以色列元帅尼珥的儿子押尼珥和犹大元帅益帖的儿子亚玛撒，我父亲大卫却不知道。
And the Lord will send back his blood on his head, because of the attack he made on two men more upright and better than himself, putting them to the sword without my father's knowledge; even Abner, the son of Ner, captain of the army of Israel, and Amasa, the son of Jether, captain of the army of Judah.

故此，流这二人血的罪必归到约押和他后裔的头上，直到永远。惟有大卫和他的后裔，并他的家与国，必从耶和华那里得平安，直到永远。
So their blood will be on the head of Joab, and on the head of his seed for ever; but for David and his seed and his family and the seat of his kingdom, there will be peace for ever from the Lord.

于是耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅上去，将约押杀死，葬在旷野约押自己的坟墓里（坟墓原文作房屋）。
So Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, went up, and falling on him, put him to death; and his body was put to rest in his house in the waste land.

王就立耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅作元帅，代替约押，又使祭司撒督代替亚比亚他。
And the king put Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, in his place over the army; and Zadok the priest he put in the place of Abiathar.

王差遣人将示每召来，对他说，你要在耶路撒冷建造房屋居住，不可出来往别处去。
Then the king sent for Shimei, and said to him, Make a house for yourself in Jerusalem and keep there and go to no other place.

你当确实地知道，你何日出来过汲沦溪，何日必死。你的罪（原文作血）必归到自己的头上。
For be certain that on the day when you go out and go over the stream Kidron, death will overtake you: and your blood will be on your head.

示每对王说，这话甚好。我主我王怎样说，仆人必怎样行。于是示每多日住在耶路撒冷。
And Shimei said to the king, Very well! as my lord the king has said, so will your servant do. And for a long time Shimei went on living in Jerusalem.

过了三年，示每的两个仆人逃到迦特王玛迦的儿子亚吉那里去。有人告诉示每说，你的仆人在迦特。
But after three years, two of the servants of Shimei went in flight to Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath. And word was given to Shimei that his servants had gone to Gath.

示每起来，备上驴，往迦特到亚吉那里去找他的仆人，就从迦特带他仆人回来。
Then Shimei got up, and making ready his ass, he went to Gath, to Achish, in search of his servants; and he sent and got them from Gath.

有人告诉所罗门说，示每出耶路撒冷往迦特去，回来了。
And news was given to Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath and had come back again.

王就差遣人将示每召了来，对他说，我岂不是叫你指着耶和华起誓，并且警戒你说你当确实地知道，你哪日出来往别处去，那日必死吗？你也对我说，这话甚好，我必听从。
Then the king sent for Shimei, and said to him, Did I not make you take an oath by the Lord, protesting to you and saying, Be certain that on the day when you go out from here, wherever you go, death will overtake you? and you said to me, Very well!

现在你为何不遵守你指着耶和华起的誓和我所吩咐你的命令呢？
Why then have you not kept the oath of the Lord and the order which I gave you?

王又对示每说，你向我父亲大卫所行的一切恶事，你自己心里也知道，所以耶和华必使你的罪恶归到自己的头上。
And the king said to Shimei, You have knowledge of all the evil which you did to David my father; and now the Lord has sent back your evil on yourself.

惟有所罗门王必得福，并且大卫的国位必在耶和华面前坚定，直到永远。
But a blessing will be on King Solomon, and the kingdom of David will keep its place before the Lord for ever.

于是王吩咐耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅，他就去杀死示每。这样，便坚定了所罗门的国位。
So the king gave orders to Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada; and he went out and, falling on him, put him to death. And Solomon's authority over the kingdom was complete.

所罗门与埃及王法老结亲，娶了法老的女儿为妻，接她进入大卫城，直等到造完了自己的宫和耶和华的殿，并耶路撒冷周围的城墙。
Solomon became the son-in-law of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter as his wife, keeping her in the town of David, till the house he was building for himself, and the house of the Lord and the wall round Jerusalem, were complete.

当那些日子，百姓仍在丘坛献祭，因为还没有为耶和华的名建殿。
But all this time the people were making their offerings in the high places, because no house had been put up to the name of the Lord till those days.

所罗门爱耶和华，遵行他父亲大卫的律例，只是还在丘坛献祭烧香。
And Solomon, in his love for the Lord, kept the laws of David his father; but he made offerings and let them go up in smoke on the high places.

所罗门王上基遍去献祭。因为在那里有极大的丘坛（极大或作出名），他在那坛上献一千牺牲作燔祭。
And the king went to Gibeon to make an offering there, because that was the chief high place: it was Solomon's way to make a thousand burned offerings on that altar.

在基遍，夜间梦中，耶和华向所罗门显现，对他说，你愿我赐你什么。你可以求。
In Gibeon, Solomon had a vision of the Lord in a dream by night; and God said to him, Say what I am to give you.

所罗门说，你仆人我父亲大卫用诚实，公义，正直的心行在你面前，你就向他大施恩典，又为他存留大恩，赐他一个儿子坐在他的位上，正如今日一样。
And Solomon said, Great was your mercy to David my father, as his life before you was true and upright and his heart was true to you; and you have kept for him this greatest mercy, a son to take his place this day.

耶和华我的神阿，如今你使仆人接续我父亲大卫作王。但我是幼童，不知道应当怎样出入。
And now, O Lord my God, you have made your servant king in the place of David my father; and I am only a young boy, with no knowledge of how to go out or come in.

仆人住在你所拣选的民中，这民多得不可胜数。
And your servant has round him the people of your selection, a people so great that they may not be numbered, and no account of them may be given.

所以求你赐我智慧，可以判断你的民，能辨别是非。不然，谁能判断这众多的民呢？
Give your servant, then, a wise heart for judging your people, able to see what is good and what evil; for who is able to be the judge of this great people?

所罗门因为求这事，就蒙主喜悦。
Now these words and Solomon's request were pleasing to the Lord.

神对他说，你既然求这事，不为自己求寿，求富，也不求灭绝你仇敌的性命，单求智慧可以听讼，
And God said to him, Because your request is for this thing, and not for long life for yourself or for wealth or for the destruction of your haters, but for wisdom to be a judge of causes;

我就应允你所求的，赐你聪明智慧，甚至在你以前没有象你的，在你以后也没有象你的。
I have done as you said: I have given you a wise and far-seeing heart, so that there has never been your equal in the past, and never will there be any like you in the future.

你所没有求的，我也赐给你，就是富足，尊荣，使你在世的日子，列王中没有一个能比你的。
And with this I have given you what you made no request for: wealth and honour, so that no king was ever your equal.

你若效法你父亲大卫，遵行我的道，谨守我的律例，诫命，我必使你长寿。
And if you go on in my ways, keeping my laws and my orders as your father David did, I will give you a long life.

所罗门醒了，不料是个梦。他就回到耶路撒冷，站在耶和华的约柜前，献燔祭和平安祭，又为他众臣仆设摆筵席。
And Solomon, awakening, saw that it was a dream; then he came to Jerusalem, where he went before the ark of the agreement of the Lord, offering burned offerings and peace-offerings; and he made a feast for all his servants.

一日，有两个妓女来，站在王面前。
Then two loose women of the town came and took their places before the king;

一个说，我主阿，我和这妇人同住一房。她在房中的时候，我生了一个男孩。
And one of them said, O my lord, I and this woman are living in the same house; and I gave birth to a child by her side in the house.

我生孩子后第三日，这妇人也生了孩子。我们是同住的，除了我们二人之外，房中再没有别人。
And three days after the birth of my child, this woman had a child: we were together, no other-person was with us in the house but we two only.

夜间，这妇人睡着的时候，压死了她的孩子。
In the night, this woman, sleeping on her child, was the cause of its death.

她半夜起来，趁我睡着，从我旁边把我的孩子抱去，放在她怀里，将她的死孩子放在我怀里。
And she got up in the middle of the night and took my son from my side while your servant was sleeping; and she took it in her arms and put her dead child in my arms.

天要亮的时候，我起来要给我的孩子吃奶，不料，孩子死了。及至天亮，我细细地察看，不是我所生的孩子。
And when I got up to give my child the breast, I saw that it was dead; but in the morning, looking at it with care, I saw that it was not my son.

那妇人说，不然，活孩子是我的，死孩子是你的。这妇人说，不然，死孩子是你的，活孩子是我的。她们在王面前如此争论。
And the other woman said, No; but the living child is my son and the dead one yours. But the first said, No; the dead child is your son and the living one mine. So they kept on talking before the king.

王说，这妇人说活孩子是我的，死孩子是你的，那妇人说不然，死孩子是你的，活孩子是我的，
Then the king said, One says, The living child is my son, and yours is the dead: and the other says, Not so; but your son is the dead one and mine is the living.

就吩咐说，拿刀来。人就拿刀来。
Then he said, Get me a sword. So they went and put a sword before the king.

王说，将活孩子劈成两半，一半给那妇人，一半给这妇人。
And the king said, Let the living child be cut in two and one half given to one woman and one to the other.

活孩子的母亲为自己的孩子心里急痛，就说，求我主将活孩子给那妇人吧，万不可杀他。那妇人说，这孩子也不归我，也不归你，把他劈了吧。
Then the mother of the living child came forward, for her heart went out to her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the child; do not on any account put it to death. But the other woman said, It will not be mine or yours; let it be cut in two.

王说，将活孩子给这妇人，万不可杀他。这妇人实在是他的母亲。
Then the king made answer and said, Give her the child, and do not put it to death; she is the mother of it.

以色列众人听见王这样判断，就都敬畏他。因为见他心里有神的智慧，能以断案。
And news of this decision which the king had made went through all Israel; and they had fear of the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to give decisions.

所罗门作以色列众人的王。
Now Solomon was king over all Israel.

他的臣子记在下面，撒督的儿子亚撒利雅作祭司，
And these were his chief men: Azariah, the son of Zadok, was the priest;

示沙的两个儿子以利何烈，亚希亚作书记，亚希律的儿子约沙法作史官，
Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, were scribes; Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was the recorder;

耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅作元帅，撒督和亚比亚他作祭司长，
Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was head of the army; Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

拿单的儿子亚撒利雅作众吏长，王的朋友拿单的儿子撒布得作领袖，
Azariah, the son of Nathan, was over those in authority in the different divisions of the country; Zabud, the son of Nathan, was priest and the king's friend;

亚希煞作家宰，亚比大的儿子亚多尼兰掌管服苦的人。
Ahishar was controller of the king's house; Adoniram, the son of Abda, was overseer of the forced work.

所罗门在以色列全地立了十二个官吏，使他们供给王和王家的食物，每年各人供给一月。
And Solomon put twelve overseers over all Israel, to be responsible for the stores needed for the king and those of his house; every man was responsible for one month in the year.

他们的名字记在下面，在以法莲山地有便户珥。
And these are their names: ... the son of Hur in the hill country of Ephraim;

在玛迦斯，沙宾，伯示麦，以伦伯哈南有便底甲。
... the son of Deker in Makaz and Shaalbim and Beth-shemesh and Elonbeth-hanan;

在亚鲁泊有便希悉，他管理梭哥和希弗全地。
... the son of Hesed in Arubboth; Socoh and all the land of Hepher were under his control;

在多珥山冈（或作全境）有便亚比拿达，他娶了所罗门的女儿他法为妻。
... the son of Abinadab in all Naphath-dor; his wife was Taphath, the daughter of Solomon.

在他纳和米吉多，并靠近撒拉他拿，耶斯列下边的伯善全地，从伯善到亚伯米何拉直到约念之外，有亚希律的儿子巴拿。
Baana, the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is by the side of Zarethan, under Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as the far side of Jokmeam;

在基列的拉末有便基别，他管理在基列的玛拿西子孙睚珥的城邑，巴珊的亚珥歌伯地的大城六十座，都有城墙和铜闩。
... the son of Geber in Ramoth-gilead; he had the towns of Jair, the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead, and the country of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great towns with walls and locks of brass.

在玛哈念有易多的儿子亚希拿达。
Ahinadab, the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;

在拿弗他利有亚希玛斯，他也娶了所罗门的一个女儿巴实抹为妻。
Ahimaaz in Naphtali; he took Basemath, the daughter of Solomon, as his wife;

在亚设和亚禄有户筛的儿子巴拿。
Baana, the son of Hushai, in Asher and Aloth;

在以萨迦有帕路亚的儿子约沙法。
Jehoshaphat, the son of Paruah, in Issachar;

在便雅悯有以拉的儿子示每。
Shimei, the son of Ela, in Benjamin;

在基列地，就是从前属亚摩利王西宏和巴珊王噩之地，有乌利的儿子基别一人管理。
Geber, the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan; and one overseer had authority over all the overseers who were in the land.

犹大人和以色列人如同海边的沙那样多，都吃喝快乐。
Judah and Israel were as great in number as the sand by the seaside, and they took their food and drink with joy in their hearts.

所罗门统管诸国，从大河到非利士地，直到埃及的边界。所罗门在世的日子，这些国都进贡服事他。
And Solomon was ruler over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines, and as far as the edge of Egypt; men gave him offerings and were his servants all the days of his life.

所罗门每日所用的食物，细面三十歌珥，粗面六十歌珥，
And the amount of Solomon's food for one day was thirty measures of crushed grain and sixty measures of meal;

肥牛十只，草场的牛二十只，羊一百只，还有鹿，羚羊，狍子，并肥禽。
Ten fat oxen and twenty oxen from the fields, and a hundred sheep, in addition to harts and gazelles and roes and fat fowls.

所罗门管理大河西边的诸王，以及从提弗萨直到迦萨的全地，四境尽都平安。
For he had authority over all the country on this side of the River, from Tiphsah to Gaza, over all the kings on this side of the River; and he had peace round him on every side.

所罗门在世的日子，从但到别是巴的犹大人和以色列人，都在自己的葡萄树下和无花果树下安然居住。
So Judah and Israel were living safely, every man under his vine and his fig-tree, from Dan as far as Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.

所罗门有套车的马四万，还有马兵一万二千。
And Solomon had four thousand boxed-off spaces for horses for his carriages, and twelve thousand horsemen.

那十二个官吏各按各月供给所罗门王，并一切与他同席之人的食物，一无所缺。
And those overseers, every man in his month, saw that food was produced for Solomon and all his guests, they took care that nothing was overlooked.

众人各按各分，将养马与快马的大麦和干草送到官吏那里。
And they took grain and dry grass for the horses and the carriage-horses, to the right place, every man as he was ordered.

神赐给所罗门极大的智慧聪明和广大的心，如同海沙不可测量。
And God gave Solomon a great store of wisdom and good sense, and a mind of wide range, as wide as the sand by the seaside.

所罗门的智慧超过东方人和埃及人的一切智慧。
And Solomon's wisdom was greater than the wisdom of all the people of the East and all the wisdom of Egypt.

他的智慧胜过万人，胜过以斯拉人以探，并玛曷的儿子希幔，甲各，达大的智慧。他的名声传扬在四围的列国。
For he was wiser than all men, even than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman and Calcol and Darda, the sons of Mahol; and he had a great name among all the nations round about.

他作箴言三千句，诗歌一千零五首。
He was the maker of three thousand wise sayings, and of songs to the number of a thousand and five.

他讲论草木，自利巴嫩的香柏树直到墙上长的牛膝草，又讲论飞禽走兽，昆虫水族。
He made sayings about all plants, from the cedar in Lebanon to the hyssop hanging on the wall; and about all beasts and birds and fishes and the small things of the earth.

天下列王听见所罗门的智慧，就都差人来听他的智慧话。
People came from every nation to give ear to the wisdom of Solomon, from all the kings of the earth who had word of his wisdom.

推罗王希兰，平素爱大卫。他听见以色列人膏所罗门，接续他父亲作王，就差遣臣仆来见他。
Now Hiram, king of Tyre, hearing that Solomon had been made king in place of his father, sent his servants to him; for Hiram had ever been a friend to David.

所罗门也差遣人去见希兰，说：
And Solomon sent back word to Hiram, saying,

“你知道我父亲大卫因四围的争战，不能为耶和华他神的名建殿，直等到耶和华使仇敌都服在他脚下。
You have knowledge that David my father was not able to make a house for the name of the Lord his God, because of the wars which were round him on every side, till the Lord put all those who were against him under his feet.

现在耶和华我的神使我四围平安，没有仇敌，没有灾祸。
But now the Lord my God has given me rest on every side; no one is making trouble, and no evil is taking place.

我定意要为耶和华我神的名建殿，是照耶和华应许我父亲大卫的话说，我必使你儿子接续你坐你的位，他必为我的名建殿。
And so it is my purpose to make a house for the name of the Lord my God, as he said to David my father, Your son, whom I will make king in your place, will be the builder of a house for my name.

所以求你吩咐你的仆人在利巴嫩为我砍伐香柏木，我的仆人也必帮助他们，我必照你所定的，给你仆人的工价。因为你知道，在我们中间没有人像西顿人善于砍伐树木。”
So now, will you have cedar-trees from Lebanon cut down for me, and my servants will be with your servants; and I will give you payment for your servants at whatever rate you say; for it is common knowledge that we have no such wood-cutters among us as the men of Zidon.

希兰听见所罗门的话，就甚喜悦，说，今日应当称颂耶和华。因他赐给大卫一个有智慧的儿子，治理这众多的民。
And these words of Solomon made Hiram glad, and he said, Now may the Lord be praised who has given to David a wise son to be king over this great people.

希兰打发人去见所罗门，说，你差遣人向我所提的那事，我都听见了。论到香柏木和松木，我必照你的心愿而行。
Then Hiram sent to Solomon, saying; The words you sent have been given to me: I will do all your desire in the question of cedar-wood and cypress-wood.

我的仆人必将这木料从利巴嫩运到海里，扎成筏子，浮海运到你所指定我的地方，在那里拆开，你就可以收取，你也要成全我的心愿，将食物给我的家。
My men will take them down from Lebanon to the sea, where I will have them corded together to go by sea to whatever place you say, and I will have them cut up there so that you may take them away; as for payment, it will be enough if you give me food for my people.

于是希兰照着所罗门所要的，给他香柏木和松木。
So Hiram gave Solomon all the cedar-wood and cypress-wood he had need of;

所罗门给希兰麦子二万歌珥，清油二十歌珥，作他家的食物。所罗门每年都是这样给希兰。
And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of grain, as food for his people, and twenty measures of clear oil; this he did every year.

耶和华照着所应许的赐智慧给所罗门。希兰与所罗门和好，彼此立约。
Now the Lord had given Solomon wisdom, as he had said to him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they made an agreement together.

所罗门王从以色列人中挑取服苦的人共有三万，
Then King Solomon got together men for the forced work through all Israel, thirty thousand men in number;

派他们轮流每月一万人上利巴嫩去。一个月在利巴嫩，两个月在家里。亚多尼兰掌管他们。
And sent them to Lebanon in bands of ten thousand every month: for a month they were working in Lebanon and for two months in their country, and Adoniram was in control of them.

所罗门用七万扛抬的，八万在山上凿石头的。
Then he had seventy thousand for the work of transport, and eighty thousand stone-cutters in the mountains;

此外，所罗门用三千三百督工的，监管工人。
In addition to the chiefs of the responsible men put by Solomon to oversee the work, three thousand and three hundred in authority over the workmen.

王下令，人就凿出又大又宝贵的石头来，用以立殿的根基。
By the king's orders great stones, stones of high price, were cut out, so that the base of the house might be made of squared stone.

所罗门的匠人和希兰的匠人，并迦巴勒人，都将石头凿好，预备木料和石头建殿。
Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did the work of cutting them, and put edges on them, and got the wood and the stone ready for the building of the house.

以色列人出埃及地后四百八十年，所罗门作以色列王第四年西弗月，就是二月，开工建造耶和华的殿。
In the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year that Solomon was king of Israel, in the month Ziv, which is the second month, the building of the Lord's house was started.

所罗门王为耶和华所建的殿，长六十肘，宽二十肘，高三十肘。
The house which Solomon made for the Lord was sixty cubits long, twenty cubits wide and thirty cubits high.

殿前的廊子长二十肘，与殿的宽窄一样，阔十肘。
The covered way before the Temple of the house was twenty cubits long, as wide as the house, and ten cubits wide in front of the house.

又为殿作了严紧的窗棂。
And for the house he made windows, with network across.

靠着殿墙，围着外殿内殿，造了三层旁屋。
And against the walls all round, and against the walls of the Temple and of the inmost room, he put up wings, with side rooms all round:

下层宽五肘，中层宽六肘，上层宽七肘。殿外旁屋的梁木搁在殿墙坎上，免得插入殿墙。
The lowest line of them being five cubits wide, the middle six cubits wide and the third seven cubits; for there was a space all round the outside walls of the house so that the boards supporting the rooms did not have to be fixed in the walls of the house.

建殿是用山中凿成的石头。建殿的时候，锤子，斧子，和别样铁器的响声都没有听见。
(And the stones used in the building of the house were squared at the place where they were cut out; there was no sound of hammer or axe or any iron instrument while they were building the house.)

在殿右边当中的旁屋有门，门内有旋螺的楼梯，可以上到第二层，从第二层可以上到第三层。
The door to the lowest side rooms was in the right side of the house; and they went up by twisting steps into the middle rooms, and from the middle into the third.

所罗门建殿，安置香柏木的栋梁，又用香柏木板遮盖。
So he put up the house and made it complete, roofing it with boards of cedar-wood.

靠着殿所造的旁屋，每层高五肘，香柏木的栋梁搁在殿墙坎上。
And he put up the line of side rooms against the walls of the house, fifteen cubits high, resting against the house on boards of cedar-wood.

耶和华的话临到所罗门说，
(And the word of the Lord came to Solomon, saying,

论到你所建的这殿，你若遵行我的律例，谨守我的典章，遵从我的一切诫命，我必向你应验我所应许你父亲大卫的话。
About this house which you are building: if you will keep my laws and give effect to my decisions and be guided by my rules, I will give effect to my word which I gave to David your father.

我必住在以色列人中间，并不丢弃我民以色列。
And I will be ever among the children of Israel, and will not go away from my people.

所罗门建造殿宇。
So Solomon made the building of the house complete.)

殿里面用香柏木板贴墙，从地到棚顶都用木板遮蔽，又用松木板铺地。
The walls of the house were covered inside with cedar-wood boards; from the floor to the roof of the house they were covered inside with wood; and the floor was covered with boards of cypress-wood.

内殿，就是至圣所，长二十肘，从地到棚顶用香柏木板遮蔽（或作隔断）。
And at the back of the house a further space of twenty cubits was shut in with boards of cedar-wood, for the inmost room.

内殿前的外殿，长四十肘。
And the house, that is, the Temple, in front of the holy place was forty cubits long.

殿里一点石头都不显露，一概用香柏木遮蔽。上面刻着野瓜和初开的花。
(All the inside of the house was cedar-wood, ornamented with designs of buds and flowers; no stonework was to be seen inside.)

殿里预备了内殿，好安放耶和华的约柜。
And he made ready an inmost room in the middle of the house, in which to put the ark of the agreement of the Lord.

内殿长二十肘，宽二十肘，高二十肘，墙面都贴上精金。又用香柏木作坛，包上精金。
And the inmost room was twenty cubits square and twenty cubits high, plated over with clear gold, and he made an altar of cedar-wood, plating it with gold.

所罗门用精金贴了殿内的墙，又用金链子挂在内殿前门扇，用金包裹。
Solomon had all the inside of the house covered with gold, and he put chains of gold across in front of the inmost room, which itself was covered with gold.

全殿都贴上金子，直到贴完。内殿前的坛，也都用金包裹。
Plates of gold were put all through the house till it was covered completely (and the altar in the inmost room was all covered with gold).

他用橄榄木作两个基路伯，各高十肘，安在内殿。
In the inmost room he made two winged beings of olive-wood, ten cubits high;

这一个基路伯有两个翅膀，各长五肘，从这翅膀尖到那翅膀尖共有十肘。
With outstretched wings five cubits wide; the distance from the edge of one wing to the edge of the other was ten cubits.

那一个基路伯的两个翅膀也是十肘，两个基路伯的尺寸，形像都是一样。
The two winged ones were ten cubits high, of the same size and form.

这基路伯高十肘，那基路伯也是如此。
The two of them were ten cubits high.

他将两个基路伯安在内殿里。基路伯的翅膀是张开的，这基路伯的一个翅膀挨着这边的墙，那基路伯的一个翅膀挨着那边的墙，里边的两个翅膀在殿中间彼此相接。
These were placed inside the inner house, their outstretched wings touching the walls of the house, one touching one wall and one the other, while their other wings were touching in the middle.

又用金子包裹二基路伯。
These winged ones were plated over with gold.

内殿，外殿周围的墙上都刻着基路伯，棕树，和初开的花。
And all the walls of the house inside and out were ornamented with forms of winged ones and palm-trees and open flowers.

内殿，外殿的地板都贴上金子。
And the floor of the house was covered with gold, inside and out.

又用橄榄木制造内殿的门扇，门楣，门框。门口有墙的五分之一。
For the way into the inmost room he made doors of olive-wood, the arch and the door supports forming a five-sided opening.

在橄榄木作的两门扇上刻着基路伯，棕树，和初开的花，都贴上金子。
On the olive-wood doors were cut designs of winged ones and palm-trees and open flowers, all of them, with the doors, plated with gold.

又用橄榄木制造外殿的门框，门口有墙的四分之一。
Then he made pillars of olive-wood for the way into the Temple; the pillars were square:

用松木作门两扇。这扇分两扇，是摺叠的。那扇分两扇。也是摺叠的。
And two folding doors of cypress-wood, with two leaves.

上面刻着基路伯，棕树，和初开的花，都用金子贴了。
These were ornamented with designs of winged ones and palm-trees and open flowers, plated over with gold.

他又用凿成的石头三层，香柏木一层建筑内院。
And the inner space was walled with three lines of squared stones and a line of cedar-wood boards.

所罗门在位第四年西弗月，立了耶和华殿的根基。
In the fourth year the base of the house was put in its place, in the month Ziv.

到十一年布勒月，就是八月，殿和一切属殿的都按着样式造成。他建殿的工夫共有七年。
And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, the building of the house was complete in every detail, as it had been designed. So he was seven years building it.

所罗门为自己建造宫室，十三年方才造成。
Solomon was thirteen years building a house for himself till it was complete.

又建造利巴嫩林宫，长一百肘，宽五十肘，高三十肘，有香柏木柱三（原文作四）行，柱上有香柏木柁梁。
And he made the house of the Woods of Lebanon, which was a hundred cubits long and fifty cubits wide and thirty cubits high, resting on four lines of cedar-wood pillars with cedar-wood supports on the pillars.

其上以香柏木为盖，每行柱子十五根，共有四十五根。
And it was covered with cedar over the forty-five supports which were on the pillars, fifteen in a line.

有窗户三层，窗与窗相对。
There were three lines of window-frames, window facing window in every line.

所有的门框都是厚木见方的，有窗户三层，窗与窗相对。
And all the doors and windows had square frames, with the windows facing one another in three lines.

并建造有柱子的廊子，长五十肘，宽三十肘。在这廊前又有廊子，廊外有柱子和台阶。
And he made a covered room of pillars, fifty cubits long and thirty cubits wide, and ... with steps before it.

又建造一廊，其中设立审判的座位，这廊从地到顶都用香柏木遮蔽。
Then he made a covered room for his high seat when he gave decisions; this was the covered room of judging; it was covered with cedar-wood from floor to roof.

廊后院内有所罗门住的宫室。工作与这工作相同。所罗门又为所娶法老的女儿建造一宫，作法与这廊子一样。
And the house for his living-place, the other open square in the covered room, was made in the same way. And then he made a house like it for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had taken as his wife.

建造这一切所用的石头都是宝贵的，是按着尺寸凿成的，是用锯里外锯齐的。从根基直到檐石，从外头直到大院，都是如此。
All these buildings were made, inside and out, from base to crowning stone, and outside to the great walled square, of highly priced stone, cut to different sizes with cutting-instruments.

根基是宝贵的大石头，有长十肘的，有长八肘的。
And the base was of great masses of highly priced stone, some ten cubits and some eight cubits square.

上面有香柏木和按着尺寸凿成宝贵的石头。
Overhead were highly priced stones cut to measure, and cedar-wood.

大院周围有凿成的石头三层，香柏木一层，都照耶和华殿的内院和殿廊的样式。
The great outer square all round was walled with three lines of squared stones and a line of cedar-wood boards, round about the open square inside the house of the Lord and the covered room of the king's house.

所罗门王差遣人往推罗去，将户兰召了来。
Then King Solomon sent and got Hiram from Tyre.

他是拿弗他利支派中一个寡妇的儿子，他父亲是推罗人，作铜匠的。户兰满有智慧，聪明，技能，善于各样铜作。他来到所罗门王那里，作王一切所要作的。
He was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; he was full of wisdom and knowledge and an expert worker in brass. He came to King Solomon and did all his work for him.

他制造两根铜柱，每根高十八肘，围十二肘。
He it was who made the two brass pillars; the first pillar was eighteen cubits high, and a line of twelve cubits went round it; and the second was the same.

又用铜铸了两个柱顶安在柱上，各高五肘。
And he made the two crowns to be put on the tops of the pillars, of brass made soft in the fire; the crowns were five cubits high.

柱顶上有装修的网子和拧成的链索，每顶七个。
There were nets of open-work for the crowns on the tops of the pillars, a net of open-work for one and a net of open-work for the other.

网子周围有两行石榴遮盖柱顶，两个柱顶都是如此。
And he made ornaments of apples; and two lines of apples all round over the network, covering the crowns of the pillars, the two crowns in the same way.

廊子的柱顶径四肘，刻着百合花。
The crowns on the tops of the pillars were ornamented with a design of flowers, and were four cubits across.

两柱顶的鼓肚上挨着网子，各有两行石榴环绕，两行共有二百。
And there were crowns on the two pillars near the round part by the network, and there were two hundred apples in lines round every crown.

他将两根柱子立在殿廊前头，右边立一根，起名叫雅斤。左边立一根，起名叫波阿斯。
He put up the pillars at the doorway of the Temple, naming the one on the right Jachin, and that on the left Boaz.

在柱顶上刻着百合花。这样，造柱子的工就完毕了。
The tops of the pillars had a design of flowers; and the work of making the pillars was complete.

他又铸一个铜海，样式是圆的，高五肘，径十肘，围三十肘。
And he made a great metal water-vessel ten cubits across from edge to edge, five cubits high and thirty cubits round.

在海边之下，周围有野瓜的样式。每肘十瓜，共有两行，是铸海的时候铸上的。
And under the edge of it, circling it all round for ten cubits, were two lines of flower buds, made together with it from liquid metal.

有十二只铜牛驮海，三只向北，三只向西，三只向南，三只向东。海在牛上，牛尾都向内。
It was supported on twelve oxen, with their back parts turned to the middle of it, three of them facing to the north, three to the west, three to the south, and three to the east; the vessel was resting on top of them.

海厚一掌，边如杯边，又如百合花，可容二千吧特。
It was as thick as a man's open hand, and was curved like the edge of a cup, like the flower of a lily: it would take two thousand baths.

他用铜制造十个盆座，每座长四肘，宽四肘，高三肘。
And he made ten wheeled bases of brass; every one four cubits long, four cubits wide, and three cubits high.

座的造法是这样，四面都有心子，心子在边子当中，
And the bases were made in this way; their sides were square, fixed in a framework;

心子上有狮子和牛，并基路伯。边上有小座，狮子和牛以下有垂下的璎珞。
And on the square sides between the frames were lions, oxen, and winged ones; and the same on the frame; and over and under the lions and the oxen and the winged ones were steps.

每盆座有四个铜轮和铜轴。小座的四角上在盆以下，有铸成的盆架，其旁都有璎珞。
Every base had four wheels of brass, turning on brass rods, and their four angles had angle-plates under them; the angle-plates under the base were of metal, and there were ornaments at the side of every one.

小座高一肘，口是圆的，仿佛座的样式，径一肘半，在口上有雕工，心子是方的，不是圆的。
The mouth of it inside the angle-plate was one cubit across; it was round like a pillar, a cubit and a half across; it had designs cut on it; the sides were square, not round.

四个轮子在心子以下，轮轴与座相连，每轮高一肘半。
The four wheels were under the frames, and the rods on which the wheels were fixed were in the base; the wheels were a cubit and a half high.

轮的样式如同车轮。轴，辋，辐，毂都是铸的。
The wheels were made like carriage-wheels, the rods on which they were fixed, the parts forming their edges, their rods and the middle points of them, were all formed out of liquid metal.

每座四角上都有盆架，是与座一同铸成的。
And there were four angle-plates at the four angles of every base, forming part of the structure of the base.

座上有圆架，高半肘。座上有撑子和心子，是与座一同铸的。
And at the top of the base there was a round vessel, half a cubit high;

在撑子和心子上刻着基路伯，狮子，和棕树，周围有璎珞。
In the spaces of the flat sides and on the frames of them, he made designs of winged ones, lions, and palm-trees, with ornamented edges all round.

十个盆座都是这样，铸法，尺寸，样式相同。
All the ten bases were made in this way, after the same design, of the same size and form.

又用铜制造十个盆，每盆可容四十吧特。盆径四肘，在那十座上，每座安设一盆。
And he made ten brass washing-vessels, everyone taking forty baths, and measuring four cubits; one vessel was placed on every one of the ten bases.

五个安在殿门的右边，五个放在殿门的左边。又将海放在殿门的右旁，就是南边。
And he put the bases by the house, five on the right side and five on the left; and he put the great water-vessel on the right side of the house, to the east, facing south.

户兰又造了盆，铲子，和盘子。这样，他为所罗门王作完了耶和华殿的一切工。
And Hiram made the pots and spades and the basins. So Hiram came to the end of all the work he did for King Solomon in the house of the Lord:

所造的就是，两根柱子和柱上两个如球的顶。并两个盖柱顶的网子。
The two pillars and the two cups of the crowns which were on the tops of the two pillars; and the network covering the two cups of the crowns on the tops of the pillars,

和四百石榴，安在两个网子上，每网两行，盖着两个柱上如球的顶。
And the four hundred apples for the network, two lines of apples for every network, covering the two cups of the crowns on the pillars;

十个座和其上的十个盆。
And the ten bases, with the ten washing-vessels on them;

海和海下的十二只牛。
And the great water-vessel, with the twelve oxen under it;

盆，铲子，盘子。这一切都是户兰给所罗门王用光亮的铜为耶和华的殿造成的，
And the pots and the spades and the basins; all the vessels which Hiram made for King Solomon, for the house of the Lord, were of polished brass.

是遵王命在约旦平原，疏割和撒拉但中间借胶泥铸成的。
He made them of liquid metal in the lowland of Jordan, at the way across the river, at Adama, between Succoth and Zarethan.

这一切所罗门都没有过秤。因为甚多，铜的轻重也无法可查。
The weight of all these vessels was not measured, because there was such a number of them; it was not possible to get the weight of the brass.

所罗门又造耶和华殿里的金坛和陈设饼的金桌子。
And Solomon had all the vessels made for use in the house of the Lord: the altar of gold and the gold table on which the holy bread was placed;

内殿前的精金灯台，右边五个，左边五个，并其上的金花，灯盏，蜡剪，
And the supports for the lights, five on the right side and five on the left before the inmost room, of clear gold; and the flowers and the lights and all the instruments of gold;

与精金的杯，盘，镊子，调羹，火鼎，以及至圣所，内殿的门枢，和外殿的门枢。
And the cups and the scissors and the basins and the spoons and the fire-trays, all of gold; and the pins on which the doors were turned, the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and the doors of the Temple, all of gold.

所罗门王作完了耶和华殿的一切工，就把他父大卫分别为圣的金银和器皿都带来放在耶和华殿的府库里。
So all the work King Solomon had done in the house of the Lord was complete. Then Solomon took the holy things which David his father had given, the silver and the gold and all the vessels, and put them in the store-houses of the house of the Lord.

那时，所罗门将以色列的长老和各支派的首领，并以色列的族长，招聚到耶路撒冷，要把耶和华的约柜从大卫城就是锡安运上来。
Then Solomon sent for all the responsible men of Israel, and all the chiefs of the tribes, and the heads of families of the children of Israel, to come to him in Jerusalem to take the ark of the Lord's agreement up out of the town of David, which is Zion.

以他念月，就是七月，在节前，以色列人都聚集到所罗门王那里。
And all the men of Israel came together to King Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, the seventh month.

以色列长老来到，祭司便抬起约柜，
And all the responsible men of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.

祭司和利未人将耶和华的约柜运上来，又将会幕和会幕的一切圣器具都带上来。
They took up the ark of the Lord, and the Tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels which were in the Tent; all these the priests and the Levites took up.

所罗门王和聚集到他那里的以色列全会众，一同在约柜前献牛羊为祭，多得不可胜数。
And King Solomon and all the men of Israel who had come together there, were with him before the ark, making offerings of sheep and oxen more than might be numbered.

祭司将耶和华的约柜抬进内殿，就是至圣所，放在两个基路伯的翅膀底下。
And the priests took the ark of the agreement of the Lord and put it in its place in the inner room of the house, in the most holy place, under the wings of the winged ones.

基路伯张着翅膀在约柜之上，遮掩约柜和抬柜的杠。
For their wings were outstretched over the place where the ark was, covering the ark and its rods.

这杠甚长，杠头在内殿前的圣所可以看见，在殿外却不能看见，直到如今还在那里。
The rods were so long that their ends were seen from the holy place, in front of the inmost room; but they were not seen from outside: and there they are to this day.

约柜里惟有两块石版，就是以色列人出埃及地后，耶和华与他们立约的时候摩西在何烈山所放的。除此以外，并无别物。
There was nothing in the ark but the two flat stones which Moses put there at Horeb, where the Lord made an agreement with the children of Israel when they came out of the land of Egypt.

祭司从圣所出来的时候，有云充满耶和华的殿。
Now when the priests had come out of the holy place, the house of the Lord was full of the cloud,

甚至祭司不能站立供职，因为耶和华的荣光充满了殿。
So that the priests were not able to keep their places to do their work because of the cloud, for the house of the Lord was full of the glory of the Lord.

那时所罗门说，耶和华曾说，他必住在幽暗之处。
Then Solomon said, O Lord, to the sun you have given the heaven for a living-place, but your living-place was not seen by men;

我已经建造殿宇作你的居所，为你永远的住处。
So I have made for you a living-place, a house in which you may be for ever present.

王转脸为以色列会众祝福，以色列会众就都站立。
Then, turning his face about, the king gave a blessing to all the men of Israel; and they were all on their feet together.

所罗门说，耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的。因他亲口向我父大卫所应许的，也亲手成就了。
And he said, Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, who himself gave his word to David my father, and with his strong hand has made his word come true, saying,

他说，自从我领我民以色列出埃及以来，我未曾在以色列各支派中选择一城建造殿宇为我名的居所，但拣选大卫治理我民以色列。
From the day when I took my people Israel out of Egypt, no town in all the tribes of Israel has been marked out by me for the building of a house for the resting-place of my name; but I made selection of David to be king over my people Israel.

所罗门说，我父大卫曾立意，要为耶和华以色列神的名建殿。
Now it was in the heart of David my father to put up a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.

耶和华却对我父大卫说，你立意为我的名建殿，这意思甚好。
But the Lord said to David my father, You did well to have in your heart the desire to make a house for my name;

只是你不可建殿，惟你所生的儿子必为我名建殿。
But you yourself will not be the builder of my house; but your son, the offspring of your body, he it is who will put up a house for my name.

现在耶和华成就了他所应许的话，使我接续我父大卫坐以色列的国位，又为耶和华以色列神的名建造了殿。
And the Lord has made his word come true; for I have taken my father David's place on the seat of the kingdom of Israel, as the Lord gave his word; and I have made a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.

我也在其中为约柜预备一处。约柜内有耶和华的约，就是他领我们列祖出埃及地的时候，与他们所立的约。
In it I have made a place for the ark, in which is the agreement which the Lord made with our fathers, when he took them out of the land of Egypt.

所罗门当着以色列会众，站在耶和华的坛前，向天举手说，
Then Solomon took his place before the altar of the Lord, all the men of Israel being present, and stretching out his hands to heaven,

耶和华以色列的神阿，天上地下没有神可比你的。你向那尽心行在你面前的仆人守约施慈爱。
Said, O Lord, the God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven or on the earth; keeping faith and mercy unchanging for your servants, while they go in your ways with all their hearts.

向你仆人我父大卫所应许的话现在应验了。你亲口应许，亲手成就，正如今日一样。
And you have kept the word which you gave to your servant David, my father; with your mouth you said it and with your hand you have made it come true this day.

耶和华以色列的神阿，你所应许你仆人我父大卫的话说，你的子孙若谨慎自己的行为，在我面前行事象你所行的一样，就不断人坐以色列的国位。现在求你应验这话。
So now, O Lord, the God of Israel, let your word to your servant David, my father, come true, when you said, You will never be without a man to take his place on the seat of the kingdom of Israel before me, if only your children give attention to their ways, walking before me as you have done.

以色列的神阿，求你成就向你仆人我父大卫所应许的话。
So now, O God of Israel, it is my prayer that you will make your word come true which you said to your servant David, my father.

神果真住在地上吗？看哪，天和天上的天尚且不足你居住的，何况我所建的这殿呢？
But is it truly possible that God may be housed on earth? see, heaven and the heaven of heavens are not wide enough to be your resting-place; how much less this house which I have made!

惟求耶和华我的神垂顾仆人的祷告祈求，俯听仆人今日在你面前的祈祷呼吁。
Still, let your heart be turned to the prayer of your servant, O Lord God, and to his prayer for grace; give ear to the cry and the prayer which your servant sends up to you this day;

愿你昼夜看顾这殿，就是你应许立为你名的居所。求你垂听仆人向此处祷告的话。
That your eyes may be open to this house night and day, to this place of which you have said, My name will be there; hearing the prayer which your servant may make, turning to this place.

你仆人和你民以色列向此处祈祷的时候，求你在天上你的居所垂听，垂听而赦免。
Give ear to the prayers of your servant, and the prayers of your people Israel, when they make their prayers, turning to this place; give ear in heaven your living-place, and hearing, have mercy.

人若得罪邻舍，有人叫他起誓，他来到这殿在你的坛前起誓，
If a man does wrong to his neighbour, and has to take an oath, and comes before your altar to take his oath in this house:

求你在天上垂听，判断你的仆人，定恶人有罪，照他所行的报应在他头上。定义人有理，照他的义赏赐他。
Then let your ear be open in heaven, and be the judge of your servants, giving your decision against the wrongdoer, so that punishment for his sins may come on his head; and, by your decision, keeping from evil him who has done no wrong.

你的民以色列若得罪你，败在仇敌面前，又归向你，承认你的名，在这殿里祈求祷告，
When your people Israel are overcome in war, because of their sin against you; if they are turned to you again, honouring your name, making prayers to you and requesting your grace in this house:

求你在天上垂听，赦免你民以色列的罪，使他们归回你赐给他们列祖之地。
Then give ear in heaven, and let the sin of your people Israel have forgiveness, and take them back again into the land which you gave to their fathers.

你的民因得罪你，你惩罚他们，使天闭塞不下雨。他们若向此处祷告，承认你的名，离开他们的罪，
When heaven is shut up and there is no rain, because of their sin against you; if they make prayers with their faces turned to this place, honouring your name and turning away from their sin when you send trouble on them:

求你在天上垂听，赦免你仆人以色列民的罪，将当行的善道指教他们，且降雨在你的地，就是你赐给你民为业之地。
Then give ear in heaven, so that the sin of your servants, and of your people Israel, may have forgiveness, when you make clear to them the good way in which they are to go; and send rain on your land which you have given to your people for their heritage.

国中若有饥荒，瘟疫，旱风，霉烂，蝗虫，蚂蚱，或有仇敌犯境围困城邑，无论遭遇什么灾祸疾病，
If there is no food in the land, or if there is disease, or if the fruits of the earth are damaged through heat or water, locust or worm; if their towns are shut in by their attackers; whatever trouble, whatever disease there may be:

你的民以色列，或是众人，或是一人，自觉有罪（原文作灾），向这殿举手，无论祈求什么，祷告什么，
Whatever prayer or request for your grace is made by any man, or by all your people Israel, whatever his trouble may be, whose hands are stretched out to this house:

求你在天上你的居所垂听赦免。你是知道人心的，要照各人所行的待他们，（惟有你知道世人的心），
Give ear in heaven your living-place, acting in mercy; and give to every man whose secret heart is open to you, the reward of all his ways; for you, and you only, have knowledge of the hearts of all the children of men:

使他们在你赐给我们列祖之地上一生一世敬畏你。
So that they may give you worship all the days of their life in the land which you gave to our fathers.

论到不属你民以色列的外邦人，为你名从远方而来，
And as for the man from a strange land, who is not of your people Israel; when he comes from a far country because of the glory of your name:

（他们听人论说你的大名和大能的手，并伸出来的膀臂）向这殿祷告，
(For they will have news of your great name and your strong hand and your out-stretched arm;) when he comes to make his prayer, turning to this house:

求你在天上你的居所垂听，照着外邦人所祈求的而行，使天下万民都认识你的名，敬畏你象你的民以色列一样。又使他们知道我建造的这殿是称为你名下的。
Give ear in heaven your living-place, and give him his desire, whatever it may be; so that all the peoples of the earth may have knowledge of your name, worshipping you as do your people Israel, and that they may see that this house which I have put up is truly named by your name.

你的民若奉你的差遣，无论往何处去与仇敌争战，向耶和华所选择的城与我为你名所建造的殿祷告，
If your people go out to war against their attackers, by whatever way you may send them, if they make their prayer to the Lord, turning their faces to this town of yours and to this house which I have made for your name:

求你在天上垂听他们的祷告祈求，使他们得胜。
Give ear in heaven to their prayer and their cry for grace, and see right done to them.

你的民若得罪你（世上没有不犯罪的人），你向他们发怒，将他们交给仇敌掳到仇敌之地，或远或近，
If they do wrong against you, (for no man is without sin,) and you are angry with them and give them up into the power of those who are fighting against them, so that they take them away as prisoners into a strange land, far off or near;

他们若在掳到之地想起罪来，回心转意，恳求你说，我们有罪了，我们悖逆了，我们作恶了。
And if they take thought, in the land where they are prisoners, and are turned again to you, crying out in prayer to you in that land, and saying, We are sinners, we have done wrong, we have done evil;

他们若在掳到之地尽心尽性归服你，又向自己的地，就是你赐给他们列祖之地和你所选择的城，并我为你名所建造的殿祷告，
And with all their heart and soul are turned again to you, in the land of those who took them prisoners, and make their prayer to you, turning their eyes to this land which you gave to their fathers, and to the town which you took for yourself, and the house which I made for your name:

求你在天上你的居所垂听他们的祷告祈求，为他们伸冤。
Then give ear to their prayer and to their cry in heaven your living-place, and see right done to them;

饶恕得罪你的民，赦免他们的一切过犯，使他们在掳他们的人面前蒙怜恤。
Answering with forgiveness the people who have done wrong against you, and overlooking the evil which they have done against you; let those who made them prisoners be moved with pity for them, and have pity on them;

因为他们是你的子民，你的产业，是你从埃及领出来脱离铁炉的。
For they are your people and your heritage, which you took out of Egypt, out of the iron fireplace;

愿你的眼目看顾仆人，听你民以色列的祈求，无论何时向你祈求，愿你垂听。
Let your eyes be open to your servant's prayer for grace and to the prayer of your people Israel, hearing them when their cry comes to you.

主耶和华阿，你将他们从地上的万民中分别出来作你的产业，是照你领我们列祖出埃及的时候，借你仆人摩西所应许的话。
For you made them separate from all the peoples of the earth, to be your heritage, as you said by Moses your servant, when you took our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord God.

所罗门在耶和华的坛前屈膝跪着，向天举手，在耶和华面前祷告祈求已毕，就起来，
Then Solomon, after making all these prayers and requests for grace to the Lord, got up from his knees before the altar of the Lord, where his hands had been stretched out in prayer to heaven;

站着，大声为以色列全会众祝福，说，
And, getting on his feet, he gave a blessing to all the men of Israel, saying with a loud voice,

耶和华是应当称颂的。因为他照着一切所应许的赐平安给他的民以色列人，凡借他仆人摩西应许赐福的话，一句都没有落空。
Praise be to the Lord who has given rest to his people Israel, as he gave them his word to do; every word of all his oath, which he gave by the hand of Moses his servant, has come true.

愿耶和华我们的神与我们同在，像与我们列祖同在一样，不撇下我们，不丢弃我们，
Now may the Lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers; let him never go away from us or give us up;

使我们的心归向他，遵行他的道，谨守他吩咐我们列祖的诫命，律例，典章。
Turning our hearts to himself, guiding us to go in all his ways, to keep his orders and his laws and his decisions, which he gave to our fathers.

我在耶和华面前祈求的这些话，愿耶和华我们的神昼夜垂念，每日为他仆人与他民以色列伸冤，
And may these my words, the words of my prayer to the Lord, be before the Lord our God day and night, so that he may see right done to his servant and to his people Israel, day by day as we have need.

使地上的万民都知道惟独耶和华是神，并无别神。
So that all the peoples of the earth may see that the Lord is God, and there is no other.

所以你们当向耶和华我们的神存诚实的心，遵行他的律例，谨守他的诫命，至终如今日一样。
Then let your hearts be without sin before the Lord our God, walking in his laws and keeping his orders as at this day.

王和以色列众民一同在耶和华面前献祭。
Now the king, and all Israel with him, were making offerings before the Lord.

所罗门向耶和华献平安祭，用牛二万二千，羊十二万。这样，王和以色列众民为耶和华的殿行奉献之礼。
And Solomon gave to the Lord for peace-offerings, twenty-two thousand oxen and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel kept the feast of the opening of the Lord's house.

当日，王因耶和华殿前的铜坛太小，容不下燔祭，素祭，和平安祭牲的脂油，便将耶和华殿前院子当中分别为圣，在那里献燔祭，素祭，和平安祭牲的脂油。
The same day the king made holy the middle of the open square in front of the house of the Lord, offering there the burned offering and the meal offering and the fat of the peace-offerings; for there was not room on the brass altar of the Lord for the burned offerings and the meal offerings and the fat of the peace-offerings.

那时，所罗门和以色列众人，就是从哈马口直到埃及小河所有的以色列人，都聚集成为大会，在耶和华我们的神面前守节七日又七日，共十四日。
So Solomon and all Israel with him, a very great meeting, (for the people had come together from the way into Hamath to the river of Egypt,) kept the feast at that time before the Lord our God, for two weeks, even fourteen days.

第八日，王遣散众民。他们都为王祝福。因见耶和华向他仆人大卫和他民以色列所施的一切恩惠，就都心中喜乐，各归各家去了。
And on the eighth day he sent the people away, and, blessing the king, they went to their tents full of joy and glad in their hearts, because of all the good which the Lord had done to David his servant and to Israel his people.

所罗门建造耶和华殿和王宫，并一切所愿意建造的都完毕了，
Now when Solomon came to the end of building the house of the Lord and the king's house, and all Solomon's desires, which he had in mind were effected;

耶和华就二次向所罗门显现，如先前在基遍向他显现一样，
The Lord came to him again in a vision, as he had done at Gibeon;

对他说，你向我所祷告祈求的，我都应允了。我已将你所建的这殿分别为圣，使我的名永远在其中。我的眼，我的心也必常在那里。
And the Lord said to him, Your prayers and your requests for grace have come to my ears: I have made holy this house which you have made, and I have put my name there for ever; my eyes and my heart will be there at all times.

你若效法你父大卫，存诚实正直的心行在我面前，遵行我一切所吩咐你的，谨守我的律例典章，
As for you, if you will go on your way before me, as David your father did, uprightly and with a true heart, doing what I have given you orders to do, keeping my laws and my decisions;

我就必坚固你的国位在以色列中，直到永远，正如我应许你父大卫说，你的子孙必不断人坐以色列的国位。
Then I will make the seat of your rule over Israel certain for ever, as I gave my word to David your father, saying, You will never be without a man to be king in Israel.

倘若你们和你们的子孙转去不跟从我，不守我指示你们的诫命律例，去事奉敬拜别神，
But if you are turned from my ways, you or your children, and do not keep my orders and my laws which I have put before you, but go and make yourselves servants to other gods and give them worship:

我就必将以色列人从我赐给他们的地上剪除，并且我为己名所分别为圣的殿也必舍弃不顾，使以色列人在万民中作笑谈，被讥诮。
Then I will have Israel cut off from the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have made holy for myself, I will put away from before my eyes; and Israel will be a public example, and a word of shame among all peoples.

这殿虽然甚高，将来经过的人必惊讶，嗤笑，说，耶和华为何向这地和这殿如此行呢？
And this house will become a mass of broken walls, and everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder at it and make whistling sounds; and they will say, Why has the Lord done so to this land and to this house?

人必回答说，是因此地的人离弃领他们列祖出埃及地之耶和华他们的神，去亲近别神，事奉敬拜他，所以耶和华使这一切灾祸临到他们。
And their answer will be, Because they were turned away from the Lord their God, who took their fathers out of the land of Egypt; they took for themselves other gods and gave them worship and became their servants: that is why the Lord has sent all this evil on them.

所罗门建造耶和华殿和王宫，这两所二十年才完毕了。
Now at the end of twenty years, in which time Solomon had put up the two houses, the house of the Lord and the king's house,

（推罗王希兰曾照所罗门所要的，资助他香柏木，松木，和金子）所罗门王就把加利利地的二十座城给了希兰。
(Hiram, king of Tyre, had given Solomon cedar-trees and cypress-trees and gold, as much as he had need of,) King Solomon gave Hiram twenty towns in the land of Galilee.

希兰从推罗出来，察看所罗门给他的城邑，就不喜悦，
But when Hiram came from Tyre to see the towns which Solomon had given him, he was not pleased with them.

说，我兄阿，你给我的是什么城邑呢？他就给这城邑之地起名叫迦步勒，直到今日。
And he said, What sort of towns are these which you have given me, my brother? So they were named the land of Cabul, to this day.

希兰给所罗门一百二十他连得金子。
And Hiram sent the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold.

所罗门王挑取服苦的人，是为建造耶和华的殿，自己的宫，米罗，耶路撒冷的城墙，夏琐，米吉多，并基色。
Now, this was the way of Solomon's system of forced work for the building of the Lord's house and of the king's house, and the Millo and the wall of Jerusalem and Megiddo and Gezer. ...

先前埃及王法老上来攻取基色，用火焚烧，杀了城内居住的迦南人，将城赐给他女儿所罗门的妻作妆奁。
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, came and took Gezer, burning it down and putting to death the Canaanites living in the town, and he gave it for a bride-offering to his daughter, Solomon's wife. ...

所罗门建造基色，下伯和仑，
... and Solomon was the builder of Gezer and Beth-horon the lower,

巴拉，并国中旷野里的达莫，
And Baalath and Tamar in the waste land, in that land;

又建造所有的积货城，并屯车和马兵的城，与耶路撒冷，利巴嫩，以及自己治理的全国中所愿建造的。
And all the store-towns and the towns which Solomon had for his war-carriages and for his horsemen, and everything which it was his pleasure to put up in Jerusalem and in Lebanon and in all the land under his rule.

至于国中所剩下不属以色列人的亚摩利人，赫人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人，
As for the rest of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not children of Israel;

就是以色列人不能灭尽的，所罗门挑取他们的后裔作服苦的奴仆，直到今日。
Their children who were still in the land, and whom the children of Israel had not been able to put to complete destruction, them did Solomon put to forced work, to this day.

惟有以色列人，所罗门不使他们作奴仆，乃是作他的战士，臣仆，统领，军长，车兵长，马兵长。
But Solomon did not put the children of Israel to forced work; they were the men of war, his servants, his captains, and his chiefs, captains of his war-carriages and of his horsemen.

所罗门有五百五十督工的，监管工人。
These were the chiefs of the overseers of Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, in authority over the people who did the work.

法老的女儿从大卫城搬到所罗门为她建造的宫里。那时，所罗门才建造米罗。
At that time Solomon made Pharaoh's daughter come up from the town of David to the house which he had made for her: then he made the Millo.

所罗门每年三次在他为耶和华所筑的坛上献燔祭和平安祭，又在耶和华面前的坛上烧香。这样，他建造殿的工程完毕了。
Three times in the year it was Solomon's way to give burned offerings and peace-offerings on the altar he had made to the Lord, causing his fire-offering to go up on the altar before the Lord.

所罗门王在以东地红海边，靠近以禄的以旬迦别制造船只。
And King Solomon made a sea-force of ships in Ezion-geber, by Eloth, on the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.

希兰差遣他的仆人，就是熟悉泛海的船家，与所罗门的仆人一同坐船航海。
Hiram sent his servants, who were experienced seamen, in the sea-force with Solomon's men.

他们到了俄斐，从那里得了四百二十他连得金子，运到所罗门王那里。
And they came to Ophir, where they got four hundred and twenty talents of gold, and took it back to King Solomon.

示巴女王听见所罗门因耶和华之名所得的名声，就来要用难解的话试问所罗门。
Now the queen of Sheba, hearing great things of Solomon, came to put his wisdom to the test with hard questions.

跟随她到耶路撒冷的人甚多，又有骆驼驮着香料，宝石，和许多金子。她来见了所罗门王，就把心里所有的对所罗门都说出来。
And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels weighted down with spices, and stores of gold and jewels: and when she came to Solomon she had talk with him of everything in her mind.

所罗门王将她所问的都答上了，没有一句不明白，不能答的。
And Solomon gave her answers to all her questions; there was no secret which the king did not make clear to her.

示巴女王见所罗门大有智慧，和他所建造的宫室，
And when the queen of Sheba had seen all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house which he had made,

席上的珍馐美味，群臣分列而坐，仆人两旁侍立，以及他们的衣服装饰和酒政的衣服装饰，又见他上耶和华殿的台阶（或作他在耶和华殿里所献的燔祭），就诧异得神不守舍。
And the food at his table, and all his servants seated there, and those who were waiting on him in their places, and their robes, and his wine-servants, and the burned offerings which he made in the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in her.

对王说，我在本国里所听见论到你的事和你的智慧实在是真的。
And she said to the king, The account which was given to me in my country of your acts and your wisdom was true.

我先不信那些话，及至我来亲眼见了才知道人所告诉我的还不到一半。你的智慧和你的福分越过我所听见的风声。
But I had no faith in what was said about you, till I came and saw for myself; and now I see that it was not half the story; your wisdom and your wealth are much greater than they said.

你的臣子，你的仆人常侍立在你面前听你智慧的话是有福的。
Happy are your wives, happy are these your servants whose place is ever before you, hearing your words of wisdom.

耶和华你的神是应当称颂的。他喜悦你，使你坐以色列的国位。因为他永远爱以色列，所以立你作王，使你秉公行义。
May the Lord your God be praised, whose pleasure it was to put you on the seat of the kingdom of Israel; because the Lord's love for Israel is eternal, he has made you king, to be their judge in righteousness.

于是，示巴女王将一百二十他连得金子和宝石，与极多的香料，送给所罗门王。她送给王的香料，以后奉来的不再有这样多。
And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and a great store of spices and jewels: never again was such a wealth of spices seen as that which the queen of Sheba gave King Solomon.

希兰的船只从俄斐运了金子来，又从俄斐运了许多檀香木（或作乌木下同）和宝石来。
And the sea-force of Hiram, in addition to gold from Ophir, came back with much sandal-wood and jewels.

王用檀香木为耶和华殿和王宫作栏杆，又为歌唱的人作琴瑟。以后再没有这样的檀香木进国来，也没有人看见过，直到如今。
And from the sandal-wood the king made pillars for the house of the Lord, and for the king's house, and instruments of music for the makers of melody: never has such sandal-wood been seen to this day.

示巴女王一切所要所求的，所罗门王都送给她，另外照自己的厚意馈送她。于是女王和她臣仆转回本国去了。
And King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she made request for, in addition to what he gave her freely from the impulse of his heart. So she went back to her country, she and her servants.

所罗门每年所得的金子共有六百六十六他连得。
Now the weight of gold which came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents;

另外还有商人和杂族的诸王，与国中的省长，所进的金子。（杂族在历代下九章十四节作亚拉伯）
In addition to what came to him from the business of the traders, and from all the kings of the Arabians, and from the rulers of the country.

所罗门王用锤出来的金子打成挡牌二百面，每面用金子六百舍客勒。
And Solomon made two hundred body-covers of hammered gold, every one having six hundred shekels of gold in it.

又用锤出来的金子打成盾牌三百面，每面用金子三弥那，都放在利巴嫩林宫里。
And he made three hundred smaller body-covers of hammered gold, with three pounds of gold in every cover: and the king put them in the house of the Woods of Lebanon.

王用象牙制造一个宝座，用精金包裹。
Then the king made a great ivory seat, plated with the best gold.

宝座有六层台阶，座的后背是圆的，两旁有扶手，靠近扶手有两个狮子站立。
There were six steps going up to it, and the top of it was round at the back, there were arms on the two sides of the seat, and two lions by the side of the arms;

六层台阶上有十二个狮子站立，每层有两个，左边一个，右边一个。在列国中没有这样作的。
And twelve lions were placed on the one side and on the other side on the six steps: there was nothing like it in any kingdom.

所罗门王一切的饮器都是金子的。利巴嫩林宫里的一切器皿都是精金的。所罗门年间，银子算不了什么。
And all King Solomon's drinking-vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the Woods of Lebanon were of the best gold; not one was of silver, for no one gave a thought to silver in the days of King Solomon.

因为王有他施船只与希兰的船只一同航海，三年一次，装载金银，象牙，猿猴，孔雀回来。
For the king had Tarshish-ships at sea with the ships of Hiram; once every three years the Tarshish-ships came with gold and silver and ivory and monkeys and peacocks.

所罗门王的财宝与智慧胜过天下的列王。
And King Solomon was greater than all the kings of the earth in wealth and in wisdom.

普天下的王都求见所罗门，要听神赐给他智慧的话。
And from all over the earth they came to see Solomon and to give ear to his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.

他们各带贡物，就是金器，银器，衣服，军械，香料，骡马，每年有一定之例。
And everyone took with him an offering, vessels of silver and vessels of gold, and robes, and coats of metal, and spices, and horses, and beasts of transport, regularly year by year.

所罗门聚集战车马兵，有战车一千四百辆，马兵一万二千名，安置在屯车的城邑和耶路撒冷，就是王那里。
And Solomon got together war-carriages and horsemen; he had one thousand, four hundred carriages and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he kept, some in the carriage-towns and some with the king at Jerusalem.

王在耶路撒冷使银子多如石头，香柏木多如高原的桑树。
And the king made silver as common as stones in Jerusalem and cedars like the sycamore-trees of the lowlands in number.

所罗门的马是从埃及带来的，是王的商人一群一群按着定价买来的。
And Solomon's horses came from Egypt and from Kue; the king's traders got them at a price from Kue.

从埃及买来的车，每辆价银六百舍客勒，马每匹一百五十舍客勒。赫人诸王和亚兰诸王所买的车马，也是按这价值经他们手买来的。
A war-carriage might be got from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty; they got them at the same rate for all the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram.

所罗门王在法老的女儿之外，又宠爱许多外邦女子，就是摩押女子，亚扪女子，以东女子，西顿女子，赫人女子。
Now a number of strange women were loved by Solomon, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites:

论到这些国的人，耶和华曾晓谕以色列人说，你们不可与她们往来相通，因为她们必诱惑你们的心去随从她们的神。所罗门却恋爱这些女子。
The nations of which the Lord had said to the children of Israel, You are not to take wives from them and they are not to take wives from you; or they will certainly make you go after their gods: to these Solomon was united in love.

所罗门有妃七百，都是公主。还有嫔三百。这些妃嫔诱惑他的心。
He had seven hundred wives, daughters of kings, and three hundred other wives; and through his wives his heart was turned away.

所罗门年老的时候，他的妃嫔诱惑他的心去随从别神，不效法他父亲大卫诚诚实实地顺服耶和华他的神。
For it came about that when Solomon was old, his heart was turned away to other gods by his wives; and his heart was no longer true to the Lord his God as the heart of his father David had been.

因为所罗门随从西顿人的女神亚斯他录和亚扪人可憎的神米勒公。
For Solomon went after Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Zidonians, and Milcom, the disgusting god of the Ammonites.

所罗门行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，不效法他父亲大卫专心顺从耶和华。
And Solomon did evil in the eyes of the Lord, not walking in the Lord's ways with all his heart as David his father did.

所罗门为摩押可憎的神基抹和亚扪人可憎的神摩洛，在耶路撒冷对面的山上建筑丘坛。
Then Solomon put up a high place for Chemosh, the disgusting god of Moab, in the mountain before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the disgusting god worshipped by the children of Ammon.

他为那些向自己的神烧香献祭的外邦女子，就是他娶来的妃嫔也是这样行。
And so he did for all his strange wives, who made offerings with burning of perfumes to their gods.

耶和华向所罗门发怒，因为他的心偏离向他两次显现的耶和华以色列的神。
And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from the Lord, the God of Israel, who had twice come to him in a vision;

耶和华曾吩咐他不可随从别神，他却没有遵守耶和华所吩咐的。
And had given him orders about this very thing, that he was not to go after other gods; but he did not keep the orders of the Lord.

所以耶和华对他说，你既行了这事，不遵守我所吩咐你守的约和律例，我必将你的国夺回，赐给你的臣子。
So the Lord said to Solomon, Because you have done this, and have not kept my agreement and my laws, which I gave you, I will take the kingdom away from you by force and will give it to your servant.

然而，因你父亲大卫的缘故，我不在你活着的日子行这事，必从你儿子的手中将国夺回。
I will not do it in your life-time, because of your father David, but I will take it from your son.

只是我不将全国夺回，要因我仆人大卫和我所选择的耶路撒冷，还留一支派给你的儿子。
Still I will not take all the kingdom from him; but I will give one tribe to your son, because of my servant David, and because of Jerusalem, the town of my selection.

耶和华使以东人哈达兴起，作所罗门的敌人。他是以东王的后裔。
So the Lord sent Hadad the Edomite to make trouble for Solomon: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

先前大卫攻击以东，元帅约押上去葬埋阵亡的人，将以东的男丁都杀了。
And when David had sent destruction on Edom, and Joab, the captain of the army, had gone to put the dead into the earth, and had put to death every male in Edom;

约押和以色列众人在以东住了六个月，直到将以东的男丁尽都剪除。
(For Joab and all Israel were there six months till every male in Edom had been cut off;)

那时哈达还是幼童。他和他父亲的臣仆，几个以东人逃往埃及。
Hadad, being still a young boy, went in flight to Egypt, with certain Edomites, servants of his father;

他们从米甸起行，到了巴兰。从巴兰带着几个人来到埃及见埃及王法老。法老为他派定粮食，又给他房屋田地。
And they went on from Midian and came to Paran; and, taking men from Paran with them, they came to Egypt, to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who gave him a house and gave orders for his food and gave him land.

哈达在法老面前大蒙恩惠，以致法老将王后答比匿的妹子赐他为妻。
Now Hadad was very pleasing to Pharaoh, so that he gave him the sister of his wife, Tahpenes the queen, for his wife.

答比匿的妹子给哈达生了一个儿子，名叫基努拔。答比匿使基努拔在法老的宫里断奶，基努拔就与法老的众子一同住在法老的宫里。
And the sister of Tahpenes had a son by him, Genubath, whom Tahpenes took care of in Pharaoh's house; and Genubath was living in Pharaoh's house among Pharaoh's sons.

哈达在埃及听见大卫与他列祖同睡，元帅约押也死了，就对法老说，求王容我回本国去。
Now when Hadad had news in Egypt that David had been put to rest with his fathers, and that Joab, the captain of the army, was dead, he said to Pharaoh, Send me back to my country.

法老对他说，你在我这里有什么缺乏，你竟要回你本国去呢？他回答说，我没有缺乏什么，只是求王容我回去。
But Pharaoh said to him, What have you been short of while you have been with me, that you are desiring to go back to your country? And he said, Nothing; but even so, send me back.

神又使以利亚大的儿子利逊兴起，作所罗门的敌人。他先前逃避主人琐巴王哈大底谢。
And God sent another trouble-maker, Rezon, the son of Eliada, who had gone in flight from his lord, Hadadezer, king of Zobah:

大卫击杀琐巴人的时候，利逊招聚了一群人，自己作他们的头目，往大马色居住，在那里作王。
He got some men together and made himself captain of a band of outlaws; and went to Damascus and became king there.

所罗门活着的时候，哈达为患之外，利逊也作以色列的敌人。他恨恶以色列人，且作了亚兰人的王。
He was a trouble to Israel all through the days of Solomon. And this is the damage Hadad did: he was cruel to Israel while he was ruler over Edom.

所罗门的臣仆，尼八的儿子耶罗波安也举手攻击王。他是以法莲支派的洗利达人，他母亲是寡妇，名叫洗鲁阿。
And there was Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite from Zeredah, a servant of Solomon, whose mother was Zeruah, a widow; and his hand was lifted up against the king.

他举手攻击王的缘故，乃由先前所罗门建造米罗，修补他父亲大卫城的破口。
The way in which his hand came to be lifted up against the king was this: Solomon was building the Millo and making good the damaged parts of the town of his father David;

耶罗波安是大有才能的人。所罗门见这少年人殷勤，就派他监管约瑟家的一切工程。
And Jeroboam was an able and responsible man; and Solomon saw that he was a good worker and made him overseer of all the work given to the sons of Joseph.

一日，耶罗波安出了耶路撒冷，示罗人先知亚希雅在路上遇见他。亚希雅身上穿着一件新衣。他们二人在田野，以外并无别人。
Now at that time, when Jeroboam was going out of Jerusalem, the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite came across him on the road; now Ahijah had put on a new robe; and the two of them were by themselves in the open country.

亚希雅将自己穿的那件新衣撕成十二片，
And Ahijah took his new robe in his hands, parting it violently into twelve.

对耶罗波安说，你可以拿十片。耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必将国从所罗门手里夺回，将十个支派赐给你。
And he said to Jeroboam, Take ten of the parts, for this is what the Lord has said: See, I will take the kingdom away from Solomon by force, and will give ten tribes to you;

（我因仆人大卫和我在以色列众支派中所选择的耶路撒冷城的缘故，仍给所罗门留一个支派。）
(But one tribe will be his, because of my servant David, and because of Jerusalem, the town which, out of all the tribes of Israel, I have made mine,)

因为他离弃我，敬拜西顿人的女神亚斯他录，摩押的神基抹，和亚扪人的神米勒公，没有遵从我的道，行我眼中看为正的事，守我的律例典章，像他父亲大卫一样。
Because they are turned away from me to the worship of Ashtoreth, the goddess of the Zidonians, and Chemosh, the god of Moab, and Milcom, the god of the Ammonites; they have not been walking in my ways or doing what is right in my eyes or keeping my laws and my decisions as his father David did.

但我不从他手里将全国夺回。使他终身为君，是因我所拣选的仆人大卫谨守我的诫命律例。
But I will not take the kingdom from him; I will let him be king all the days of his life, because of David my servant, in whom I took delight because he kept my orders and my laws.

我必从他儿子的手里将国夺回，以十个支派赐给你，
But I will take the kingdom from his son, and give it to you.

还留一个支派给他的儿子，使我仆人大卫在我所选择立我名的耶路撒冷城里，在我面前长有灯光。
And one tribe I will give to his son, so that David my servant may have a light for ever burning before me in Jerusalem, the town which I have made mine to put my name there.

我必拣选你，使你照心里一切所愿的，作王治理以色列。
And you I will take, and you will be king over Israel, ruling over whatever is the desire of your soul.

你若听从我一切所吩咐你的，遵行我的道，行我眼中看为正的事，谨守我的律例诫命，像我仆人大卫所行的，我就与你同在，为你立坚固的家，像我为大卫所立的一样，将以色列人赐给你。
And if you give attention to the orders I give you, walking in my ways and doing what is right in my eyes and keeping my laws and my orders as David my servant did; then I will be with you, building up for you a safe house, as I did for David, and I will give Israel to you.

我必因所罗门所行的使大卫后裔受患难，但不至于永远。
(So that I may send trouble for this on the seed of David, but not for ever.)

所罗门因此想要杀耶罗波安。耶罗波安却起身逃往埃及。到了埃及王示撒那里，就住在埃及，直到所罗门死了。
And Solomon was looking for a chance to put Jeroboam to death; but he went in flight to Egypt, to Shishak, king of Egypt, and was in Egypt till the death of Solomon.

所罗门其余的事，凡他所行的和他的智慧都写在所罗门记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all he did, and his wisdom, are they not recorded in the book of the acts of Solomon?

所罗门在耶路撒冷作以色列众人的王共四十年。
And the time Solomon was king in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

所罗门与他列祖同睡，葬在他父亲大卫的城里。他儿子罗波安接续他作王。
And Solomon went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in the town of David his father: and Solomon went to rest with his fathers and Rehoboam his son became king in his place.

罗波安往示剑去。因为以色列人都到了示剑要立他作王。
And Rehoboam went to Shechem, where all Israel had come together to make him king,

尼八的儿子耶罗波安先前躲避所罗门王，逃往埃及，住在那里（他听见这事。）
And, hearing of it, Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who was still in Egypt, where he had gone in flight from Solomon, and was living there, came back to his town Zeredah, in the hill-country of Ephraim;

以色列人打发人去请他来，他就和以色列会众都来见罗波安，对他说，
And all the men of Israel came to Rehoboam and said,

你父亲使我们负重轭，作苦工。现在求你使我们作的苦工，负的重轭轻松些，我们就事奉你。
Your father put a hard yoke on us: if you will make the conditions under which your father kept us down less cruel, and the weight of the yoke he put on us less hard, then we will be your servants.

罗波安对他们说，你们暂且去，第三日再来见我。民就去了。
And he said to them, Go away for three days and then come back to me again. So the people went away.

罗波安之父所罗门在世的日子，有侍立在他面前的老年人，罗波安王和他们商议，说，你们给我出个什么主意，我好回覆这民。
Then King Rehoboam took the opinion of the old men who had been with Solomon his father when he was living, and said, In your opinion, what answer am I to give to this people?

老年人对他说，现在王若服事这民如仆人，用好话回答他们，他们就永远作王的仆人。
And they said to him, If you will be a servant to this people today, caring for them and giving them a gentle answer, then they will be your servants for ever.

王却不用老年人给他出的主意，就和那些与他一同长大，在他面前侍立的少年人商议，
But he gave no attention to the opinion of the old men, and went to the young men of his generation who were waiting before him:

说，这民对我说，你父亲使我们负重轭，求你使我们轻松些。你们给我出个什么主意，我好回覆他们。
And said to them, What is your opinion? What answer are we to give to this people who have said to me, Make less the weight of the yoke which your father put on us?

那同他长大的少年人说，这民对王说，你父亲使我们负重轭，求你使我们轻松些。王要对他们如此说，我的小拇指头比我父亲的腰还粗。
And the young men of his generation said to him, This is the answer to give to the people who came to you saying, Your father put a hard yoke on us; will you make it less? say to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's body;

我父亲使你们负重轭，我必使你们负更重的轭。我父亲用鞭子责打你们，我要用蝎子鞭责打你们。
If my father put a hard yoke on you, I will make it harder: my father gave you punishment with whips, but I will give you blows with snakes.

耶罗波安和众百姓遵着罗波安王所说你们第三日再来见我的那话，第三日他们果然来了。
So all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king had given orders, saying, Come back to me the third day.

王用严厉的话回答百姓，不用老年人给他所出的主意，
And the king gave them a rough answer, giving no attention to the suggestion of the old men;

照着少年人所出的主意对民说，我父亲使你们负重轭，我必使你们负更重的轭。我父亲用鞭子责打你们，我要用蝎子鞭责打你们。
But giving them the answer put forward by the young men, saying, My father made your yoke hard, but I will make it harder; my father gave you punishment with whips, but I will give it with snakes.

王不肯依从百姓，这事乃出于耶和华，为要应验他借示罗人亚希雅对尼八的儿子耶罗波安所说的话。
So the king did not give ear to the people; and this came about by the purpose of the Lord, so that what he had said by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam, son of Nebat, might be effected.

以色列众民见王不依从他们，就对王说，我们与大卫有什么分儿呢？与耶西的儿子并没有关涉。以色列人哪，各回各家去吧。大卫家阿，自己顾自己吧。于是，以色列人都回自己家里去了，
And when all Israel saw that the king would give no attention to them, the people in answer said to the king, What part have we in David? what is our heritage in the son of Jesse? to your tents, O Israel; now see to your people, David. So Israel went away to their tents.

惟独住犹大城邑的以色列人，罗波安仍作他们的王。
(But Rehoboam was still king over those of the children of Israel who were living in the towns of Judah.)

罗波安王差遣掌管服苦之人的亚多兰往以色列人那里去，以色列人就用石头打死他。罗波安王急忙上车，逃回耶路撒冷去了。
Then King Rehoboam sent Adoniram, the overseer of the forced work; and he was stoned to death by all Israel. And King Rehoboam went quickly and got into his carriage to go in flight to Jerusalem.

这样，以色列人背叛大卫家，直到今日。
So Israel was turned away from the family of David to this day.

以色列众人听见耶罗波安回来了，就打发人去请他到会众面前，立他作以色列众人的王。除了犹大支派以外，没有顺从大卫家的。
Now when all Israel had news that Jeroboam had come back, they sent for him to come before the meeting of the people, and made him king over Israel: not one of them was joined to the family of David but only the tribe of Judah.

罗波安来到耶路撒冷，招聚犹大全家和便雅悯支派的人共十八万，都是挑选的战士，要与以色列家争战，好将国夺回，再归所罗门的儿子罗波安。
When Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he got together all the men of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand of his best fighting-men, to make war against Israel and get the kingdom back for Rehoboam, the son of Solomon.

但神的话临到神人示玛雅，说，
But the word of God came to Shemaiah, the man of God, saying,

你去告诉所罗门的儿子犹大王罗波安和犹大，便雅悯全家，并其余的民说，
Say to Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all the men of Judah and Benjamin and the rest of the people:

耶和华如此说，你们不可上去与你们的弟兄以色列人争战。各归各家去吧。因为这事出于我。众人就听从耶和华的话，遵着耶和华的命回去了。
The Lord has said, You are not to go to war against your brothers, the children of Israel; go back, every man to his house, because this thing is my purpose. So they gave ear to the word of the Lord, and went back, as the Lord had said.

耶罗波安在以法莲山地建筑示剑，就住在其中。又从示剑出去，建筑毗努伊勒。
Then Jeroboam made the town of Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim a strong place, and was living there; and from there he went out and did the same to Penuel.

耶罗波安心里说，恐怕这国仍归大卫家。
And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now the kingdom will go back to the family of David:

这民若上耶路撒冷去，在耶和华的殿里献祭，他们的心必归向他们的主犹大王罗波安，就把我杀了，仍归犹大王罗波安。
If the people go up to make offerings in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, their heart will be turned again to their lord, to Rehoboam, king of Judah; and they will put me to death and go back to Rehoboam, king of Judah.

耶罗波安王就筹划定妥，铸造了两个金牛犊，对众民说，以色列人哪，你们上耶路撒冷去实在是难。这就是领你们出埃及地的神。
So after taking thought the king made two oxen of gold; and he said to the people, You have been going up to Jerusalem long enough; see! these are your gods, O Israel, who took you out of the land of Egypt.

他就把牛犊一只安在伯特利，一只安在但。
And he put one in Beth-el and the other in Dan.

这事叫百姓陷在罪里，因为他们往但去拜那牛犊。
And this became a sin in Israel; for the people went to give worship to the one at Beth-el, and to the other at Dan.

耶罗波安在丘坛那里建殿，将那不属利未人的凡民立为祭司。
And he made places for worship at the high places, and made priests, who were not Levites, from among all the people.

耶罗波安定八月十五日为节期，像在犹大的节期一样，自己上坛献祭。他在伯特利也这样向他所铸的牛犊献祭，又将立为丘坛的祭司安置在伯特利。
And Jeroboam gave orders for a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast which is kept in Judah, and he went up to the altar. And in the same way, in Beth-el, he gave offerings to the oxen which he had made, placing in Beth-el the priests of the high places he had made.

他在八月十五日，就是他私自所定的月日，为以色列人立作节期的日子，在伯特利上坛烧香。
He went up to the altar he had made in Beth-el on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, the month fixed by him at his pleasure; and he gave orders for a feast for the people of Israel, and went up to the altar, and there he made the smoke of his offerings go up.

那时，有一个神人奉耶和华的命从犹大来到伯特利。耶罗波安正站在坛旁要烧香。
Then a man of God came from Judah by the order of the Lord to Beth-el, where Jeroboam was by the altar, burning offerings.

神人奉耶和华的命向坛呼叫，说，坛哪，坛哪。耶和华如此说，大卫家里必生一个儿子，名叫约西亚，他必将丘坛的祭司，就是在你上面烧香的，杀在你上面，人的骨头也必烧在你上面。
And by the order of the Lord he made an outcry against the altar, saying, O altar, altar, the Lord has said, From the seed of David will come a child, named Josiah, and on you he will put to death the priests of the high places, who are burning offerings on you, and men's bones will be burned on you.

当日，神人设个预兆，说，这坛必破裂，坛上的灰必倾撒，这是耶和华说的预兆。
The same day he gave them a sign, saying, This is the sign which the Lord has given: See, the altar will be broken and the burned waste on it overturned.

耶罗波安王听见神人向伯特利的坛所呼叫的话，就从坛上伸手，说，拿住他吧。王向神人所伸的手就枯干了，不能弯回。
Then the king, hearing the man of God crying out against the altar at Beth-el, put out his hand from the altar, saying, Take him prisoner. And his hand, stretched out against him, became dead, and he had no power of pulling it back.

坛也破裂了，坛上的灰倾撒了，正如神人奉耶和华的命所设的预兆。
And the altar was broken and the burned waste on it overturned; this was the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the Lord.

王对神人说，请你为我祷告，求耶和华你神的恩典使我的手复原。于是神人祈祷耶和华，王的手就复了原，仍如寻常一样。
Then the king made answer and said to the man of God, Make a prayer now for the grace of the Lord your God, and for me, that my hand may be made well. And in answer to the prayer of the man of God, the king's hand was made well again, as it was before.

王对神人说，请你同我回去吃饭，加添心力，我也必给你赏赐。
And the king said to the man of God, Come with me to my house for food and rest, and I will give you a reward.

神人对王说，你就是把你的宫一半给我，我也不同你进去，也不在这地方吃饭喝水。
But the man of God said to the king, Even if you gave me half of all you have, I would not go in with you, and I would not take food or a drink of water in this place;

因为有耶和华的话嘱咐我，说不可在伯特利吃饭喝水，也不可从你去的原路回来。
For so I was ordered by the word of the Lord, who said, You are not to take food or a drink of water, and you are not to go back the way you came.

于是神人从别的路回去，不从伯特利来的原路回去。
So he went another way, and not by the way he came to Beth-el.

有一个老先知住在伯特利，他儿子们来，将神人当日在伯特利所行的一切事和向王所说的话都告诉了父亲。
Now there was an old prophet living in Beth-el; and one of his sons came and gave him word of all the man of God had done that day in Beth-el, and they gave their father an account of the words he had said to the king.

父亲问他们说，神人从哪条路去了呢？儿子们就告诉他。原来他们看见那从犹大来的神人所去的路。
Then their father said to them, Which way did he go? Now his sons had seen which way the man of God who came from Judah had gone.

老先知就吩咐他儿子们说，你们为我备驴。他们备好了驴，他就骑上，
So the prophet said to his sons, Make ready an ass for me. So they made an ass ready, and he got on it,

去追赶神人，遇见他坐在橡树底下，就问他说，你是从犹大来的神人不是。他说，是。
And went after the man of God, and came up with him while he was seated under an oak-tree. And he said to him, Are you the man of God who came from Judah? And he said, I am.

老先知对他说，请你同我回家吃饭。
Then he said to him, Come back to the house with me and have a meal.

神人说，我不可同你回去进你的家，也不可在这里同你吃饭喝水。
But he said, I may not go back with you or go into your house; and I will not take food or a drink of water with you in this place;

因为有耶和华的话嘱咐我说，你在那里不可吃饭喝水，也不可从你去的原路回来。
For the Lord said to me, You are not to take food or water there, or go back again by the way you came.

老先知对他说，我也是先知，和你一样。有天使奉耶和华的命对我说，你去把他带回你的家，叫他吃饭喝水。这都是老先知诓哄他。
Then he said to him, I am a prophet like you; and an angel said to me by the word of the Lord, Take him back with you and give him food and water. But he said false words to him.

于是神人同老先知回去，在他家里吃饭喝水。
So he went back with him, and had a meal in his house and a drink of water.

二人坐席的时候，耶和华的话临到那带神人回来的先知，
But while they were seated at the table, the word of the Lord came to the prophet who had taken him back;

他就对那从犹大来的神人说，耶和华如此说，你既违背耶和华的话，不遵守耶和华你神的命令，
And crying out to the man of God who came from Judah, he said, The Lord says, Because you have gone against the voice of the Lord, and have not done as you were ordered by the Lord,

反倒回来，在耶和华禁止你吃饭喝水的地方吃了喝了，因此你的尸身不得入你列祖的坟墓。
But have come back, and have taken food and water in this place where he said you were to take no food or water; your dead body will not be put to rest with your fathers.

吃喝完了，老先知为所带回来的先知备驴。
Now after the meal he made ready the ass for him, for the prophet whom he had taken back.

他就去了，在路上有个狮子遇见他，将他咬死，尸身倒在路上，驴站在尸身旁边，狮子也站在尸身旁边。
And he went on his way; but on the road a lion came rushing at him and put him to death; and his dead body was stretched in the road with the ass by its side, and the lion was there by the body.

有人从那里经过，看见尸身倒在路上，狮子站在尸身旁边，就来到老先知所住的城里述说这事。
And some men, going by, saw the body stretched out in the road with the lion by its side; and they came and gave news of it in the town where the old prophet was living.

那带神人回来的先知听见这事，就说，这是那违背了耶和华命令的神人，所以耶和华把他交给狮子。狮子抓伤他，咬死他，是应验耶和华对他说的话。
Then the prophet who had made him come back, hearing it, said, It is the man of God, who went against the word of the Lord; that is why the Lord has given him to the lion to be wounded to death, as the Lord said.

老先知就吩咐他儿子们说，你们为我备驴。他们就备了驴。
And he said to his sons, Make ready the ass for me. And they did so.

他去了，看见神人的尸身倒在路上，驴和狮子站在尸身旁边，狮子却没有吃尸身，也没有抓伤驴。
And he went and saw the dead body stretched out in the road with the ass and the lion by its side: the lion had not taken the body for its food or done any damage to the ass.

老先知就把神人的尸身驮在驴上，带回自己的城里，要哀哭他，葬埋他。
Then the prophet took up the body of the man of God and put it on the ass and took it back; and he came to the town to put the body to rest with weeping.

就把他的尸身葬在自己的坟墓里，哀哭他，说，哀哉。我兄阿。
And he put the body in the resting-place made ready for himself, weeping and sorrowing over it, saying, O my brother!

安葬之后，老先知对他儿子们说，我死了，你们要葬我在神人的坟墓里，使我的尸骨靠近他的尸骨，
And when he had put it to rest, he said to his sons, When I am dead, then you are to put my body into the earth with the body of this man of God, and put me by his bones so that my bones may be kept safe with his bones.

因为他奉耶和华的命，指着伯特利的坛，和撒玛利亚各城有丘坛之殿所说的话必定应验。
For the outcry he made by the word of the Lord against the altar in Beth-el and against all the houses of the high places in the towns of Samaria, will certainly come about.

这事以后，耶罗波安仍不离开他的恶道，将凡民立为丘坛的祭司。凡愿意的，他都分别为圣，立为丘坛的祭司。
After this Jeroboam, not turning back from his evil ways, still made priests for his altars from among all the people; he made a priest of anyone desiring it, so that there might be priests of the high places.

这事叫耶罗波安的家陷在罪里，甚至他的家从地上除灭了。
And this became a sin in the family of Jeroboam, causing it to be cut off and sent to destruction from the face of the earth.

那时，耶罗波安的儿子亚比雅病了。
At that time Abijah, the son of Jeroboam, became ill.

耶罗波安对他的妻说，你可以起来改装，使人不知道你是耶罗波安的妻，往示罗去，在那里有先知亚希雅。他曾告诉我说，你必作这民的王。
And Jeroboam said to his wife, Now come, put on different clothing so that you may not seem to be the wife of Jeroboam, and go to Shiloh; see, Ahijah is there, the prophet who said I would be king over this people.

现在你要带十个饼，与几个薄饼，和一瓶蜜去见他，他必告诉你儿子将要怎样。
And take with you ten cakes of bread and dry cakes and a pot of honey, and go to him: he will give you word of what is to become of the child.

耶罗波安的妻就这样行，起身往示罗去，到了亚希雅的家。亚希雅因年纪老迈，眼目发直，不能看见。
So Jeroboam's wife did so, and got up and went to Shiloh and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah was unable to see, because he was very old.

耶和华先晓谕亚希雅说，耶罗波安的妻要来问你，因她儿子病了，你当如此如此告诉她。她进来的时候必装作别的妇人。
And the Lord had said to Ahijah, The wife of Jeroboam is coming to get news from you about her son, who is ill; give her such and such an answer; for she will make herself seem to be another woman.

她刚进门，亚希雅听见她脚步的响声，就说，耶罗波安的妻，进来吧。你为何装作别的妇人呢？我奉差遣将凶事告诉你。
Then Ahijah, hearing the sound of her footsteps coming in at the door, said, Come in, O wife of Jeroboam; why do you make yourself seem like another? for I am sent to you with bitter news.

你回去告诉耶罗波安说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，我从民中将你高举，立你作我民以色列的君，
Go, say to Jeroboam, These are the words of the Lord, the God of Israel: Though I took you from among the people, lifting you up to be a ruler over my people Israel,

将国从大卫家夺回赐给你。你却不效法我仆人大卫，遵守我的诫命，一心顺从我，行我眼中看为正的事。
And took the kingdom away by force from the seed of David and gave it to you, you have not been like my servant David, who kept my orders, and was true to me with all his heart, doing only what was right in my eyes.

你竟行恶，比那在你以先的更甚，为自己立了别神，铸了偶像，惹我发怒，将我丢在背后。
But you have done evil more than any before you, and have made for yourself other gods, and images of metal, moving me to wrath, and turning your back on me.

因此，我必使灾祸临到耶罗波安的家，将属耶罗波安的男丁，无论困住的，自由的都从以色列中剪除，必除尽耶罗波安的家，如人除尽粪土一般。
So I will send evil on the line of Jeroboam, cutting off from his family every male child, those who are shut up and those who go free in Israel; the family of Jeroboam will be brushed away like a man brushing away waste till it is all gone.

凡属耶罗波安的人，死在城中的必被狗吃，死在田野的必被空中的鸟吃。这是耶和华说的。
Those of the family of Jeroboam who come to death in the town, will become food for the dogs; and those on whom death comes in the open country, will be food for the birds of the air; for the Lord has said it.

所以你起身回家去吧。你的脚一进城，你儿子就必死了。
Up, then! go back to your house; and in the hour when your feet go into the town, the death of the child will take place.

以色列众人必为他哀哭，将他葬埋。凡属耶罗波安的人，惟有他得入坟墓。因为在耶罗波安的家中，只有他向耶和华以色列的神显出善行。
And all Israel will put his body to rest, weeping over him, because he only of the family of Jeroboam will be put into his resting-place in the earth; for of all the family of Jeroboam, in him only has the Lord, the God of Israel, seen some good.

耶和华必另立一王治理以色列。到了日期，他必剪除耶罗波安的家。那日期已经到了。
And the Lord will put up a king over Israel who will send destruction on the family of Jeroboam in that day;

耶和华必击打以色列人，使他们摇动，像水中的芦苇一般。又将他们从耶和华赐给他们列祖的美地上拔出来，分散在大河那边。因为他们作木偶，惹耶和华发怒。
And even now the hand of the Lord has come down on Israel, shaking it like a river-grass in the water; and, uprooting Israel from this good land, which he gave to their fathers, he will send them this way and that on the other side of the River; because they have made for themselves images, moving the Lord to wrath.

因耶罗波安所犯的罪，又使以色列人陷在罪里，耶和华必将以色列人交给仇敌。
And he will give Israel up because of the sins which Jeroboam has done and made Israel do.

耶罗波安的妻起身回去，到了得撒，刚到门槛，儿子就死了。
Then Jeroboam's wife got up and went away and came to Tirzah; and when she came to the doorway of the house, death came to the child.

以色列众人将他葬埋，为他哀哭，正如耶和华借他仆人先知亚希雅所说的话。
And all Israel put his body to rest, weeping over him, as the Lord had said by his servant Ahijah the prophet.

耶罗波安其余的事，他怎样争战，怎样作王，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he made war and how he became king, are recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel.

耶罗波安作王二十二年，就与他列祖同睡。他儿子拿答接续他作王。
And Jeroboam was king for twenty-two years, and was put to rest with his fathers, and Nadab his son became king in his place.

所罗门的儿子罗波安作犹大王。他登基的时候年四十一岁，在耶路撒冷，就是耶和华从以色列众支派中所选择立他名的城，作王十七年。罗波安的母亲名叫拿玛，是亚扪人。
And Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, was king in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and he was king for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the town which the Lord had made his out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there; his mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonite woman.

犹大人行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，犯罪触动他的愤恨，比他们列祖更甚。
And Judah did evil in the eyes of the Lord, and made him more angry than their fathers had done by their sins.

因为他们在各高冈上，各青翠树下筑坛，立柱像和木偶。
For they made high places and upright stones and wood pillars on every high hill and under every green tree;

国中也有娈童。犹大人效法耶和华在以色列人面前所赶出的外邦人，行一切可憎恶的事。
And more than this, there were those in the land who were used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods, doing the same disgusting crimes as the nations which the Lord had sent out before the children of Israel.

罗波安王第五年，埃及王示撒上来攻取耶路撒冷，
Now in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem;

夺了耶和华殿和王宫里的宝物，尽都带走，又夺去所罗门制造的金盾牌。
And took away all the stored wealth from the house of the Lord, and from the king's house, and all the gold body-covers which Solomon had made.

罗波安王制造铜盾牌代替那金盾牌，交给守王宫门的护卫长看守。
So in their place King Rehoboam had other body-covers made of brass, and gave them into the care of the captains of the armed men who were stationed at the door of the king's house.

王每逢进耶和华的殿，护卫兵就拿这盾牌，随后仍将盾牌送回，放在护卫房。
And whenever the king went into the house of the Lord, the armed men went with him taking the body-covers, and then took them back to their room.

罗波安其余的事，凡他所行的，都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

罗波安与耶罗波安时常争战。
And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.

罗波安与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他母亲名叫拿玛，是亚扪人。他儿子亚比央（又名亚比雅）接续他作王。
And Rehoboam went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth with his fathers in the town of David; his mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonite woman. And Abijam his son became king in his place.

尼八的儿子耶罗波安王十八年，亚比央登基作犹大王，
Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, Abijam became king over Judah.

在耶路撒冷作王三年。他母亲名叫玛迦，是押沙龙的女儿。
For three years he was king in Jerusalem: and his mother's name was Maacah, the daughter of Abishalom.

亚比央行他父亲在他以前所行的一切恶，他的心不像他祖大卫的心，诚诚实实地顺服耶和华他的神。
And he did the same sins which his father had done before him: his heart was not completely true to the Lord his God, like the heart of David his father.

然而耶和华他的神因大卫的缘故，仍使他在耶路撒冷有灯光，叫他儿子接续他作王，坚立耶路撒冷。
But because of David, the Lord gave him a light in Jerusalem, making his sons king after him, so that Jerusalem might be safe;

因为大卫除了赫人乌利亚那件事，都是行耶和华眼中看为正的事，一生没有违背耶和华一切所吩咐的。
Because David did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, and never in all his life went against his orders, but only in the question of Uriah the Hittite.

罗波安在世的日子常与耶罗波安争战。
...

亚比央其余的事，凡他所行的，都写在犹大列王记上。亚比央常与耶罗波安争战。
Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

亚比央与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫的城里。他儿子亚撒接续他作王。
Then Abijam went to rest with his fathers, and they put him into the earth in the town of David: and Asa his son became king in his place.

以色列王耶罗波安二十年，亚撒登基作犹大王，
In the twentieth year that Jeroboam was king of Israel, Asa became king over Judah.

在耶路撒冷作王四十一年。他祖母名叫玛迦，是押沙龙的女儿。
And he was king for forty-one years in Jerusalem; his mother's name was Maacah, the daughter of Abishalom.

亚撒效法他祖大卫行耶和华眼中看为正的事，
Asa did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as David his father did.

从国中除去娈童，又除掉他列祖所造的一切偶像。
Those used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods he sent out of the country, and he took away all the images which his fathers had made.

并且贬了他祖母玛迦太后的位，因她造了可憎的偶像亚舍拉。亚撒砍下她的偶像，烧在汲沦溪边，
And he would not let Maacah his mother be queen, because she had made a disgusting image for Asherah; and Asa had the image cut down and burned by the stream Kidron.

只是丘坛还没有废去。亚撒一生却向耶和华存诚实的心。
The high places, however, were not taken away: but still the heart of Asa was true to the Lord all his life.

亚撒将他父亲所分别为圣，与自己所分别为圣的金银和器皿，都奉到耶和华的殿里。
He took into the house of the Lord all the things which his father had made holy, and those which he himself had made holy, silver and gold and vessels.

亚撒和以色列王巴沙在世的日子常常争战。
Now there was war between Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, all their days.

以色列王巴沙上来要攻击犹大，修筑拉玛，不许人从犹大王亚撒那里出入。
And Baasha, king of Israel, went up against Judah, building Ramah, so that no one was able to go out or in to Asa, king of Judah.

于是亚撒将耶和华殿和王宫府库里所剩下的金银都交在他臣仆手中，打发他们往住大马色的亚兰王希旬的孙子，他伯利们的儿子便哈达那里去，
Then Asa took all the silver and gold which was still stored in the Lord's house, and in the king's house, and sent them, in the care of his servants, to Ben-hadad, son of Tabrimmon, son of Rezon, king of Aram, at Damascus, saying,

说，你父曾与我父立约，我与你也要立约。现在我将金银送你为礼物，求你废掉你与以色列王巴沙所立的约，使他离开我。
Let there be an agreement between me and you as there was between my father and your father: see, I have sent you an offering of silver and gold; go and put an end to your agreement with Baasha, king of Israel, so that he may give up attacking me.

便哈达听从亚撒王的话，派军长去攻击以色列的城邑。他们就攻破以云，但，亚伯伯玛迦，基尼烈全境，拿弗他利全境。
So Ben-hadad did as King Asa said, and sent the captains of his armies against the towns of Israel, attacking Ijon and Dan and Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth as far as all the land of Naphtali.

巴沙听见，就停工不修筑拉玛了，仍住在得撒。
And Baasha, hearing of it, put a stop to the building of Ramah, and was living in Tirzah.

于是亚撒王宣告犹大众人，不准一个推辞，吩咐他们将巴沙修筑拉玛所用的石头，木头都运去，用以修筑便雅悯的迦巴和米斯巴。
Then King Asa got all Judah together, making every man come; and they took away the stones and the wood with which Baasha was building Ramah, and King Asa made use of them for building Geba in the land of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

亚撒其余的事，凡他所行的，并他的勇力与他所建筑的城邑，都写在犹大列王记上。亚撒年老的时候，脚上有病。
Now the rest of the acts of Asa, and his power, and all he did, and the towns of which he was the builder, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah? But when he was old he had a disease of the feet.

亚撒与他列祖同睡，葬在他祖大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子约沙法接续他作王。
So Asa went to rest with his fathers and was put into the earth in the town of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚撒第二年，耶罗波安的儿子拿答登基作以色列王共二年，
Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, became king over Israel in the second year that Asa was king of Judah; and he was king of Israel for two years.

拿答行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，行他父亲所行的，犯他父亲使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, copying the evil ways of his father, and the sin which he did and made Israel do.

以萨迦人亚希雅的儿子巴沙背叛拿答，在非利士的基比顿杀了他。那时拿答和以色列众人正围困基比顿。
And Baasha, the son of Ahijah, of the family of Issachar, made a secret design against him, attacking him at Gibbethon, a town of the Philistines; for Nadab and the armies of Israel were making war on Gibbethon.

在犹大王亚撒第三年巴沙杀了他，篡了他的位。
In the third year of the rule of Asa, king of Judah, Baasha put him to death, and became king in his place.

巴沙一作王就杀了耶罗波安的全家，凡有气息的没有留下一个，都灭尽了，正应验耶和华借他仆人示罗人亚希雅所说的话。
And straight away when he became king, he sent destruction on all the offspring of Jeroboam; there was not one living person of all the family of Jeroboam whom he did not put to death, so the word of the Lord, which he said by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite, came about;

这是因为耶罗波安所犯的罪使以色列人陷在罪里，惹动耶和华以色列神的怒气。
Because of the sins which Jeroboam did and made Israel do, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath.

拿答其余的事，凡他所行的，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

亚撒和以色列王巴沙在世的日子常常争战。
And there was war between Asa and Baasha, king of Israel, all their days.

犹大王亚撒第三年，亚希雅的儿子巴沙在得撒登基作以色列众人的王共二十四年。
In the third year of the rule of Asa, king of Judah, Baasha, the son of Ahijah, became king over all Israel in Tirzah, and was king for twenty-four years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，行耶罗波安所行的道，犯他使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, copying the evil ways of Jeroboam and the sin which he made Israel do.

耶和华的话临到哈拿尼的儿子耶户，责备巴沙说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jehu, son of Hanani, protesting against Baasha and saying,

我既从尘埃中提拔你，立你作我民以色列的君，你竟行耶罗波安所行的道，使我民以色列陷在罪里，惹我发怒，
Because I took you up out of the dust, and made you ruler over my people Israel; and you have gone in the ways of Jeroboam, and made my people Israel do evil, moving me to wrath by their sins;

我必除尽你和你的家，使你的家像尼八的儿子耶罗波安的家一样。
Truly, I will see that Baasha and all his family are completely brushed away; I will make your family like the family of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat.

凡属巴沙的人，死在城中的必被狗吃，死在田野的必被空中的鸟吃。
Anyone of the family of Baasha who comes to death in the town, will become food for the dogs; and he to whom death comes in the open country, will be food for the birds of the air.

巴沙其余的事，凡他所行的和他的勇力，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his power, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

巴沙与他列祖同睡，葬在得撒。他儿子以拉接续他作王。
And Baasha went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth at Tirzah; and Elah his son became king in his place.

耶和华的话临到哈拿尼的儿子先知耶户，责备巴沙和他的家，因他行耶和华眼中看为恶的一切事，以他手所作的惹耶和华发怒，像耶罗波安的家一样，又因他杀了耶罗波安的全家。
And the Lord sent his word against Baasha and his family by the mouth of the prophet Jehu, the son of Hanani, because of all the evil he did in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to wrath by the work of his hands, because he was like the family of Jeroboam, and because he put it to death.

犹大王亚撒二十六年，巴沙的儿子以拉在得撒登基作以色列王共二年。
In the twenty-sixth year that Asa was king of Judah, Elah, the son of Baasha, became king of Israel in Tirzah, and he was king for two years.

有管理他一半战车的臣子心利背叛他。当他在得撒家宰亚杂家里喝醉的时候，
And his servant Zimri, captain of half his war-carriages, made secret designs against him: now he was in Tirzah, drinking hard in the house of Arza, controller of the king's house in Tirzah.

心利就进去杀了他，篡了他的位。这是犹大王亚撒二十七年的事。
And Zimri went in and made an attack on him and put him to death, in the twenty-seventh year that Asa was king of Judah, and made himself king in his place.

心利一坐王位就杀了巴沙的全家，连他的亲属，朋友也没有留下一个男丁。
And straight away when he became king and took his place on the seat of the kingdom, he put to death all the family of Baasha: not one male child of his relations or his friends kept his life.

心利这样灭绝巴沙的全家，正如耶和华借先知耶户责备巴沙的话。
So Zimri put to death all the family of Baasha, so that the word which the Lord said against him by the mouth of Jehu the prophet came about;

这是因巴沙和他儿子以拉的一切罪，就是他们使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，以虚无的神惹耶和华以色列神的怒气。
Because of all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, which they did and made Israel do, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath by their foolish acts.

以拉其余的事，凡他所行的，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

犹大王亚撒二十七年，心利在得撒作王七日。那时民正安营围攻非利士的基比顿。
In the twenty-seventh year of Asa, king of Judah, Zimri was king for seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were attacking Gibbethon in the land of the Philistines.

民在营中听说心利背叛，又杀了王，故此以色列众人当日在营中立元帅暗利作以色列王。
And news came to the people in the tents that Zimri had made a secret design and had put the king to death: so all Israel made Omri, the captain of the army, king that day in the tents.

暗利率领以色列众人，从基比顿上去，围困得撒。
Then Omri went up from Gibbethon, with all the army of Israel, and they made an attack on Tirzah, shutting in the town on every side.

心利见城破失，就进了王宫的卫所，放火焚烧宫殿，自焚而死。
And when Zimri saw that the town was taken, he went into the inner room of the king's house, and burning the house over his head, came to his end,

这是因他犯罪，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，行耶罗波安所行的，犯他使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
Because of his sin in doing evil in the eyes of the Lord, in going in the way of Jeroboam and in his sin which he made Israel do.

心利其余的事和他背叛的情形都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and the secret design he made, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

那时，以色列民分为两半，一半随从基纳的儿子提比尼，要立他作王。一半随从暗利。
Then there was a division among the people of Israel; half the people were for making Tibni, son of Ginath, king, and half were supporting Omri.

但随从暗利的民胜过随从基纳的儿子提比尼的民。提比尼死了，暗利就作了王。
But the supporters of Omri overcame those who were on the side of Tibni, the son of Ginath; and death came to Tibni and to his brother Joram at that time: and Omri became king in the place of Tibni.

犹大王亚撒三十一年，暗利登基作以色列王共十二年。在得撒作王六年。
In the thirty-first year of Asa, king of Judah, Omri became king over Israel, and he was king for twelve years; for six years he was ruling in Tirzah.

暗利用二他连得银子向撒玛买了撒玛利亚山，在山上造城，就按着山的原主撒玛的名，给所造的城起名叫撒玛利亚。
He got the hill Samaria from Shemer for the price of two talents of silver, and he made a town there, building it on the hill and naming it Samaria, after Shemer the owner of the hill.

暗利行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，比他以前的列王作恶更甚。
And Omri did evil in the eyes of the Lord, even worse than all those before him,

因他行了尼八的儿子耶罗波安所行的，犯他使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，以虚无的神惹耶和华以色列神的怒气。
Copying all the evil ways of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and all the sins he did and made Israel do, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath by their foolish ways.

暗利其余的事和他所显出的勇力都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts which Omri did, and his great power, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

暗利与他列祖同睡，葬在撒玛利亚。他儿子亚哈接续他作王。
So Omri went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in Samaria; and Ahab his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚撒三十八年，暗利的儿子亚哈登基作了以色列王。暗利的儿子亚哈在撒玛利亚作以色列王二十二年。
In the thirty-eighth year that Asa was king of Judah, Ahab, the son of Omri, became king over Israel; and Ahab was king in Samaria for twenty-two years.

暗利的儿子亚哈行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，比他以前的列王更甚，
And Ahab, the son of Omri, did evil in the eyes of the Lord, even worse than all who went before him.

犯了尼八的儿子耶罗波安所犯的罪。他还以为轻，又娶了西顿王谒巴力的女儿耶洗别为妻，去事奉敬拜巴力，
And as if copying the evil ways of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, was a small thing for him, he took as his wife Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of Zidon, and became a servant and worshipper of Baal.

在撒玛利亚建造巴力的庙，在庙里为巴力筑坛。
And he put up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal which he had made in Samaria.

亚哈又作亚舍拉，他所行的惹耶和华以色列神的怒气，比他以前的以色列诸王更甚。
And Ahab made an image of Asherah and did more than all the kings of Israel before him to make the Lord, the God of Israel, angry.

亚哈在位的时候，有伯特利人希伊勒重修耶利哥城。立根基的时候，丧了长子亚比兰。安门的时候，丧了幼子西割，正如耶和华借嫩的儿子约书亚所说的话。
In his days Hiel made Jericho; he put its base in position at the price of Abiram, his oldest son, and he put its doors in place at the price of his youngest son Segub; even as the Lord had said by Joshua, the son of Nun.

基列寄居的提斯比人以利亚对亚哈说，我指着所事奉永生耶和华以色列的神起誓，这几年我若不祷告，必不降露，不下雨。
And Elijah the Tishbite, of Tishbe in Gilead, said to Ahab, By the living Lord, the God of Israel, whose servant I am, there will be no dew or rain in these years, but only at my word.

耶和华的话临到以利亚说，
Then the word of the Lord came to him, saying,

你离开这里往东去，藏在约旦河东边的基立溪旁。
Go from here in the direction of the east, and keep yourself in a secret place by the stream Cherith, east of Jordan.

你要喝那溪里的水，我已吩咐乌鸦在那里供养你。
The water of the stream will be your drink, and by my orders the ravens will give you food there.

于是以利亚照着耶和华的话，去住在约旦河东的基立溪旁。
So he went and did as the Lord said, living by the stream Cherith, east of Jordan.

乌鸦早晚给他叼饼和肉来，他也喝那溪里的水。
And the ravens took him bread in the morning and meat in the evening; and the water of the stream was his drink.

过了些日子，溪水就干了，因为雨没有下在地上。
Now after a time the stream became dry, because there was no rain in the land.

耶和华的话临到他说，
Then the word of the Lord came to him, saying,

你起身往西顿的撒勒法去（撒勒法与路加福音四章二十六节同），住在那里。我已吩咐那里的一个寡妇供养你。
Up! go now to Zarephath, in Zidon, and make your living-place there; I have given orders to a widow woman there to see that you have food.

以利亚就起身往撒勒法去。到了城门，见有一个寡妇在那里捡柴，以利亚呼叫她说，求你用器皿取点水来给我喝。
So he got up and went to Zarephath; and when he came to the door of the town, he saw a widow woman getting sticks together; and crying out to her he said, Will you give me a little water in a vessel for my drink?

她去取水的时候，以利亚又呼叫她说，也求你拿点饼来给我。
And when she was going to get it, he said to her, And get me with it a small bit of bread.

她说，我指着永生耶和华你的神起誓，我没有饼，坛内只有一把面，瓶里只有一点油。我现在找两根柴，回家要为我和我儿子作饼。我们吃了，死就死吧。
Then she said, By the life of the Lord your God, I have nothing but a little meal in my store, and a drop of oil in the bottle; and now I am getting two sticks together so that I may go in and make it ready for me and my son, so that we may have a meal before our death.

以利亚对她说，不要惧怕。可以照你所说的去作吧。只要先为我作一个小饼拿来给我，然后为你和你的儿子作饼。
And Elijah said to her, Have no fear; go and do as you have said, but first make me a little cake of it and come and give it to me, and then make something for yourself and your son.

因为耶和华以色列的神如此说，坛内的面必不减少，瓶里的油必不缺短，直到耶和华使雨降在地上的日子。
For this is the word of the Lord, the God of Israel: The store of meal will not come to an end, and the bottle will never be without oil, till the day when the Lord sends rain on the earth.

妇人就照以利亚的话去行。她和她家中的人，并以利亚，吃了许多日子。
So she went and did as Elijah said; and she and he and her family had food for a long time.

坛内的面果不减少，瓶里的油也不缺短，正如耶和华借以利亚所说的话。
The store of meal did not come to an end, and the bottle was never without oil, as the Lord had said by the mouth of Elijah.

这事以后，作那家主母的妇人，她儿子病了。病得甚重，以致身无气息。
Now after this, the son of the woman of the house became ill, so ill that there was no breath in him.

妇人对以利亚说，神人哪，我与你何干？你竟到我这里来，使神想念我的罪，以致我的儿子死呢？
And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with you, O man of God? have you come to put God in mind of my sin, and to put my son to death?

以利亚对她说，把你儿子交给我。以利亚就从妇人怀中将孩子接过来，抱到他所住的楼中，放在自己的床上，
And he said to her, Give your son to me. And lifting him out of her arms, he took him up to his room and put him down on his bed.

就求告耶和华说，耶和华我的神阿，我寄居在这寡妇的家里，你就降祸与她，使她的儿子死了吗？
And crying to the Lord he said, O Lord my God, have you sent evil even on the widow whose guest I am, by causing her son's death?

以利亚三次伏在孩子的身上，求告耶和华说，耶和华我的神阿，求你使这孩子的灵魂仍入他的身体。
And stretching herself out on the child three times, he made his prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord my God, be pleased to let this child's life come back to him again.

耶和华应允以利亚的话，孩子的灵魂仍入他的身体，他就活了。
And the Lord gave ear to the voice of Elijah, and the child's spirit came into him again, and he came back to life.

以利亚将孩子从楼上抱下来，进屋子交给他母亲，说，看哪，你的儿子活了。
And Elijah took the child down from his room into the house and gave him to his mother and said to her, See, your son is living.

妇人对以利亚说，现在我知道你是神人，耶和华借你口所说的话是真的。
Then the woman said to Elijah, Now I am certain that you are a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in your mouth is true.

过了许久，到第三年，耶和华的话临到以利亚说，你去，使亚哈得见你。我要降雨在地上。
Now after a long time, the word of the Lord came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, Go and let Ahab see you, so that I may send rain on the earth.

以利亚就去，要使亚哈得见他。那时，撒玛利亚有大饥荒。
So Elijah went to let Ahab see him. Now there was no food to be had in Samaria.

亚哈将他的家宰俄巴底召了来。俄巴底甚是敬畏耶和华，
And Ahab sent for Obadiah, the controller of the king's house. (Now Obadiah had the fear of the Lord before him greatly;

耶洗别杀耶和华众先知的时候，俄巴底将一百个先知藏了，每五十人藏在一个洞里，拿饼和水供养他们。
For when Jezebel was cutting off the prophets of the Lord, Obadiah took a hundred of them, and kept them secretly in a hole in the rock, fifty at a time, and gave them bread and water.)

亚哈对俄巴底说，我们走遍这地，到一切水泉旁和一切溪边，或者找得着青草，可以救活骡马，免得绝了牲畜。
And Ahab said to Obadiah, Come, let us go through all the country, to all the fountains of water and all the rivers, and see if there is any grass to be had for the horses and the transport beasts, so that we may be able to keep some of the beasts from destruction.

于是二人分地游行，亚哈独走一路，俄巴底独走一路。
So they went through all the country, covering it between them; Ahab went in one direction by himself, and Obadiah went in another by himself.

俄巴底在路上恰与以利亚相遇，俄巴底认出他来，就俯伏在地，说，你是我主以利亚不是。
And while Obadiah was on his way, he came face to face with Elijah; and seeing who it was, he went down on his face and said, Is it you, my lord Elijah?

回答说，是。你去告诉你主人说，以利亚在这里。
And Elijah in answer said, It is I; now go and say to your lord, Elijah is here.

俄巴底说，仆人有什么罪，你竟要将我交在亚哈手里，使他杀我呢？
And he said, What sin have I done, that you would give up your servant into the hand of Ahab, and be the cause of my death?

我指着永生耶和华你的神起誓，无论哪一邦哪一国，我主都打发人去找你。若说你没有在那里，就必使那邦那国的人起誓说，实在是找不着你。
By the life of the Lord your God, there is not a nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent in search of you; and when they said, He is not here; he made them take an oath that they had not seen you.

现在你说，要去告诉你主人说，以利亚在这里。
And now you say, Go, say to your lord, Elijah is here.

恐怕我一离开你，耶和华的灵就提你到我所不知道的地方去。这样，我去告诉亚哈，他若找不着你，就必杀我。仆人却是自幼敬畏耶和华的。
And straight away, when I have gone from you, the spirit of the Lord will take you away, I have no idea where, so that when I come and give word to Ahab, and he sees you not, he will put me to death: though I, your servant, have been a worshipper of the Lord from my earliest years.

耶洗别杀耶和华众先知的时候，我将耶和华的一百个先知藏了，每五十人藏在一个洞里，拿饼和水供养他们，岂没有人将这事告诉我主吗？
Has my lord not had word of what I did when Jezebel was putting the Lord's prophets to death? how I kept a hundred of them in a secret hole in the rock, fifty at a time, and gave them bread and water?

现在你说，要去告诉你主人说，以利亚在这里，他必杀我。
And now you say, Go and say to your Lord, Elijah is here; and he will put me to death.

以利亚说，我指着所事奉永生的万军之耶和华起誓，我今日必使亚哈得见我。
And Elijah said, By the life of the Lord of armies, whose servant I am, I will certainly let him see me today.

于是俄巴底去迎着亚哈，告诉他。亚哈就去迎着以利亚。
So Obadiah went to Ahab and gave him the news; and Ahab went to see Elijah.

亚哈见了以利亚，便说，使以色列遭灾的就是你吗？
And when he saw Elijah, Ahab said to him, Is it you, you troubler of Israel?

以利亚说，使以色列遭灾的不是我，乃是你和你父家。因为你们离弃耶和华的诫命，去随从巴力。
Then he said in answer, I have not been troubling Israel, but you and your family; because, turning away from the orders of the Lord, you have gone after the Baals.

现在你当差遣人，招聚以色列众人和事奉巴力的那四百五十个先知，并耶洗别所供养事奉亚舍拉的那四百个先知，使他们都上迦密山去见我。
Now send, and get Israel together before me at Mount Carmel, with the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal who get their food at Jezebel's table.

亚哈就差遣人招聚以色列众人和先知都上迦密山。
So Ahab sent for all the children of Israel, and got the prophets together at Mount Carmel.

以利亚前来对众民说，你们心持两意要到几时呢？若耶和华是神，就当顺从耶和华。若巴力是神，就当顺从巴力。众民一言不答。
And Elijah came near to all the people and said, How long will you go on balancing between two opinions? if the Lord is God, then give worship to him; but if Baal, give worship to him. And the people said not a word in answer.

以利亚对众民说，作耶和华先知的只剩下我一个人。巴力的先知却有四百五十个人。
Then Elijah said to the people, I, even I, am the only living prophet of the Lord; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.

当给我们两只牛犊，巴力的先知可以挑选一只，切成块子，放在柴上，不要点火。我也预备一只牛犊放在柴上，也不点火。
Now, let them give us two oxen; and let them take one for themselves, and have it cut up, and put it on the wood, but put no fire under it; I will get the other ox ready, and put it on the wood, and put no fire under it.

你们求告你们神的名，我也求告耶和华的名。那降火显应的神，就是神。众民回答说，这话甚好。
And do you make prayers to your god, and I will make a prayer to the Lord: and it will be clear that the one who gives an answer by fire is God. And all the people in answer said, It is well said.

以利亚对巴力的先知说，你们既是人多，当先挑选一只牛犊，预备好了，就求告你们神的名，却不要点火。
Then Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, Take one ox for yourselves and get it ready first, for there are more of you; and make your prayers to your god, but put no fire under.

他们将所得的牛犊预备好了，从早晨到午间，求告巴力的名说，巴力阿，求你应允我们。却没有声音，没有应允的。他们在所筑的坛四围踊跳。
So they took the ox which was given them, and made it ready, crying out to Baal from morning till the middle of the day, and saying, O Baal, give ear to us. But there was no voice and no answer. And they were jumping up and down before the altar they had made.

到了正午，以利亚嬉笑他们，说，大声求告吧。因为他是神，他或默想，或走到一边，或行路，或睡觉，你们当叫醒他。
And in the middle of the day, Elijah made sport of them, saying, Give louder cries, for he is a god; he may be deep in thought, or he may have gone away for some purpose, or he may be on a journey, or by chance he is sleeping and has to be made awake.

他们大声求告，按着他们的规矩，用刀枪自割，自刺，直到身体流血。
So they gave loud cries, cutting themselves with knives and swords, as was their way, till the blood came streaming out all over them.

从午后直到献晚祭的时候，他们狂呼乱叫，却没有声音，没有应允的，也没有理会的。
And from the middle of the day they went on with their prayers till the time of the offering; but there was no voice, or any answer, or any who gave attention to them.

以利亚对众民说，你们到我这里来。众民就到他那里。他便重修已经毁坏耶和华的坛。
Then Elijah said to all the people, Come near to me; and all the people came near. And he put up again the altar of the Lord which had been broken down.

以利亚照雅各子孙支派的数目，取了十二块石头（耶和华的话曾临到雅各说，你的名要叫以色列），
And Elijah took twelve stones, the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the Lord had said, Israel will be your name:

用这些石头为耶和华的名筑一座坛，在坛的四围挖沟，可容谷种二细亚，
And with the stones he made an altar to the name of the Lord; and he made a deep drain all round the altar, great enough to take two measures of seed.

又在坛上摆好了柴，把牛犊切成块子放在柴上，对众人说，你们用四个桶盛满水，倒在燔祭和柴上。
And he put the wood in order, and, cutting up the ox, put it on the wood. Then he said, Get four vessels full of water and put it on the burned offering and on the wood. And he said, Do it a second time, and they did it a second time;

又说，倒第二次。他们就倒第二次。又说，倒第三次。他们就倒第三次。
And he said, Do it a third time, and they did it a third time.

水流在坛的四围，沟里也满了水。
And the water went all round the altar, till the drain was full.

到了献晚祭的时候，先知以利亚近前来，说，亚伯拉罕，以撒，以色列的神，耶和华阿，求你今日使人知道你是以色列的神，也知道我是你的仆人，又是奉你的命行这一切事。
Then at the time of the offering, Elijah the prophet came near and said, O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it be seen this day that you are God in Israel, and that I am your servant, and that I have done all these things by your order.

耶和华阿，求你应允我，应允我。使这民知道你耶和华是神，又知道是你叫这民的心回转。
Give me an answer, O Lord, give me an answer, so that this people may see that you are God, and that you have made their hearts come back again.

于是，耶和华降下火来，烧尽燔祭，木柴，石头，尘土，又烧干沟里的水。
Then the fire of the Lord came down, burning up the offering and the wood and the stones and the dust, and drinking up the water in the drain.

众民看见了，就俯伏在地，说，耶和华是神。耶和华是神。
And when the people saw it, they all went down on their faces, and said, The Lord, he is God, the Lord, he is God.

以利亚对他们说，拿住巴力的先知，不容一人逃脱。众人就拿住他们。以利亚带他们到基顺河边，在那里杀了他们。
And Elijah said to them, Take the prophets of Baal, let not one of them get away. So they took them, and Elijah made them go down to the stream Kishon, and put them to death there.

以利亚对亚哈说，你现在可以上去吃喝，因为有多雨的响声了。
Then Elijah said to Ahab, Up! take food and drink, for there is a sound of much rain.

亚哈就上去吃喝。以利亚上了迦密山顶，屈身在地，将脸伏在两膝之中。
So Ahab went up to have food and drink, while Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he went down on the earth, putting his face between his knees.

对仆人说，你上去，向海观看。仆人就上去观看，说，没有什么。他说，你再去观看。如此七次。
And he said to his servant, Go now, and take a look in the direction of the sea. And he went up, and after looking said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times; and he went seven times.

第七次仆人说，我看见有一小片云从海里上来，不过如人手那样大。以利亚说，你上去告诉亚哈，当套车下去，免得被雨阻挡。
And the seventh time he said, I see a cloud coming up out of the sea, as small as a man's hand. Then he said, Go up and say to Ahab, Get your carriage ready and go down or the rain will keep you back.

霎时间，天因风云黑暗，降下大雨。亚哈就坐车往耶斯列去了。
And after a very little time, the heaven became black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab went in his carriage to Jezreel.

耶和华的灵（原文作手）降在以利亚身上，他就束上腰，奔在亚哈前头，直到耶斯列的城门。
And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he made himself strong, and went running before Ahab till they came to Jezreel.

亚哈将以利亚一切所行的和他用刀杀众先知的事都告诉耶洗别。
Ahab gave Jezebel news of all Elijah had done, and how he had put all the prophets to death with the sword.

耶洗别就差遣人去见以利亚，告诉他说，明日约在这时候，我若不使你的性命像那些人的性命一样，愿神明重重地降罚与我。
Then Jezebel sent a servant to Elijah, saying, May the gods' punishment be on me if I do not make your life like the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time.

以利亚见这光景就起来逃命，到了犹大的别是巴，将仆人留在那里，
And he got up, fearing for his life, and went in flight, and came to Beer-sheba in Judah, parting there from his servant;

自己在旷野走了一日的路程，来到一棵罗腾树下（罗腾，小树名，松类。下同），就坐在那里求死，说，耶和华阿，罢了。求你取我的性命，因为我不胜于我的列祖。
While he himself went a day's journey into the waste land, and took a seat under a broom-plant, desiring for himself only death; for he said, It is enough: now, O Lord, take away my life, for I am no better than my fathers.

他就躺在罗腾树下，睡着了。有一个天使拍他，说，起来吃吧。
And stretching himself on the earth, he went to sleep under the broom-plant; but an angel, touching him, said to him, Get up and have some food.

他观看，见头旁有一瓶水与炭火烧的饼，他就吃了喝了，仍然躺下。
And looking up, he saw by his head a cake cooked on the stones and a bottle of water. So he took food and drink and went to sleep again.

耶和华的使者第二次来拍他，说，起来吃吧。因为你当走的路甚远。
And the angel of the Lord came again a second time, and touching him said, Get up and have some food, or the journey will be overmuch for your strength.

他就起来吃了喝了，仗着这饮食的力，走了四十昼夜，到了神的山，就是何烈山。
So he got up and took food and drink, and in the strength of that food he went on for forty days and nights, to Horeb, the mountain of God.

他在那里进了一个洞，就住在洞中。耶和华的话临到他说，以利亚阿，你在这里作什么。
And there he went into a hole in the rock for the night; then the word of the Lord came to him, saying, What are you doing here, Elijah?

他说，我为耶和华万军之神大发热心。因为以色列人背弃了你的约，毁坏了你的坛，用刀杀了你的先知，只剩下我一个人，他们还要寻索我的命。
And he said, I have been burning for the honour of the Lord, the God of armies; for the children of Israel have not kept your agreement; they have made destruction of your altars, and have put your prophets to death with the sword: till I, even I, am the only one living; and now they are attempting to take away my life.

耶和华说，你出来站在山上，在我面前。那时耶和华从那里经过，在他面前有烈风大作，崩山碎石，耶和华却不在风中。风后地震，耶和华却不在其中。
Then he said, Go out and take your place on the mountain before the Lord. Then the Lord went by, and mountains were parted by the force of a great wind, and rocks were broken before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind. And after the wind there was an earth-shock, but the Lord was not in the earth-shock.

地震后有火，耶和华也不在火中。火后有微小的声音。
And after the earth-shock a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire, the sound of a soft breath.

以利亚听见，就用外衣蒙上脸，出来站在洞口。有声音向他说，以利亚阿，你在这里作什么。
And Elijah, hearing it, went out, covering his face with his robe, and took his place in the opening of the hole. And there a voice came to him saying, What are you doing here, Elijah?

他说，我为耶和华万军之神大发热心。因为以色列人背弃了你的约，毁坏了你的坛，用刀杀了你的先知，只剩下我一个人，他们还要寻索我的命。
And he said, I have been burning for the honour of the Lord, the God of armies; for the children of Israel have not kept your agreement; they have had your altars broken down, and have put your prophets to death with the sword: till I, even I, am the only one living; and now they are attempting to take away my life.

耶和华对他说，你回去，从旷野往大马色去。到了那里，就要膏哈薛作亚兰王，
And the Lord said to him, Go back on your way through the waste land to Damascus; and when you come there, put the holy oil on Hazael to make him king over Aram;

又膏宁示的孙子耶户作以色列王，并膏亚伯米何拉人沙法的儿子以利沙作先知接续你。
And on Jehu, son of Nimshi, making him king over Israel; and on Elisha, the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah, to be prophet in your place.

将来躲避哈薛之刀的，必被耶户所杀。躲避耶户之刀的，必被以利沙所杀。
And it will come about that the man who gets away safe from the sword of Hazael, Jehu will put to death; and whoever gets away safe from the sword of Jehu, Elisha will put to death.

但我在以色列人中为自己留下七千人，是未曾向巴力屈膝的，未曾与巴力亲嘴的。
But I will keep safe seven thousand in Israel, all those whose knees have not been bent to Baal, and whose mouths have given him no kisses.

于是，以利亚离开那里走了，遇见沙法的儿子以利沙耕地。在他前头有十二对牛，自己赶着第十二对。以利亚到他那里去，将自己的外衣搭在他身上。
So he went away from there and came across Elisha, the son of Shaphat, ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen, he himself walking with the twelfth; and Elijah went up to him and put his robe on him.

以利沙就离开牛，跑到以利亚那里，说，求你容我先与父母亲嘴，然后我便跟随你。以利亚对他说，你回去吧，我向你作了什么呢？
And letting the oxen be where they were, he came running after Elijah, and said, Only let me give a kiss to my father and mother, and then I will come after you. But he said to him, Go back again; for what have I done to you?

以利沙就离开他回去，宰了一对牛，用套牛的器具煮肉给民吃，随后就起身跟随以利亚，服事他。
And he went back, and took the oxen and put them to death, and cooking their flesh with the yokes of the oxen, he gave the people a feast. Then he got up and went after Elijah and became his servant.

亚兰王便哈达聚集他的全军，率领三十二个王，带着车马上来围攻撒玛利亚。
Now Ben-hadad, king of Aram, got all his army together, and thirty-two kings with him, and horses and carriages of war; he went up and made war on Samaria, shutting it in.

又差遣使者进城见以色列王亚哈，对他说，便哈达如此说，
And he sent representatives into the town to Ahab, king of Israel;

你的金银都要归我，你妻子儿女中最美的也要归我。
And they said to him, Ben-hadad says, Your silver and your gold are mine; and your wives and children are mine.

以色列王回答说，我主我王阿，可以依着你的话，我与我所有的都归你。
And the king of Israel sent him an answer saying, As you say, my lord king, I am yours with all I have.

使者又来说，便哈达如此说，我已差遣人去见你，要你将你的金银，妻子，儿女都给我。
Then the representatives came back again, and said, These are the words of Ben-hadad: I sent to you saying, Give up to me your silver and your gold, your wives and your children;

但明日约在这时候，我还要差遣臣仆到你那里，搜查你的家和你仆人的家，将你眼中一切所喜爱的都拿了去。
But I will send my servants to you tomorrow about this time, to make a search through your house and the houses of your people, and everything which is pleasing in your eyes they will take away in their hands.

以色列王召了国中的长老来，对他们说，请你们看看，这人是怎样地谋害我，他先差遣人到我这里来，要我的妻子，儿女，和金银，我并没有推辞他。
Then the king of Israel sent for all the responsible men of the land, and said, Now will you take note and see the evil purpose of this man: he sent for my wives and my children, my silver and my gold, and I did not keep them back.

长老和百姓对王说，不要听从他，也不要应允他。
And all the responsible men and the people said to him, Do not give attention to him or do what he says.

故此，以色列王对便哈达的使者说，你们告诉我主我王说，王头一次差遣人向仆人所要的，仆人都依从。但这次所要的，我不能依从。使者就去回覆便哈达。
So he said to the representatives of Ben-hadad, Say to my lord the king, All the orders you sent the first time I will do; but this thing I may not do. And the representatives went back with this answer.

便哈达又差遣人去见亚哈说，撒玛利亚的尘土若够跟从我的人每人捧一捧的，愿神明重重地降罚与我。
Then Ben-hadad sent to him, saying, May the gods' punishment be on me if there is enough of the dust of Samaria for all the people at my feet to take some in their hands.

以色列王说，你告诉他说，才顶盔贯甲的，休要像摘盔卸甲的夸口。
And the king of Israel said in answer, Say to him, The time for loud talk is not when a man is putting on his arms, but when he is taking them off.

便哈达和诸王正在帐幕里喝酒，听见这话，就对他臣仆说，摆队吧。他们就摆队攻城。
Now when this answer was given to Ben-hadad, he was drinking with the kings in the tents, and he said to his men, Take up your positions. So they put themselves in position for attacking the town.

有一个先知来见以色列王亚哈，说，耶和华如此说，这一大群人你看见了吗？今日我必将他们交在你手里，你就知道我是耶和华。
Then a prophet came up to Ahab, king of Israel, and said, The Lord says, Have you seen all this great army? See, I will give it into your hands today, and you will see that I am the Lord.

亚哈说，借着谁呢？他回答说，耶和华说，借着跟从省长的少年人。亚哈说，要谁率领呢？他说，要你亲自率领。
And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, The Lord says, By the servants of the chiefs who are over the divisions of the land. Then he said, By whom is the fighting to be started? And he made answer, By you.

于是亚哈数点跟从省长的少年人，共有二百三十二名，后又数点以色列的众兵，共有七千名。
Then he got together the servants of all the chiefs who were over the divisions of the land, two hundred and thirty-two of them; and after them, he got together all the people, all the children of Israel, seven thousand.

午间，他们就出城。便哈达和帮助他的三十二个王正在帐幕里痛饮。
And in the middle of the day they went out. But Ben-hadad was drinking in the tents with the thirty-two kings who were helping him.

跟从省长的少年人先出城。便哈达差遣人去探望，他们回报说，有人从撒玛利亚出来了。
And the servants of the chiefs who were over the divisions of the land went forward first; and when Ben-hadad sent out, they gave him the news, saying, Men have come out from Samaria.

他说，他们若为讲和出来，要活捉他们。若为打仗出来，也要活捉他们。
And he said, If they have come out for peace, take them living, and if they have come out for war, take them living.

跟从省长的少年人出城，军兵跟随他们。
So the servants of the chiefs of the divisions of the land went out of the town, with the army coming after them.

各人遇见敌人就杀。亚兰人逃跑，以色列人追赶他们。亚兰王便哈达骑着马和马兵一同逃跑。
And every one of them put his man to death, and the Aramaeans went in flight with Israel after them; and Ben-hadad, king of Aram, got away safely on a horse with his horsemen.

以色列王出城攻打车马，大大击杀亚兰人。
And the king of Israel went out and took the horses and the war-carriages, and made great destruction among the Aramaeans.

那先知来见以色列王，对他说，你当自强，留心怎样防备。因为到明年这时候，亚兰王必上来攻击你。
Then the prophet came up to the king of Israel, and said to him, Now make yourself strong, and take care what you do, or a year from now the king of Aram will come up against you again.

亚兰王的臣仆对亚兰王说，以色列人的神是山神，所以他们胜过我们。但在平原与他们打仗，我们必定得胜。
Then the king of Aram's servants said to him, Their god is a god of the hills; that is why they were stronger than we: but if we make an attack on them in the lowlands, we will certainly be stronger than they.

王当这样行，把诸王革去，派军长代替他们，
This is what you have to do: take away the kings from their positions, and put captains in their places;

又照着王丧失军兵之数，再招募一军，马补马，车补车，我们在平原与他们打仗，必定得胜。王便听臣仆的话去行。
And get together another army like the one which came to destruction, horse for horse, and carriage for carriage; and let us make war on them in the lowlands, and certainly we will be stronger than they. And he gave ear to what they said, and did so.

次年，便哈达果然点齐亚兰人上亚弗去，要与以色列人打仗。
So, a year later, Ben-hadad got the Aramaeans together and went up to Aphek to make war on Israel.

以色列人也点齐军兵，预备食物，迎着亚兰人出去，对着他们安营，好像两小群山羊羔。亚兰人却满了地面。
And the children of Israel got themselves together, and food was made ready and they went against them; the tents of the children of Israel were like two little flocks of goats before them, but all the country was full of the Aramaeans.

有神人来见以色列王，说，耶和华如此说，亚兰人既说我耶和华是山神，不是平原的神，所以我必将这一大群人都交在你手中，你们就知道我是耶和华。
And a man of God came up and said to the king of Israel, The Lord says, Because the Aramaeans have said, The Lord is a god of the hills and not of the valleys; I will give all this great army into your hands, and you will see that I am the Lord.

以色列人与亚兰人相对安营七日，到第七日两军交战。那一日以色列人杀了亚兰人步兵十万，
Now the two armies kept their positions facing one another for seven days. And on the seventh day the fight was started; and the children of Israel put to the sword a hundred thousand Aramaean footmen in one day.

其余的逃入亚弗城。城墙塌倒，压死剩下的二万七千人。便哈达也逃入城，藏在严密的屋子里。
But the rest went in flight to Aphek, into the town, where a wall came down on the twenty-seven thousand who were still living. And Ben-hadad went in flight into the town, into an inner room.

他的臣仆对他说，我们听说以色列王都是仁慈的王，现在我们不如腰束麻布，头套绳索，出去投降以色列王，或者他存留王的性命。
Then his servants said to him, It is said that the kings of Israel are full of mercy: let us then put on haircloth, and cords on our heads, and go to the king of Israel; it may be that he will give you your life.

于是他们腰束麻布，头套绳索，去见以色列王，说，王的仆人便哈达说，求王存留我的性命。亚哈说，他还活着吗？他是我的兄弟。
So they put on haircloth, and cords on their heads, and came to the king of Israel and said, Your servant Ben-hadad says, Let me now keep my life. And he said, Is he still living? he is my brother.

这些人留心探出他的口气来，便急忙就着他的话说，便哈达是王的兄弟。王说，你们去请他来。便哈达出来见王，王就请他上车。
Now the men took it as a sign, and quickly took up his words; and they said, Ben-hadad is your brother. Then he said, Go and get him. So Ben-hadad came out to him and he made him get up into his carriage.

便哈达对王说，我父从你父那里所夺的城邑，我必归还。你可以在大马色立街市，像我父在撒玛利亚所立的一样。亚哈说，我照此立约，放你回去，就与他立约，放他去了。
And Ben-hadad said to him, The towns my father took from your father I will give back; and you may make streets for yourself in Damascus as my father did in Samaria. And as for me, at the price of this agreement you will let me go. So he made an agreement with him and let him go.

有先知的一个门徒奉耶和华的命对他的同伴说，你打我吧。那人不肯打他。
And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said to his neighbour by the word of the Lord, Give me a wound. But the man would not.

他就对那人说，你既不听从耶和华的话，你一离开我，必有狮子咬死你。那人一离开他，果然遇见狮子，把他咬死了。
Then he said to him, Because you have not given ear to the voice of the Lord, straight away when you have gone from me a lion will put you to death. And when he had gone, straight away a lion came rushing at him and put him to death.

先知的门徒又遇见一个人，对他说，你打我吧。那人就打他，将他打伤。
Then he came across another man, and said, Give me a wound. And the man gave him a blow wounding him.

他就去了，用头巾蒙眼，改换面目，在路旁等候王。
So the prophet went away, and pulling his head-band over his eyes to keep his face covered, took his place by the road waiting for the king.

王从那里经过，他向王呼叫说，仆人在阵上的时候，有人带了一个人来，对我说，你看守这人，若把他失了，你的性命必代替他的性命。不然，你必交出一他连得银子来。
And when the king went by, crying out to him he said, Your servant went out into the fight; and a man came out to me with another man and said, Keep this man: if by any chance he gets away, your life will be the price of his life, or you will have to give a talent of silver in payment.

仆人正在忙乱之间，那人就不见了。以色列王对他说，你自己定妥了，必照样判断你。
But while your servant was turning this way and that, he was gone. Then the king of Israel said to him, You are responsible; you have given the decision against yourself.

他急忙除掉蒙眼的头巾，以色列王就认出他是一个先知。
Then he quickly took the head-band from his eyes; and the king of Israel saw that he was one of the prophets.

他对王说，耶和华如此说，因你将我定要灭绝的人放去，你的命就必代替他的命，你的民也必代替他的民。
And he said to him, These are the words of the Lord: Because you have let go from your hands the man whom I had put to the curse, your life will be taken for his life, and your people for his people.

于是以色列王闷闷不乐地回到撒玛利亚，进了他的宫。
Then the king of Israel went back to his house, bitter and angry, and came to Samaria.

这事以后，又有一事。耶斯列人拿伯在耶斯列有一个葡萄园，靠近撒玛利亚王亚哈的宫。
Now Naboth the Jezreelite had a vine-garden in Jezreel, near the house of Ahab, king of Samaria.

亚哈对拿伯说，你将你的葡萄园给我作菜园，因为是靠近我的宫。我就把更好的葡萄园换给你，或是你要银子，我就按着价值给你。
And Ahab said to Naboth, Give me your vine-garden so that I may have it for a garden of sweet plants, for it is near my house; and let me give you a better vine-garden in exchange, or, if it seems good to you, let me give you its value in money.

拿伯对亚哈说，我敬畏耶和华，万不敢将我先人留下的产业给你。
But Naboth said to Ahab, By the Lord, far be it from me to give you the heritage of my fathers.

亚哈因耶斯列人拿伯说我不敢将我先人留下的产业给你，就闷闷不乐地回宫，躺在床上，转脸向内，也不吃饭。
So Ahab came into his house bitter and angry because Naboth the Jezreelite had said to him, I will not give you the heritage of my fathers. And stretching himself on the bed with his face turned away, he would take no food.

王后耶洗别来问他说，你为什么心里这样忧闷，不吃饭呢？
But Jezebel, his wife, came to him and said, Why is your spirit so bitter that you have no desire for food?

他回答说，因我向耶斯列人拿伯说，你将你的葡萄园给我，我给你价银，或是你愿意，我就把别的葡萄园换给你。他却说，我不将我的葡萄园给你。
And he said to her, Because I was talking to Naboth the Jezreelite, and I said to him, Let me have your vine-garden for a price, or, if it is pleasing to you, I will give you another vine-garden for it: and he said, I will not give you my vine-garden.

王后耶洗别对亚哈说，你现在是治理以色列国不是。只管起来，心里畅畅快快地吃饭，我必将耶斯列人拿伯的葡萄园给你。
Then Jezebel, his wife, said, Are you now the ruler of Israel? Get up, take food, and let your heart be glad; I will give you the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite.

于是托亚哈的名写信，用王的印印上，送给那些与拿伯同城居住的长老贵胄。
So she sent a letter in Ahab's name, stamped with his stamp, to the responsible men and the chiefs who were in authority with Naboth.

信上写着说，你们当宣告禁食，叫拿伯坐在民间的高位上，
And in the letter she said, Let a time of public sorrow be fixed, and put Naboth at the head of the people;

又叫两个匪徒坐在拿伯对面，作见证告他说，你谤渎神和王了。随后就把他拉出去用石头打死。
And get two good-for-nothing persons to come before him and give witness that he has been cursing God and the king. Then take him out and have him stoned to death.

那些与拿伯同城居住的长老贵胄得了耶洗别的信，就照信而行，
So the responsible men and the chiefs who were in authority in his town, did as Jezebel had said in the letter she sent them.

宣告禁食，叫拿伯坐在民间的高位上。
They gave orders for a day of public sorrow, and put Naboth at the head of the people.

有两个匪徒来，坐在拿伯的对面，当着众民作见证告他说，拿伯谤渎神和王了。众人就把他拉到城外，用石头打死。
And the two good-for-nothing persons came in and took their seats before him and gave witness against Naboth, in front of the people, saying, Naboth has been cursing God and the king. Then they took him outside the town and had him stoned to death.

于是打发人去见耶洗别，说，拿伯被石头打死了。
And they sent word to Jezebel, saying, Naboth has been stoned and is dead.

耶洗别听见拿伯被石头打死，就对亚哈说，你起来得耶斯列人拿伯不肯为价银给你的葡萄园吧。现在他已经死了。
Then Jezebel, hearing that Naboth had been stoned and was dead, said to Ahab, Get up and take as your heritage the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he would not give you for money, for Naboth is no longer living but is dead.

亚哈听见拿伯死了，就起来，下去要得耶斯列人拿伯的葡萄园。
So Ahab, hearing that Naboth was dead, went down to the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite to take it as his heritage.

耶和华的话临到提斯比人以利亚说，
And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

你起来，去见住撒玛利亚的以色列王亚哈，他下去要得拿伯的葡萄园，现今正在那园里。
Go down to Ahab, king of Israel, in Samaria; see, he is in the vine-garden of Naboth the Jezreelite, where he has gone to take it as his heritage.

你要对他说，耶和华如此说，你杀了人，又得他的产业吗？又要对他说，耶和华如此说，狗在何处舔拿伯的血，也必在何处舔你的血。
Say to him, The Lord says, Have you put a man to death and taken his heritage? Then say to him, The Lord says, In the place where dogs have been drinking the blood of Naboth, there will your blood become the drink of dogs.

亚哈对以利亚说，我仇敌阿，你找到我吗？他回答说，我找到你了。因为你卖了自己，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事。
And Ahab said to Elijah, Have you come face to face with me, O my hater? And he said, I have come to you because you have given yourself up to do evil in the eyes of the Lord.

耶和华说，我必使灾祸临到你，将你除尽。凡属你的男丁，无论困住的，自由的，都从以色列中剪除。
See, I will send evil on you and put an end to you completely, cutting off from Ahab every male child, him who is shut up and him who goes free in Israel;

我必使你的家像尼八的儿子耶罗波安的家，又像亚希雅的儿子巴沙的家。因为你惹我发怒，又使以色列人陷在罪里。
And I will make your family like the family of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and like the family of Baasha, the son of Ahijah, because you have made me angry, and have made Israel do evil.

论到耶洗别，耶和华也说，狗在耶斯列的外郭必吃耶洗别的肉。
And of Jezebel the Lord said, Jezebel will become food for dogs in the heritage of Jezreel.

凡属亚哈的人，死在城中的必被狗吃，死在田野的必被空中的鸟吃。
Any man of the family of Ahab who comes to his death in the town will become food for the dogs; and he who comes to his death in the open country will be food for the birds of the air.

（从来没有像亚哈的，因他自卖，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，受了王后耶洗别的耸动。
(There was no one like Ahab, who gave himself up to do evil in the eyes of the Lord, moved to it by Jezebel his wife.

就照耶和华在以色列人面前所赶出的亚摩利人，行了最可憎恶的事，信从偶像。）
He did a very disgusting thing in going after false gods, doing all the things the Amorites did, whom the Lord sent out before the children of Israel.)

亚哈听见这话，就撕裂衣服，禁食，身穿麻布，睡卧也穿着麻布，并且缓缓而行。
Hearing these words, Ahab, in great grief, put haircloth on his flesh and went without food, sleeping in haircloth, and going about quietly.

耶和华的话临到提斯比人以利亚说，
Then the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,

亚哈在我面前这样自卑，你看见了吗？因他在我面前自卑，他还在世的时候，我不降这祸。到他儿子的时候，我必降这祸与他的家。
Do you see how Ahab has made himself low before me? because he has made himself low before me, I will not send the evil in his life-time, but in his son's time I will send the evil on his family.

亚兰国和以色列国三年没有争战。
Now for three years there was no war between Aram and Israel.

到第三年，犹大王约沙法下去见以色列王。
And it came about in the third year, that Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, came down to the king of Israel.

以色列王对臣仆说，你们不知道基列的拉末是属我们的吗？我们岂可静坐不动，不从亚兰王手里夺回来吗？
And the king of Israel said to his servants, Do you not see that Ramoth-gilead is ours? and we are doing nothing to get it back from the hands of the king of Aram.

亚哈问约沙法说，你肯同我去攻取基列的拉末吗？约沙法对以色列王说，你我不分彼此，我的民与你的民一样，我的马与你的马一样。
And he said to Jehoshaphat, Will you go with me to Ramoth-gilead to make war? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as you are: my people as your people, my horses as your horses.

约沙法对以色列王说，请你先求问耶和华。
Then Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Let us now get directions from the Lord.

于是以色列王招聚先知，约有四百人，问他们说，我上去攻取基列的拉末可以不可以。他们说，可以上去，因为主必将那城交在王的手里。
So the king of Israel got all the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, Am I to go to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And they said, Go up: for the Lord will give it into the hands of the king.

约沙法说，这里不是还有耶和华的先知，我们可以求问他吗？
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there no other prophet of the Lord here from whom we may get directions?

以色列王对约沙法说，还有一个人，是音拉的儿子米该雅，我们可以托他求问耶和华。只是我恨他。因为他指着我所说的预言，不说吉语，单说凶言。约沙法说，王不必这样说。
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, There is still one man by whom we may get directions from the Lord, Micaiah, son of Imlah; but I have no love for him, for he is a prophet of evil to me and not of good. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

以色列王就召了一个太监来，说，你快去，将音拉的儿子米该雅召来。
Then the king of Israel sent for one of his unsexed servants and said, Go quickly and come back with Micaiah, the son of Imlah.

以色列王和犹大王约沙法在撒玛利亚城门前的空场上，各穿朝服，坐在位上，所有的先知都在他们面前说预言。
Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, were seated on their seats of authority, dressed in their robes, by the doorway into Samaria; and all the prophets were acting as prophets before them.

基拿拿的儿子西底家造了两个铁角，说，耶和华如此说，你要用这角抵触亚兰人，直到将他们灭尽。
And Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, made himself horns of iron and said, The Lord says, Pushing back the Aramaeans with these, you will put an end to them completely.

所有的先知也都这样预言说，可以上基列的拉末去，必然得胜，因为耶和华必将那城交在王的手中。
And all the prophets said the same thing, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and it will go well for you, for the Lord will give it into the hands of the king.

那去召米该雅的使者对米该雅说。众先知一口同音地都向王说吉言，你不如与他们说一样的话，也说吉言。
Now the servant who had gone to get Micaiah said to him, See now, all the prophets with one voice are saying good things to the king; so let your words be like theirs and say good things.

米该雅说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，耶和华对我说什么，我就说什么。
And Micaiah said, By the living Lord, whatever the Lord says to me I will say.

米该雅到王面前，王问他说，米该雅阿，我们上去攻取基列的拉末可以不可以。他回答说，可以上去，必然得胜，耶和华必将那城交在王的手中。
When he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, are we to go to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And in answer he said, Go up, and it will go well for you; and the Lord will give it into the hands of the king.

王对他说，我当嘱咐你几次，你才奉耶和华的名向我说实话呢？
Then the king said to him, Have I not, again and again, put you on your oath to say nothing to me but what is true in the name of the Lord?

米该雅说，我看见以色列众民散在山上，如同没有牧人的羊群一般。耶和华说，这民没有主人，他们可以平平安安地各归各家去。
Then he said, I saw all Israel wandering on the mountains like sheep without a keeper; and the Lord said, These have no master: let them go back, every man to his house in peace.

以色列王对约沙法说，我岂没有告诉你，这人指着我所说的预言，不说吉语单说凶言吗？
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not say that he would not be a prophet of good but of evil?

米该雅说，你要听耶和华的话。我看见耶和华坐在宝座上，天上的万军侍立在他左右。
And he said, Give ear now to the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord seated on his seat of power, with all the army of heaven in their places round him at his right hand and at his left.

耶和华说，谁去引诱亚哈上基列的拉末去阵亡呢？这个就这样说，那个就那样说。
And the Lord said, How may Ahab be tricked into going up to Ramoth-gilead to his death? And one said one thing and one another.

随后有一个神灵出来，站在耶和华面前，说，我去引诱他。
Then a spirit came forward and took his place before the Lord and said, I will get him to do it by a trick.

耶和华问他说，你用何法呢？他说，我去，要在他众先知口中作谎言的灵。耶和华说，这样，你必能引诱他，你去如此行吧。
And the Lord said, How? And he said, I will go out and be a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Your trick will have its effect on him: go out and do so.

现在耶和华使谎言的灵入了你这些先知的口，并且耶和华已经命定降祸与你。
And now, see, the Lord has put a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all these your prophets; and the Lord has said evil against you.

基拿拿的儿子西底家前来，打米该雅的脸，说，耶和华的灵从哪里离开我与你说话呢？
Then Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, came near and gave Micaiah a blow on the side of the face, saying, Where is the spirit of the Lord whose word is in you?

米该雅说，你进严密的屋子藏躲的那日，就必看见了。
And Micaiah said, Truly, you will see on that day when you go into an inner room to keep yourself safe.

以色列王说，将米该雅带回，交给邑宰亚们和王的儿子约阿施，说
And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah and send him back to Amon, the ruler of the town, and to Joash, the king's son;

王如此说，把这个人下在监里，使他受苦，吃不饱喝不足，等候我平平安安地回来。
And say, It is the king's order that this man is to be put in prison and given prison food till I come again in peace.

米该雅说，你若能平平安安地回来，那就是耶和华没有借我说这话了。又说，众民哪，你们都要听。
And Micaiah said, If you come back at all in peace, the Lord has not sent his word by me.

以色列王和犹大王约沙法上基列的拉末去了。
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, went up to Ramoth-gilead.

以色列王对约沙法说，我要改装上阵，你可以仍穿王服。以色列王就改装上阵。
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will make a change in my clothing, so that I do not seem to be the king, and will go into the fight; but do you put on your robes. So the king of Israel made a change in his dress and went into the fight.

先是亚兰王吩咐他的三十二个车兵长说，他们的兵将，无论大小，你们都不可与他们争战，只要与以色列王争战。
Now the king of Aram had given orders to the thirty-two captains of his war-carriages, saying, Make no attack on small or great, but only on the king of Israel.

车兵长看见约沙法，便说，这必是以色列王。就转过去与他争战，约沙法便呼喊。
So when the captains of the war-carriages saw Jehoshaphat, they said, Truly, this is the king of Israel; and turning against him, they came round him, but Jehoshaphat gave a cry.

车兵长见不是以色列王，就转去不追他了。
And when the captains of the war-carriages saw that he was not the king of Israel, they went back from going after him.

有一人随便开弓，恰巧射入以色列王的甲缝里。王对赶车的说，我受了重伤，你转过车来，拉我出阵吧。
And a certain man sent an arrow from his bow without thought of its direction, and gave the king of Israel a wound where his breastplate was joined to his clothing; so he said to the driver of his war-carriage, Go to one side and take me away out of the army, for I am badly wounded.

那日，阵势越战越猛，有人扶王站在车上，抵挡亚兰人。到晚上，王就死了，血从伤处流在车中。
But the fight became more violent while the day went on; and the king was supported in his war-carriage facing the Aramaeans, and the floor of the carriage was covered with the blood from his wound, and by evening he was dead.

约在日落的时候，有号令传遍军中，说，各归本城，各归本地吧。
And about sundown a cry went up from all parts of the army, saying, Let every man go back to his town and his country, for the king is dead.

王既死了，众人将他送到撒玛利亚，就葬在那里。
And they came to Samaria, and put the king's body to rest in Samaria.

又有人把他的车洗在撒玛利亚的池旁（妓女在那里洗澡），狗来舔他的血，正如耶和华所说的话。
And the war-carriage was washed by the pool of Samaria, which was the bathing-place of the loose women, and the dogs were drinking his blood there, as the Lord had said.

亚哈其余的事，凡他所行的和他所修造的象牙宫，并所建筑的一切城邑，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all he did, and his ivory house, and all the towns of which he was the builder, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

亚哈与他列祖同睡。他儿子亚哈谢接续他作王。
So Ahab was put to rest with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son became king in his place.

以色列王亚哈第四年，亚撒的儿子约沙法登基作了犹大王。
And Jehoshaphat, the son of Asa, became king over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab's rule over Israel.

约沙法登基的时候年三十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十五年。他母亲名叫阿苏巴，乃示利希的女儿。
Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he was king for twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.

约沙法行他父亲亚撒所行的道，不偏离左右，行耶和华眼中看为正的事。只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓仍在那里献祭烧香。
He did as Asa his father had done, not turning away from it, but doing what was right in the eyes of the Lord; but the high places were not taken away: the people went on making offerings and burning them in the high places.

约沙法与以色列王和好。
And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

约沙法其余的事和他所显出的勇力，并他怎样争战，都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his great power, and how he went to war, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

约沙法将他父亲亚撒在世所剩下的娈童都从国中除去了。
He put an end to the rest of those who were used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods, all those who were still in the land in the time of his father Asa.

那时以东没有王，有总督治理。
At that time there was no king in Edom;

约沙法制造他施船只，要往俄斐去，将金子运来。只是没有去，因为船在以旬迦别破坏了。
And the representative of King Jehoshaphat made a Tarshish-ship to go to Ophir for gold, but it did not go, because it was broken at Ezion-geber.

亚哈的儿子亚哈谢对约沙法说，容我的仆人和你的仆人坐船同去吧。约沙法却不肯。
Then Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, said to Jehoshaphat, Let my men go with yours in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not let them.

约沙法与列祖同睡。葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子约兰接续他作王。
Then Jehoshaphat went to rest with his fathers, and his body was put into the earth in the town of David his father; and Jehoram his son became king in his place.

犹大王约沙法十七年，亚哈的儿子亚哈谢在撒玛利亚登基，作以色列王共二年。
Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, became king over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of the rule of Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, and he was king over Israel for two years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他的父母，又行尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的事。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, going in the ways of his father and his mother, and in the ways of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel do evil.

他照他父亲一切所行的，事奉敬拜巴力，惹耶和华以色列神的怒气。
He was a servant and worshipper of Baal, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath, as his father had done.

 away from it, but doing what was right in the eyes of the Lord; but the high places were not taken away: the people went on making offerings and burning them in the high places.

约沙法与以色列王和好。
And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.

约沙法其余的事和他所显出的勇力，并他怎样争战，都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his great power, and how he went to war, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

约沙法将他父亲亚撒在世所剩下的娈童都从国中除去了。
He put an end to the rest of those who were used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods, all those who were still in the land in the time of his father Asa.

那时以东没有王，有总督治理。
At that time there was no king in Edom;

约沙法制造他施船只，要往俄斐去，将金子运来。只是没有去，因为船在以旬迦别破坏了。
And the representative of King Jehoshaphat made a Tarshish-ship to go to Ophir for gold, but it did not go, because it was broken at Ezion-geber.

亚哈的儿子亚哈谢对约沙法说，容我的仆人和你的仆人坐船同去吧。约沙法却不肯。
Then Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, said to Jehoshaphat, Let my men go with yours in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not let them.

约沙法与列祖同睡。葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子约兰接续他作王。
Then Jehoshaphat went to rest with his fathers, and his body was put into the earth in the town of David his father; and Jehoram his son became king in his place.

犹大王约沙法十七年，亚哈的儿子亚哈谢在撒玛利亚登基，作以色列王共二年。
Ahaziah, the son of Ahab, became king over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of the rule of Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, and he was king over Israel for two years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他的父母，又行尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的事。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, going in the ways of his father and his mother, and in the ways of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel do evil.

他照他父亲一切所行的，事奉敬拜巴力，惹耶和华以色列神的怒气。
He was a servant and worshipper of Baal, moving the Lord, the God of Israel, to wrath, as his father had done.

