列王记下 Kings


亚哈死后，摩押背叛以色列。
After the death of Ahab, Moab made itself free from the authority of Israel.

亚哈谢在撒玛利亚，一日从楼上的栏杆里掉下来，就病了。于是差遣使者说，你们去问以革伦的神巴力西卜，我这病能好不能好。
Now Ahaziah had a fall from the window of his room in Samaria, and was ill. And he sent men, and said to them, Put a question to Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, about the outcome of my disease, to see if I will get well or not.

但耶和华的使者对提斯比人以利亚说，你起来，去迎着撒玛利亚王的使者，对他们说，你们去问以革伦神巴力西卜，岂因以色列中没有神吗？
But the angel of the Lord said to Elijah the Tishbite, Go now, and, meeting the men sent by the king of Samaria, say to them, Is it because there is no God in Israel, that you are going to get directions from Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?

所以耶和华如此说，你必不下你所上的床，必定要死。以利亚就去了。
Give ear then to the words of the Lord: You will never again get down from the bed on to which you have gone up, but death will certainly come to you. Then Elijah went away.

使者回来见王，王问他们说，你们为什么回来呢？
And the men he had sent came back to the king; and he said to them, Why have you come back?

使者回答说，有一个人迎着我们来，对我们说，你们回去见差你们来的王，对他说，耶和华如此说，你差人去问以革伦神巴力西卜，岂因以色列中没有神吗？所以你必不下所上的床，必定要死。
And they said to him, On our way we had a meeting with a man who said, Go back to the king who sent you and say to him, The Lord says, Is it because there is no God in Israel that you send to put a question to Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? For this reason, you will not come down from the bed on to which you have gone up, but death will certainly come to you.

王问他们说，迎着你们来告诉你们这话的，是怎样的人。
And he said to them, What sort of a man was it who came and said these words to you?

回答说，他身穿毛衣，腰束皮带。王说，这必是提斯比人以利亚。
And they said in answer, He was a man clothed in a coat of hair, with a leather band about his body. Then he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

于是，王差遣五十夫长，带领五十人去见以利亚，他就上到以利亚那里。以利亚正坐在山顶上。五十夫长对他说，神人哪，王吩咐你下来。
Then the king sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty men; and he went up to him where he was seated on the top of a hill, and said to him, O man of God, the king has said, Come down.

以利亚回答说，我若是神人，愿火从天上降下来，烧灭你和你那五十人。于是有火从天上降下来，烧灭五十夫长和他那五十人。
And Elijah in answer said to the captain of fifty, If I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven on you and on your fifty men, and put an end to you. Then fire came down from heaven and put an end to him and his fifty men.

王第二次差遣一个五十夫长，带领五十人去见以利亚。五十夫长对以利亚说，神人哪，王吩咐你快快下来。
Then the king sent another captain of fifty with his fifty men; and he said to Elijah, O man of God, the king says, Come down quickly.

以利亚回答说，我若是神人，愿火从天上降下来，烧灭你和你那五十人。于是神的火从天上降下来，烧灭五十夫长和他那五十人。
And Elijah in answer said, If I am a man of God, may fire come down from heaven on you and on your fifty men, and put an end to you. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and put an end to him and his fifty men.

王第三次差遣一个五十夫长，带领五十人去。这五十夫长上去，双膝跪在以利亚面前，哀求他说，神人哪，愿我的性命和你这五十个仆人的性命在你眼前看为宝贵。
Then he sent a third captain of fifty with his fifty men; and the third captain of fifty went up, and falling on his knees before Elijah, requesting mercy of him, said, O man of God, let my life and the life of these your fifty servants be of value to you.

已经有火从天上降下来，烧灭前两次来的五十夫长和他们各自带的五十人。现在愿我的性命在你眼前看为宝贵。
For fire came down from heaven and put an end to the first two captains of fifty and their fifties; but now let my life be of value in your eyes.

耶和华的使者对以利亚说，你同着他下去，不要怕他。以利亚就起来，同着他下去见王，
Then the angel of the Lord said to Elijah, Go down with him; have no fear of him. So he got up and went down with him to the king.

对王说，耶和华如此说，你差人去问以革伦神巴力西卜，岂因以色列中没有神可以求问吗？所以你必不下所上的床，必定要死。
And he said to him, This is the word of the Lord: Because you sent men to put a question to Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, for this reason you will never again get down from the bed on to which you have gone up, but death will certainly come to you.

亚哈谢果然死了，正如耶和华借以利亚所说的话。因他没有儿子，他兄弟约兰接续他作王，正在犹大王约沙法的儿子约兰第二年。
So death came to him, as the Lord had said by the mouth of Elijah. And Jehoram became king in his place in the second year of the rule of Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah; because he had no son.

亚哈谢其余所行的事都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

耶和华要用旋风接以利亚升天的时候，以利亚与以利沙从吉甲前往。
Now when the Lord was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a great wind, Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.

以利亚对以利沙说，耶和华差我往伯特利去，你可以在这里等候。以利沙说，我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓，我必不离开你。于是二人下到伯特利。
And Elijah said to Elisha, Come no farther for the Lord has sent me to Beth-el. But Elisha said, As the Lord is living and as your soul is living, I will not be parted from you. So they went down to Beth-el.

住伯特利的先知门徒出来见以利沙，对他说，耶和华今日要接你的师傅离开你，你知道不知道。他说，我知道，你们不要作声。
And at Beth-el the sons of the prophets came out to Elisha and said, Has it been made clear to you that the Lord is going to take away your master from over you today? And he said, Yes, I have knowledge of it: say no more.

以利亚对以利沙说，耶和华差遣我往耶利哥去，你可以在这里等候。以利沙说，我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓，我必不离开你。于是二人到了耶利哥。
Then Elijah said to him, Come no farther, for the Lord has sent me to Jericho. But he said, As the Lord is living and as your soul is living, I will not be parted from you. So they went on to Jericho.

住耶利哥的先知门徒就近以利沙，对他说，耶和华今日要接你的师傅离开你，你知道不知道。他说，我知道，你们不要作声。
And at Jericho the sons of the prophets came up to Elisha and said to him, Has it been made clear to you that the Lord is going to take away your master from over you today? And he said in answer, Yes, I have knowledge of it: say no more.

以利亚对以利沙说，耶和华差遣我往约旦河去，你可以在这里等候。以利沙说，我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓，我必不离开你。于是二人一同前往。
Then Elijah said to him, Come no farther, for the Lord has sent me to Jordan. But he said, As the Lord is living and as your soul is living, I will not be parted from you. So they went on together.

有先知门徒去了五十人，远远地站在他们对面。二人在约旦河边站住。
And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went out and took their places facing them a long way off, while the two of them were by the edge of Jordan.

以利亚将自己的外衣卷起来，用以打水，水就左右分开，二人走干地而过。
Then Elijah took off his robe, and, rolling it up, gave the water a blow with it, and the waters were parted, flowing back this way and that, so that they went over on dry land.

过去之后，以利亚对以利沙说，我未曾被接去离开你，你要我为你作什么，只管求我。以利沙说，愿感动你的灵加倍地感动我。
And when they had come to the other side, Elijah said to Elisha, Say what you would have me do for you before I am taken from you. And Elisha said, Be pleased to let a special measure of your spirit be on me.

以利亚说，你所求的难得。虽然如此，我被接去离开你的时候，你若看见我，就必得着。不然，必得不着了。
And he said, You have made a hard request: still, if you see me when I am taken from you, you will get your desire; but if not, it will not be so.

他们正走着说话，忽有火车火马将二人隔开，以利亚就乘旋风升天去了。
And while they went on their way, going on talking together, suddenly there were carriages and horses of fire separating them from one another and Elijah went up to heaven in a great wind.

以利沙看见，就呼叫说，我父阿。我父阿。以色列的战车马兵阿。以后不再见他了。于是以利沙把自己的衣服撕为两片。
And when Elisha saw it he gave a cry, My father, my father, the carriages of Israel and its horsemen! And he saw him no longer; and he was full of grief.

他拾起以利亚身上掉下来的外衣，回去站在约旦河边。
Then he took up Elijah's robe, which had been dropped from him, and went back till he came to the edge of Jordan.

他用以利亚身上掉下来的外衣打水，说，耶和华以利亚的神在哪里呢？打水之后，水也左右分开，以利沙就过来了。
And he took Elijah's robe, which had been dropped from him, and giving the water a blow with it, said, Where is the Lord, the God of Elijah? and at his blow the waters were parted this way and that; and Elisha went over.

住耶利哥的先知门徒从对面看见他，就说，感动以利亚的灵感动以利沙了。他们就来迎接他，在他面前俯伏于地，
And when the sons of the prophets who were facing him at Jericho saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah is resting on Elisha. And they came out to him, and went down on the earth before him.

对他说，仆人们这里有五十个壮士，求你容他们去寻找你师傅，或者耶和华的灵将他提起来，投在某山某谷。以利沙说，你们不必打发人去。
And they said, Your servants have with us here fifty strong men; be pleased to let them go in search of Elijah; for it may be that the spirit of the Lord has taken him up and put him down on some mountain or in some valley. But he said, Do not send them.

他们再三催促他，他难以推辞，就说，你们打发人去吧。他们便打发五十人去，寻找了三天，也没有找着。
But when they kept on requesting him, he was shamed and said, Send, then. So they sent fifty men; but after searching for three days, they came back without having seen him.

以利沙仍然在耶利哥等候他们回到他那里。他对他们说，我岂没有告诉你们不必去吗？
And they came back to him, while he was still at Jericho; and he said to them, Did I not say to you, Go not?

耶利哥城的人对以利沙说，这城的地势美好，我主看见了。只是水恶劣，土产不熟而落。
Now the men of the town said to Elisha, You see that the position of this town is good; but the water is bad, causing the young of the cattle to come to birth dead.

以利沙说，你们拿一个新瓶来，装盐给我。他们就拿来给他。
So he said, Get me a new vessel, and put salt in it; and they took it to him.

他出到水源，将盐倒在水中，说，耶和华如此说，我治好了这水，从此必不再使人死，也不再使地土不生产。
Then he went out to the spring from which the water came, and put salt in it, and said, The Lord says, Now I have made this water sweet; no longer will it be death-giving or unfertile.

于是那水治好了，直到今日，正如以利沙所说的。
And the water was made sweet again to this day, as Elisha said.

以利沙从那里上伯特利去，正上去的时候，有些童子从城里出来，戏笑他说，秃头的上去吧。秃头的上去吧。
Then from there he went up to Beth-el; and on his way, some little boys came out from the town and made sport of him, crying, Go up, old no-hair! go up, old no-hair!

他回头看见，就奉耶和华的名咒诅他们。于是有两个母熊从林中出来，撕裂他们中间四十二个童子。
And turning back, he saw them, and put a curse on them in the name of the Lord. And two she-bears came out of the wood and put forty-two of the children to death.

以利沙从伯特利上迦密山，又从迦密山回到撒玛利亚。
From there he went to Mount Carmel, and came back from there to Samaria.

犹大王约沙法十八年，亚哈的儿子约兰在撒玛利亚登基作了以色列王十二年。
And Jehoram, the son of Ahab, became king over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of the rule of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah; and he was king for twelve years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，但不至像他父母所行的，因为除掉他父所造巴力的柱像。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord; but not like his father and his mother, for he put away the stone pillar of Baal which his father had made.

然而，他贴近尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，总不离开。
But still he did the same sins which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do; he went on in them.

摩押王米沙牧养许多羊，每年将十万羊羔的毛和十万公绵羊的毛给以色列王进贡。
Now Mesha, king of Moab, was a sheep-farmer; and he gave regularly to the king of Israel the wool from a hundred thousand lambs and a hundred thousand sheep.

亚哈死后，摩押王背叛以色列王。
But when Ahab was dead, the king of Moab got free from the authority of the king of Israel.

那时约兰王出撒玛利亚，数点以色列众人。
At that time, King Jehoram went out from Samaria and got all Israel together in fighting order.

前行的时候，差人去见犹大王约沙法，说，摩押王背叛我，你肯同我去攻打摩押吗？他说，我肯上去，你我不分彼此，我的民与你的民一样，我的马与你的马一样。
And he sent to Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, saying, The king of Moab has got free from my authority: will you go with me to make war on Moab? And he said, I will go with you: I am as you are, my people as your people, and my horses as your horses.

约兰说，我们从哪条路上去呢？回答说，从以东旷野的路上去。
And he said, Which way are we to go? And he said in answer, By the waste land of Edom.

于是，以色列王和犹大王，并以东王，都一同去绕行七日的路程。军队和所带的牲畜没有水喝。
So the king of Israel went with the king of Judah and the king of Edom by a roundabout way for seven days: and there was no water for the army or for the beasts they had with them.

以色列王说，哀哉。耶和华招聚我们这三王，乃要交在摩押人的手里。
And the king of Israel said, Here is trouble: for the Lord has got these three kings together to give them into the hands of Moab.

约沙法说，这里不是有耶和华的先知吗？我们可以托他求问耶和华。以色列王的一个臣子回答说，这里有沙法的儿子以利沙，就是从前服事以利亚的（原文作倒水在以利亚手上的）。
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there no prophet of the Lord here, through whom we may get directions from the Lord? And one of the king of Israel's men said in answer, Elisha, the son of Shaphat, is here, who was servant to Elijah.

约沙法说，他必有耶和华的话。于是以色列王和约沙法，并以东王都下去见他。
And Jehoshaphat said, The word of the Lord is with him. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.

以利沙对以色列王说，我与你何干。去问你父亲的先知和你母亲的先知吧。以色列王对他说，不要这样说，耶和华招聚我们这三王，乃要交在摩押人的手里。
But Elisha said to the king of Israel, What have I to do with you? go to the prophets of your father and your mother. And the king of Israel said, No; for the Lord has got these three kings together to give them up into the hands of Moab.

以利沙说，我指着所事奉永生的万军耶和华起誓，我若不看犹大王约沙法的情面，必不理你，不顾你。
Then Elisha said, By the life of the Lord of armies whose servant I am, if it was not for the respect I have for Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, I would not give a look at you, or see you.

现在你们给我找一个弹琴的来。弹琴的时候，耶和华的灵（原文作手）就降在以利沙身上。
But now, get me a player of music, and it will come about that while the man is playing, the hand of the Lord will come on me and I will give you the word of the Lord: and they got a player of music, and while the man was playing, the hand of the Lord was on him.

他便说，耶和华如此说，你们要在这谷中满处挖沟。
And he said, The Lord says, I will make this valley full of water-holes.

因为耶和华如此说，你们虽不见风，不见雨，这谷必满了水，使你们和牲畜有水喝。
For the Lord says, Though you see no wind or rain, the valley will be full of water, and you and your armies and your beasts will have drink.

在耶和华眼中这还算为小事，他也必将摩押人交在你们手中。
And this will be only a small thing to the Lord: in addition he will give the Moabites into your hands.

你们必攻破一切坚城美邑，砍伐各种佳树，塞住一切水泉，用石头糟踏一切美田。
And you are to put every walled town to destruction, cutting down every good tree, and stopping up every water-spring, and making all the good land rough with stones.

次日早晨，约在献祭的时候，有水从以东而来，遍地就满了水。
Now in the morning, about the time when the offering was made, they saw water flowing from the direction of Edom till the country was full of water.

摩押众人听见这三王上来要与他们争战，凡能顶盔贯甲的，无论老少，尽都聚集站在边界上。
Now all Moab, hearing that the kings had come to make war against them, got together all who were able to take up arms and went forward to the edge of the country.

次日早晨，日光照在水上，摩押人起来，看见对面水红如血，
And early in the morning they got up, when the sun was shining on the water, and they saw the water facing them as red as blood.

就说，这是血阿。必是三王互相击杀，俱都灭亡。摩押人哪，我们现在去抢夺财物吧。
Then they said, This is blood: it is clear that destruction has come on the kings; they have been fighting one another: now come, Moab, let us take their goods.

摩押人到了以色列营，以色列人就起来攻打他们，以致他们在以色列人面前逃跑。以色列人往前追杀摩押人，直杀入摩押的境内，
But when they came to the tents of Israel, the Israelites came out and made a violent attack on the Moabites, so that they went in flight before them; and they went forward still attacking them;

拆毁摩押的城邑，各人抛石填满一切美田，塞住一切水泉，砍伐各种佳树，只剩下吉珥哈列设的石墙。甩石的兵在四围攻打那城。
Pulling down the towns, covering every good field with stones, stopping up all the water-springs, and cutting down all the good trees; they went on driving Moab before them till only in Kir-hareseth were there any Moabites; and the fighting-men went round the town raining stones on it.

摩押王见阵势甚大，难以对敌，就率领七百拿刀的兵，要冲过阵去到以东王那里，却是不能。
And when the king of Moab saw that the fight was going against him, he took with him seven hundred men armed with swords, with the idea of forcing a way through to the king of Aram, but they were not able to do so.

便将那应当接续他作王的长子，在城上献为燔祭。以色列人遭遇耶和华的大怒（或作招人痛恨），于是三王离开摩押王，各回本国去了。
Then he took his oldest son, who would have been king after him, offering him as a burned offering on the wall. So there was great wrath against Israel; and they went away from him, back to their country.

有一个先知门徒的妻哀求以利沙说，你仆人我丈夫死了，他敬畏耶和华是你所知道的。现在有债主来，要取我两个儿子作奴仆。
Now a certain woman, the wife of one of the sons of the prophets, came crying to Elisha and said, Your servant my husband is dead; and to your knowledge he was a worshipper of the Lord; but now, the creditor has come to take my two children as servants in payment of his debt.

以利沙问她说，我可以为你作什么呢？你告诉我，你家里有什么。她说，婢女家中除了一瓶油之外，没有什么。
Then Elisha said to her, What am I to do for you? say now, what have you in the house? And she said, Your servant has nothing in the house but a pot of oil.

以利沙说，你去，向你众邻舍借空器皿，不要少借。
Then he said, Go out to all your neighbours and get vessels, a very great number of them.

回到家里，关上门，你和你儿子在里面将油倒在所有的器皿里，倒满了的放在一边。
Then go in, and, shutting the door on yourself and your sons, put oil into all these vessels, putting on one side the full ones.

于是，妇人离开以利沙去了，关上门，自己和儿子在里面。儿子把器皿拿来，她就倒油。
So she went away, and when the door was shut on her and her sons, they took the vessels to her and she put oil into them.

器皿都满了，她对儿子说，再给我拿器皿来。儿子说，再没有器皿了。油就止住了。
And when all the vessels were full, she said to her son, Get me another vessel. And he said, There are no more. And the flow of oil was stopped.

妇人去告诉神人，神人说，你去卖油还债，所剩的你和你儿子可以靠着度日。
So she came to the man of God and gave him word of what she had done. And he said, Go and get money for the oil and make payment of your debt, and let the rest be for the needs of yourself and your sons.

一日，以利沙走到书念，在那里有一个大户的妇人强留他吃饭。此后，以利沙每从那里经过就进去吃饭。
Now there came a day when Elisha went to Shunem, and there was a woman of high position living there, who made him come in and have a meal with her. And after that, every time he went by, he went into her house for a meal.

妇人对丈夫说，我看出那常从我们这里经过的是圣洁的神人。
And she said to her husband, Now I see that this is a holy man of God, who comes by day after day.

我们可以为他在墙上盖一间小楼，在其中安放床榻，桌子，椅子，灯台，他来到我们这里，就可以住在其间。
So let us make a little room on the wall; and put a bed there for him, and a table and a seat and a light; so that when he comes to us, he will be able to go in there.

一日，以利沙来到那里，就进了那楼躺卧。
Now one day, when he had gone there, he went into the little room and took his rest there.

以利沙吩咐仆人基哈西说，你叫这书念妇人来。他就把妇人叫了来，妇人站在以利沙面前。
And he said to Gehazi, his servant, Send for this Shunammite. So in answer to his voice she came before him.

以利沙吩咐仆人说，你对她说，你既为我们费了许多心思，可以为你作什么呢？你向王或元帅有所求的没有？她回答说，我在我本乡安居无事。
And he said to him, Now say to her, See, you have taken all this trouble for us; what is to be done for you? will you have any request made for you to the king or the captain of the army? But she said, I am living among my people.

以利沙对仆人说，究竟当为她作什么呢？基哈西说，她没有儿子，她丈夫也老了。
So he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi made answer, Still there is this, she has no son and her husband is old.

以利沙说，再叫她来。于是叫了她来，她就站在门口。
Then he said, Send for her. And in answer to his voice she took her place at the door.

以利沙说，明年到这时候，你必抱一个儿子。她说，神人，我主阿，不要那样欺哄婢女。
And Elisha said, At this time in the coming year you will have a son in your arms. And she said, No, my lord, O man of God, do not say what is false to your servant.

妇人果然怀孕，到了那时候，生了一个儿子，正如以利沙所说的。
Then the woman became with child and gave birth to a son at the time named, in the year after, as Elisha had said to her.

孩子渐渐长大，一日到他父亲和收割的人那里，
Now one day, when the child was older, he went out to his father to where the grain was being cut.

他对父亲说，我的头阿，我的头阿。他父亲对仆人说，把他抱到他母亲那里。
And he said to his father, My head, my head! And the father said to a servant, Take him in to his mother.

仆人抱去，交给他母亲。孩子坐在母亲的膝上，到晌午就死了。
And he took him in to his mother, and she took him on her knees and kept him there till the middle of the day, when his life went from him.

他母亲抱他上了楼，将他放在神人的床上，关上门出来，
Then she went up and put him on the bed of the man of God, shutting the door on him, and went out.

呼叫她丈夫说，你叫一个仆人给我牵一匹驴来，我要快快地去见神人，就回来。
And she said to her husband, Send me one of the servants and one of the asses so that I may go quickly to the man of God and come back again.

丈夫说，今日不是月朔，也不是安息日，你为何要去见他呢？妇人说，平安无事。
And he said, Why are you going to him today? it is not a new moon or a Sabbath. But she said, It is well.

于是备上驴，对仆人说，你快快赶着走，我若不吩咐你，就不要迟慢。
Then she made the ass ready and said to her servant, Keep driving on; do not make a stop without orders from me.

妇人就往迦密山去见神人。神人远远地看见她，对仆人基哈西说，看哪，书念的妇人来了。
So she went, and came to Mount Carmel, to the man of God. And when the man of God saw her coming in his direction, he said to Gehazi, his servant, See, there is the Shunammite;

你跑去迎接她，问她说，你平安吗？你丈夫平安吗？孩子平安吗？她说，平安。
Go quickly to her, and on meeting her say to her, Are you well? and your husband and the child, are they well? And she said in answer, All is well.

妇人上了山，到神人那里，就抱住神人的脚。基哈西前来要推开她，神人说，由她吧。因为她心里愁苦，耶和华向我隐瞒，没有指示我。
And when she came to where the man of God was on the hill, she put her hands round his feet; and Gehazi came near with the purpose of pushing her away; but the man of God said, Let her be, for her soul is bitter in her; and the Lord has kept it secret from me, and has not given me word of it.

妇人说，我何尝向我主求过儿子呢？我岂没有说过，不要欺哄我吗？
Then she said, Did I make a request to my lord for a son? did I not say, Do not give me false words?

以利沙吩咐基哈西说，你束上腰，手拿我的杖前去。若遇见人，不要向他问安。人若向你问安，也不要回答。要把我的杖放在孩子脸上。
Then he said to Gehazi, Make yourself ready, and take my stick in your hand, and go: if you come across anyone on the way, give him no blessing, and if anyone gives you a blessing, give him no answer. And put my stick on the child's face.

孩子的母亲说，我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓，我必不离开你。于是以利沙起身，随着她去了。
But the mother of the child said, As the Lord is living and as your soul is living, I will not go back without you. So he got up and went with her.

基哈西先去，把杖放在孩子脸上，却没有声音，也没有动静。基哈西就迎着以利沙回来，告诉他说，孩子还没有醒过来。
And Gehazi went on before them and put the stick on the child's face; but there was no voice, and no one gave attention. So he went back, and meeting him gave him the news, saying, The child is not awake.

以利沙来到，进了屋子，看见孩子死了，放在自己的床上。
And when Elisha came into the house he saw the child dead, stretched on his bed.

他就关上门，只有自己和孩子在里面，他便祈祷耶和华，
So he went in, and shutting the door on the two of them, made prayer to the Lord.

上床伏在孩子身上，口对口，眼对眼，手对手。既伏在孩子身上，孩子的身体就渐渐温和了。
Then he got up on the bed, stretching himself out on the child, and put his mouth on the child's mouth, his eyes on his eyes and his hands on his hands; and the child's body became warm.

然后他下来，在屋里来往走了一趟，又上去伏在孩子身上，孩子打了七个喷嚏，就睁开眼睛了。
Then he came back, and after walking once through the house and back, he went up, stretching himself out on the child seven times; and the child's eyes became open.

以利沙叫基哈西说，你叫这书念妇人来。于是叫了她来。以利沙说，将你儿子抱起来。
And he gave orders to Gehazi, and said, Send for the Shunammite. And she came in answer to his voice. And he said, Take up your son.

妇人就进来，在以利沙脚前俯伏于地，抱起她儿子出去了。
And she came in, and went down on her face to the earth at his feet; then she took her son in her arms and went out.

以利沙又来到吉甲，那地正有饥荒。先知门徒坐在他面前，他吩咐仆人说，你将大锅放在火上，给先知门徒熬汤。
And Elisha went back to Gilgal, now there was very little food in the land; and the sons of the prophets were seated before him. And he said to his servant, Put the great pot on the fire, and make soup for the sons of the prophets.

有一个人去到田野掐菜，遇见一棵野瓜藤，就摘了一兜野瓜回来，切了搁在熬汤的锅中，因为他们不知道是什么东西。
And one went out into the field to get green plants and saw a vine of the field, and pulling off the fruit of it till the fold of his robe was full, he came back and put the fruit, cut up small, into the pot of soup, having no idea what it was.

倒出来给众人吃，吃的时候，都喊叫说，神人哪，锅中有致死的毒物。所以众人不能吃了。
Then they gave the men soup from the pot. And while they were drinking the soup, they gave a cry, and said, O man of God, there is death in the pot; and they were not able to take any more food.

以利沙说，拿点面来，就把面撒在锅中，说，倒出来，给众人吃吧。锅中就没有毒了。
But he said, Get some meal. And he put it into the pot, and said, Now give it to the people so that they may have food. And there was nothing bad in the pot.

有一个人从巴力沙利沙来，带着初熟大麦作的饼二十个，并新穗子，装在口袋里送给神人。神人说，把这些给众人吃。
Now a man came from Baal-shalishah with an offering of first-fruits for the man of God, twenty barley cakes and garden fruit in his bag. And he said, Give these to the people for food.

仆人说，这一点岂可摆给一百人吃呢？以利沙说，你只管给众人吃吧。因为耶和华如此说，众人必吃了，还剩下。
But his servant said, How am I to put this before a hundred men? But he said, Give it to the people for food; for the Lord says, There will be food for them and some over.

仆人就摆在众人面前，他们吃了，果然还剩下，正如耶和华所说的。
So he put it before them, and they had a meal and there was more than enough, as the Lord had said.

亚兰王的元帅乃缦在他主人面前为尊为大，因耶和华曾借他使亚兰人得胜。他又是大能的勇士，只是长了大麻疯。
Now Naaman, chief of the army of the king of Aram, was a man of high position with his master, and greatly respected, because by him the Lord had given salvation to Aram; but he was a leper.

先前亚兰人成群地出去，从以色列国掳了一个小女子，这女子就服事乃缦的妻。
Now the Aramaeans had gone out in bands, and taken prisoner from Israel a little girl, who became servant to Naaman's wife.

她对主母说，巴不得我主人去见撒玛利亚的先知，必能治好他的大麻疯。
And she said to her master's wife, If only my lord would go to the prophet in Samaria, he would make him well.

乃缦进去，告诉他主人说，以色列国的女子如此如此说。
And someone went and said to his lord, This is what the girl from the land of Israel says.

亚兰王说，你可以去，我也达信于以色列王。于是乃缦带银子十他连得，金子六千舍客勒，衣裳十套，就去了。
So the king of Aram said, Go then; and I will send a letter to the king of Israel. And he went, taking with him ten talents of silver and six thousand shekels of gold, and ten changes of clothing.

且带信给以色列王，信上说，我打发臣仆乃缦去见你，你接到这信，就要治好他的大麻疯。
And he took the letter to the king of Israel, in which the king of Aram had said, See, I have sent my servant Naaman to you to be made well, for he is a leper.

以色列王看了信就撕裂衣服，说，我岂是神，能使人死使人活呢？这人竟打发人来，叫我治好他的大麻疯。你们看一看，这人何以寻隙攻击我呢？
But the king of Israel, after reading the letter, was greatly troubled and said, Am I God, to give death and life? why does this man send a leper to me to be made well? is it not clear that he is looking for a cause of war?

神人以利沙听见以色列王撕裂衣服，就打发人去见王，说，你为什么撕了衣服呢？可使那人到我这里来，他就知道以色列中有先知了。
Now Elisha, the man of God, hearing that the king of Israel had done this, sent to the king, saying, Why are you troubled? send the man to me, so that he may see that there is a prophet in Israel.

于是，乃缦带着车马到了以利沙的家，站在门前。
So Naaman, with all his horses and his carriages, came to the door of Elisha's house.

以利沙打发一个使者，对乃缦说，你去在约旦河中沐浴七回，你的肉就必复原，而得洁净。
And Elisha sent a servant to him, saying, Go to Jordan, and after washing seven times in its waters your flesh will be well again and you will be clean.

乃缦却发怒走了，说，我想他必定出来见我，站着求告耶和华他神的名，在患处以上摇手，治好这大麻疯。
But Naaman was angry and went away and said, I had the idea that he would come out to see such an important person as I am, and make prayer to the Lord his God, and with a wave of his hand over the place make the leper well.

大马色的河亚吧拿和法珥法岂不比以色列的一切水更好吗？我在那里沐浴不得洁净吗？于是气忿忿地转身去了。
Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not be washed in them and become clean? So turning, he went away in wrath.

他的仆人进前来，对他说，我父阿，先知若吩咐你作一件大事，你岂不作吗？何况说你去沐浴而得洁净呢。
Then his servants came to him and said, If the prophet had given you orders to do some great thing, would you not have done it? how much more then, when he says to you, Be washed and become clean?

于是乃缦下去，照着神人的话，在约旦河里沐浴七回。他的肉复原，好像小孩子的肉，他就洁净了。
Then he went down seven times into the waters of Jordan, as the man of God had said; and his flesh became like the flesh of a little child again, and he was clean.

乃缦带着一切跟随他的人，回到神人那里，站在他面前，说，如今我知道，除了以色列之外，普天下没有神。现在求你收点仆人的礼物。
Then he went back to the man of God, with all his train, and, taking his place before him, said, Now I am certain that there is no God in all the earth, but only in Israel: now then, take an offering from me.

以利沙说，我指着所事奉永生的耶和华起誓，我必不受。乃缦再三地求他，他却不受。
But he said, By the life of the Lord whose servant I am, I will take nothing from you. And he did his best to make him take it but he would not.

乃缦说，你若不肯受，请将两骡子驮的土赐给仆人。从今以后，仆人必不再将燔祭或平安祭献与别神，只献给耶和华。
Then Naaman said, If you will not, then let there be given to your servant as much earth as two beasts are able to take on their backs; because from now on, your servant will make no offering or burned offering to other gods, but only to the Lord.

惟有一件事，愿耶和华饶恕你仆人，我主人进临门庙叩拜的时候，我用手搀他在临门庙，我也屈身。我在临门庙屈身的这事，愿耶和华饶恕我。
But may your servant have the Lord's forgiveness for this one thing: when my master goes into the house of Rimmon for worship there, supported on my arm, and my head is bent in the house of Rimmon; when his head is bent in the house of Rimmon, may your servant have the Lord's forgiveness for this thing.

以利沙对他说，你可以平平安安地回去。乃缦就离开他去了。走了不远，
And he said to him, Go in peace. And he went from him some distance.

神人以利沙的仆人基哈西心里说，我主人不愿从这亚兰人乃缦手里受他带来的礼物，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，我必跑去追上他，向他要些。
But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha, the man of God, said, Now my master has taken nothing from Naaman, this Aramaean, of what he would have given him: by the living Lord, I will go after him and get something from him.

于是基哈西追赶乃缦。乃缦看见有人追赶，就急忙下车迎着他，说，都平安吗？
So Gehazi went after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running after him, he got down from his carriage and went back to him and said, Is all well?

说，都平安。我主人打发我来说，刚才有两个少年人，是先知门徒，从以法莲山地来见我，请你赐他们一他连得银子，两套衣裳。
And he said, All is well: but my master has sent me, saying, Even now, two young men of the sons of the prophets have come to me from the hill-country of Ephraim; will you give me a talent of silver and two changes of clothing for them?

乃缦说，请受二他连得。再三地请受，便将二他连得银子装在两个口袋里，又将两套衣裳交给两个仆人。他们就在基哈西前头抬着走。
And Naaman said, Be good enough to take two talents. And forcing him to take them, he put two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of clothing, and gave them to his two servants to take before him.

到了山冈，基哈西从他们手中接过来，放在屋里，打发他们回去。
When he came to the hill, he took them from their hands, and put them away in the house; and he sent the men away, and they went.

基哈西进去，站在他主人面前。以利沙问他说，基哈西你从哪里来。回答说，仆人没有往哪里去。
Then he came in and took his place before his master. And Elisha said to him, Where have you come from, Gehazi? And he said, Your servant went nowhere.

以利沙对他说，那人下车转回迎你的时候，我的心岂没有去呢？这岂是受银子，衣裳，买橄榄园，葡萄园，牛羊，仆婢的时候呢？
And he said to him, Did not my heart go with you, when the man got down from his carriage and went back to you? Is this a time for getting money, and clothing, and olive-gardens and vine-gardens, and sheep and oxen, and men-servants and women-servants?

因此，乃缦的大麻疯必沾染你和你的后裔，直到永远。基哈西从以利沙面前退出去，就长了大麻疯，像雪那样白。
Because of what you have done, the disease of Naaman the leper will take you in its grip, and your seed after you, for ever. And he went out from before him a leper as white as snow.

先知门徒对以利沙说，看哪，我们同你所住的地方过于窄小，
Now the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, There is not room enough for us in the place where we are living under your care;

求你容我们往约旦河去，各人从那里取一根木料建造房屋居住。他说，你们去吧。
So let us go to Jordan, and let everyone get to work cutting boards, and we will make a living-place for ourselves there. And he said to them, Go, then.

有一人说，求你与仆人同去。回答说，我可以去。
And one of them said, Be pleased to go with your servants. And he said, I will go.

于是以利沙与他们同去。到了约旦河，就砍伐树木。
So he went with them. And when they came to Jordan, they got to work cutting down trees.

有一人砍树的时候，斧头掉在水里，他就呼叫说，哀哉。我主阿，这斧子是借的。
But one of them, while cutting a board, let the head of his axe go into the water; and he gave a cry, and said, This is a bad business, my master, for it is another's.

神人问说，掉在哪里了。他将那地方指给以利沙看。以利沙砍了一根木头，抛在水里，斧头就漂上来了。
And the man of God said, Where did it go in? and when he saw the place where it had gone into the water, cutting a stick, he put it into the water, and the iron came up to the top of the water.

以利沙说，拿起来吧。那人就伸手拿起来了。
Then he said, Take it up. So he put out his hand and took it.

亚兰王与以色列人争战，和他的臣仆商议说，我要在某处某处安营。
At that time the king of Aram was making war against Israel; and he had a meeting with the chiefs of his army and said, I will be waiting in secret in some named place.

神人打发人去见以色列王，说，你要谨慎，不要从某处经过，因为亚兰人从那里下来了。
And the man of God sent to the king of Israel, saying, Take care to keep away from that place, for the Aramaeans are waiting there in secret.

以色列王差人去窥探神人所告诉所警戒他去的地方，就防备未受其害，不止一两次。
So the king of Israel sent to the place where the man of God had said there was danger, and kept clear of it more than once.

亚兰王因这事心里惊疑，召了臣仆来，对他们说，我们这里有谁帮助以色列王，你们不指给我吗？
And at this, the mind of the king of Aram was greatly troubled, and he sent for his servants and said to them, Will you not make clear to me which of us is helping the king of Israel?

有一个臣仆说，我主，我王。无人帮助他，只有以色列中的先知以利沙，将王在卧房所说的话告诉以色列王了。
And one of them said, Not one of us, my lord king; but Elisha, the prophet in Israel, gives the king of Israel news of the words you say even in your bedroom.

王说，你们去探他在哪里，我好打发人去捉拿他。有人告诉王说，他在多坍。
Then he said, Go and see where he is, so that I may send and get him. And news came to him that he was in Dothan.

王就打发车马和大军往那里去，夜间到了，围困那城。
So he sent there horses and carriages and a great army; and they came by night, circling the town.

神人的仆人清早起来出去，看见车马军兵围困了城。仆人对神人说，哀哉。我主阿，我们怎样行才好呢？
Now the servant of the man of God, having got up early and gone out, saw an army with horses and carriages of war all round the town. And the servant said to him, O my master, what are we to do?

神人说，不要惧怕。与我们同在的比与他们同在的更多。
And he said in answer, Have no fear; those who are with us are more than those who are with them.

以利沙祷告说，耶和华阿，求你开这少年人的眼目，使他能看见。耶和华开他的眼目，他就看见满山有火车火马围绕以利沙。
Then Elisha made a prayer to the Lord, saying, Lord, let his eyes be open so that he may see. And the Lord made the young man's eyes open; and he saw that all the mountain was full of horses and carriages of fire round Elisha.

敌人下到以利沙那里，以利沙祷告耶和华说，求你使这些人的眼目昏迷。耶和华就照以利沙的话，使他们的眼目昏迷。
Now when the Aramaeans came down to Elisha, he made a prayer to the Lord saying, Lord, make this people blind. And he made them blind at Elisha's request.

以利沙对他们说，这不是那道，也不是那城。你们跟我去，我必领你们到所寻找的人那里。于是领他们到了撒玛利亚。
And Elisha said to them, This is not the way, and this is not the town: come after me so that I may take you to the man you are searching for. And he took them to Samaria.

他们进了撒玛利亚，以利沙祷告说，耶和华阿，求你开这些人的眼目，使他们能看见。耶和华开他们的眼目，他们就看见了，不料，是在撒玛利亚的城中。
And when they had come into Samaria, Elisha said, Lord, let the eyes of these men be open so that they may see. And the Lord made their eyes open, and they saw that they were in the middle of Samaria.

以色列王见了他们，就问以利沙说，我父阿，我可以击杀他们吗？
And the king of Israel, when he saw them, said to Elisha, My father, am I to put them to the sword?

回答说，不可击杀他们。就是你用刀用弓掳来的，岂可击杀他们吗（或作也不可击杀，何况这些人呢？）？当在他们面前设摆饮食，使他们吃喝回到他们的主人那里。
But he said in answer, You are not to put them to death; have you any right to put to death those whom you have not taken prisoner with your sword and your bow? put bread and water before them, so that they may have food and drink and go to their master.

王就为他们预备了许多食物。他们吃喝完了，打发他们回到他们主人那里。从此，亚兰军不再犯以色列境了。
So he made ready a great feast for them, and when they had had food and drink, he sent them away and they went back to their master. And no more bands of Aramaeans came into the land of Israel.

此后，亚兰王便哈达聚集他的全军，上来围困撒玛利亚。
Now after this, Ben-hadad, king of Aram, got together all his army and went up to make an attack on Samaria, shutting the town in on all sides with his forces.

于是撒玛利亚被围困，有饥荒，甚至一个驴头值银八十舍客勒，二升鸽子粪值银五舍客勒。
And they became very short of food in Samaria; for they kept it shut in till the price of an ass's head was eighty shekels of silver, and a small measure of doves' droppings was five shekels of silver.

一日，以色列王在城上经过，有一个妇人向他呼叫说，我主，我王阿。求你帮助。
And when the king of Israel was going by on the wall, a woman came crying out to him, and said, Help! my lord king.

王说，耶和华不帮助你，我从何处帮助你。是从禾场，是从酒榨呢？
And he said, If the Lord does not give you help, where am I to get help for you? from the grain-floor or the grape-crusher?

王问妇人说，你有什么苦处。她回答说，这妇人对我说，将你的儿子取来，我们今日可以吃，明日可以吃我的儿子。
And the king said to her, What is troubling you? And she said in answer, This woman said to me, Give your son to be our food today, and we will have my son tomorrow.

我们就煮了我的儿子吃了。次日我对她说，要将你的儿子取来，我们可以吃。她却将她的儿子藏起来了。
So, boiling my son, we had a meal of him; and on the day after I said to her, Now give your son for our food; but she has put her son in a secret place.

王听见妇人的话，就撕裂衣服。（王在城上经过）百姓看见王贴身穿着麻衣。
Then the king, hearing what the woman said, took his robes in his hands, violently parting them; and, while he was walking on the wall, the people, looking, saw that under his robe he had haircloth on his flesh.

王说，我今日若容沙法的儿子以利沙的头仍在他项上，愿神重重地降罚与我。
Then he said, May God's punishment come on me if Elisha, the son of Shaphat, keeps his head on his body after this day.

那时，以利沙正坐在家中，长老也与他同坐。王打发一个伺候他的人去。他还没有到，以利沙对长老说，你们看这凶手之子，打发人来斩我的头。你们看着使者来到，就关上门，用门将他推出去。在他后头不是有他主人脚步的响声吗？
But Elisha was in his house, and the responsible men were seated there with him; and before the king got there, Elisha said to those who were with him, Do you see how this cruel and violent man has sent to take away my life?

正说话的时候，使者来到，王也到了，说，这灾祸是从耶和华那里来的，我何必再仰望耶和华呢？
While he was still talking to them, the king came down and said, This evil is from the Lord; why am I to go on waiting any longer for the Lord?

以利沙说，你们要听耶和华的话，耶和华如此说，明日约到这时候，在撒玛利亚城门口，一细亚细面要卖银一舍客勒，二细亚大麦也要卖银一舍客勒。
Then Elisha said, Give ear to the word of the Lord: the Lord says, Tomorrow, about this time, a measure of good meal will be offered for the price of a shekel and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the market-place of Samaria.

有一个搀扶王的军长对神人说，即便耶和华使天开了窗户，也不能有这事。以利沙说，你必亲眼看见，却不得吃。
Then the captain whose arm was supporting the king said to the man of God, Even if the Lord made windows in heaven, would such a thing be possible? And he said, Your eyes will see it, but you will not have a taste of the food.

在城门那里有四个长大麻疯的人，他们彼此说，我们为何坐在这里等死呢？
Now there were four lepers seated at the doorway into the town: and they said to one another, Why are we waiting here for death?

我们若说，进城去吧。城里有饥荒，必死在那里。若在这里坐着不动，也必是死。来吧，我们去投降亚兰人的军队，他们若留我们的活命，就活着。若杀我们，就死了吧。
If we say, We will go into the town, there is no food in the town, and we will come to our end there; and if we go on waiting here, death will come to us. Come then, let us give ourselves up to the army of Aram: if they let us go on living, then life will be ours; and if they put us to death, then death will be ours.

黄昏的时候，他们起来往亚兰人的营盘去。到了营边，不见一人在那里。
So in the half light they got up to go to the tents of Aram; but when they came to the outer line of tents, there was no one there.

因为主使亚兰人的军队听见车马的声音，是大军的声音。他们就彼此说，这必是以色列王贿买赫人的诸王和埃及人的诸王来攻击我们。
For the Lord had made the sound of carriages and horses, and the noise of a great army, come to the ears of the Aramaeans, so that they said to one another, Truly, the king of Israel has got the kings of the Hittites and of the Egyptians for a price to make an attack on us.

所以，在黄昏的时候他们起来逃跑，撇下帐棚，马，驴，营盘照旧，只顾逃命。
So they got up and went in flight, in the half light, without their tents or their horses or their asses or any of their goods; they went in flight, fearing for their lives.

那些长大麻疯的到了营边，进了帐棚，吃了喝了，且从其中拿出金银和衣服来，去收藏了。回来又进了一座帐棚，从其中拿出财物来去收藏了。
And when those lepers came to the outer line of tents, they went into one tent, and had food and drink, and took from it silver and gold and clothing, which they put in a secret place; then they came back and went into another tent from which they took more goods, which they put away in a secret place.

那时，他们彼此说，我们所作的不好。今日是有好信息的日子，我们竟不作声。若等到天亮，罪必临到我们。来吧，我们与王家报信去。
Then they said to one another, We are not doing right. Today is a day of good news, and we say nothing: if we go on waiting here till the morning, punishment will come to us. So let us go and give the news to those of the king's house.

他们就去叫守城门的，告诉他们说，我们到了亚兰人的营，不见一人在那里，也无人声，只有拴着的马和驴，帐棚都照旧。
So they came in, and, crying out to the door-keepers of the town, they gave them the news, saying, We came to the tents of the Aramaeans, and there was no one there and no voice of man, only the horses and the asses in their places, and the tents as they were.

守城门的叫了众守门的人来，他们就进去与王家报信。
Then the door-keepers, crying out, gave the news to those inside the king's house.

王夜间起来，对臣仆说，我告诉你们亚兰人向我们如何行。他们知道我们饥饿，所以离营，埋伏在田野，说，以色列人出城的时候，我们就活捉他们，得以进城。
Then the king got up in the night and said to his servants, This is my idea of what the Aramaeans have done to us. They have knowledge that we are without food; and so they have gone out of their tents, and are waiting secretly in the open country, saying, When they come out of the town, we will take them living and get into the town.

有一个臣仆对王说，我们不如用城里剩下之马中的五匹马（马和城里剩下的以色列人都是一样，快要灭绝），打发人去窥探。
And one of his servants said in answer, Send men and let them take five of the horses which we still have in the town; if they keep their lives they will be the same as those of Israel who are still living here; if they come to their death they will be the same as all those of Israel who have gone to destruction: let us send and see.

于是取了两辆车和马，王差人去追寻亚兰军，说，你们去窥探窥探。
So they took two horsemen; and the king sent them after the army of the Aramaeans, saying, Go and see.

他们就追寻到约旦河，看见满道上都是亚兰人急跑时丢弃的衣服器具，使者就回来报告王。
And they went after them as far as Jordan; and all the road was covered with clothing and vessels dropped by the Aramaeans in their flight. So those who were sent went back and gave the news to the king.

众人就出去，掳掠亚兰人的营盘。于是一细亚细面卖银一舍客勒，二细亚大麦也卖银一舍客勒，正如耶和华所说的。
Then the people went out and took the goods from the tents of the Aramaeans. So a measure of good meal was to be had for the price of a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, as the Lord had said.

王派搀扶他的那军长在城门口弹压，众人在那里将他践踏，他就死了，正如神人在王下来见他的时候所说的。
And the king gave authority to that captain, on whose arm he was supported, to have control over the doorway into the town; but he was crushed to death there under the feet of the people, as the man of God had said when the king went down to him.

神人曾对王说，明日约到这时候，在撒玛利亚城门口，二细亚大麦要卖银一舍客勒，一细亚细面也要卖银一舍客勒。
So the words of the man of God came true, which he said to the king: Two measures of barley will be offered for the price of a shekel and a measure of good meal for a shekel, tomorrow about this time in the market-place of Samaria.

那军长对神人说，即便耶和华使天开了窗户，也不能有这事。神人说，你必亲眼看见，却不得吃。
And that captain said to the man of God, Even if the Lord made windows in heaven, would such a thing be possible? And he said to him, Your eyes will see it, but you will not have a taste of the food.

这话果然应验在他身上。因为众人在城门口将他践踏，他就死了。
And such was his fate; for he was crushed to death under the feet of the people, in the doorway into the town.

以利沙曾对所救活之子的那妇人说，你和你的全家要起身往你可住的地方去住，因为耶和华命饥荒降在这地七年。
Now Elisha had said to the woman whose son he had given back to life, Go now, with all the people of your house, and get a living-place for yourselves wherever you are able; for by the word of the Lord, there will be great need of food in the land; and this will go on for seven years.

妇人就起身，照神人的话带着全家往非利士地去，住了七年。
So the woman got up and did as the man of God said; and she and the people of her house were living in the land of the Philistines for seven years.

七年完了，那妇人从非利士地回来，就出去为自己的房屋田地哀告王。
And when the seven years were ended, the woman came back from the land of the Philistines and went to the king with a request for her house and her land.

那时王正与神人的仆人基哈西说，请你将以利沙所行的一切大事告诉我。
Now the king was talking with Gehazi, the servant of the man of God, saying, Now, give me an account of all the great things Elisha has done.

基哈西告诉王以利沙如何使死人复活，恰巧以利沙所救活，她儿子的那妇人为自己的房屋田地来哀告王。基哈西说，我主我王，这就是那妇人，这是她的儿子，就是以利沙所救活的。
And while he was giving the king the story of how Elisha had given life to the dead, the woman whose son had come back to life came to the king with a request for her house and her land. And Gehazi said, My lord king, this is the woman and this is her son, whose life Elisha gave back to him.

王问那妇人，她就把那事告诉王。于是王为她派一个太监，说，凡属这妇人的都还给她，自从她离开本地直到今日，她田地的出产也都还给她。
And in answer to the king's questions, the woman gave him all the story. So the king gave orders to one of his unsexed servants, saying, Give her back all her property, and all the produce of her fields from the day when she went away from the land up till now.

以利沙来到大马色，亚兰王便哈达正患病。有人告诉王说，神人来到这里了。
And Elisha came to Damascus; and Ben-hadad, king of Aram, was ill; and they said to him, The man of God has come.

王就吩咐哈薛说，你带着礼物去见神人，托他求问耶和华，我这病能好不能好。
Then the king said to Hazael, Take an offering with you, and go to see the man of God and get directions from the Lord by him, saying, Am I going to get better from my disease?

于是哈薛用四十个骆驼，驮着大马色的各样美物为礼物，去见以利沙。到了他那里，站在他面前，说，你儿子亚兰王便哈达打发我来见你，他问说，我这病能好不能好。
So Hazael went to see him, taking with him forty camels with offerings on their backs of every sort of good thing from Damascus; and when he came before him, he said, Your son Ben-hadad, king of Aram, has sent me to you, saying, Will I get better from this disease?

以利沙对哈薛说，你回去告诉他说，这病必能好。但耶和华指示我，他必要死。
And Elisha said to him, Go, say to him, You will certainly get better; but the Lord has made it clear to me that only death is before him.

神人定睛看着哈薛，甚致他惭愧。神人就哭了。
And he kept his eyes fixed on him till he was shamed, and the man of God was overcome with weeping.

哈薛说，我主为什么哭。回答说，因为我知道你必苦害以色列人，用火焚烧他们的保障，用刀杀死他们的壮丁，摔死他们的婴孩，剖开他们的孕妇。
And Hazael said, Why is my lord weeping? Then he said in answer, Because I see the evil which you will do to the children of Israel: burning down their strong towns, putting their young men to death with the sword, smashing their little ones against the stones, and cutting open the women who are with child.

哈薛说，你仆人算什么，不过是一条狗，焉能行这大事呢？以利沙回答说，耶和华指示我，你必作亚兰王。
And Hazael said, How is it possible that your servant, who is only a dog, will do this great thing? And Elisha said, The Lord has made it clear to me that you will be king over Aram.

哈薛离开以利沙，回去见他的主人。主人问他说，以利沙对你说什么。回答说，他告诉我你必能好。
Then he went away from Elisha and came in to his master, who said to him, What did Elisha say to you? And his answer was, He said that you would certainly get well.

次日，哈薛拿被窝浸在水中，蒙住王的脸，王就死了。于是哈薛篡了他的位。
Now on the day after, Hazael took the bed-cover, and making it wet with water, put it over Ben-hadad's face, causing his death: and Hazael became king in his place.

以色列王亚哈的儿子约兰第五年，犹大王约沙法还在位的时候，约沙法的儿子约兰登基作了犹大王。
In the fifth year of Joram, the son of Ahab, king of Israel, Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, became king.

约兰登基的时候年三十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王八年。
He was thirty-two years old when he became king; and he was ruling in Jerusalem for eight years.

他行以色列诸王所行的，与亚哈家一样。因为他娶了亚哈的女儿为妻，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事。
He went in the ways of the kings of Israel, as the family of Ahab did: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife; and he did evil in the eyes of the Lord.

耶和华却因他仆人大卫的缘故，仍不肯灭绝犹大，照他所应许大卫的话，永远赐灯光与他的子孙。
But it was not the Lord's purpose to send destruction on Judah, because of David his servant, to whom he had given his word that he would have a light for ever.

约兰年间，以东人背叛犹大，脱离他的权下，自己立王。
In his time, Edom made themselves free from the rule of Judah, and took a king for themselves.

约兰率领所有的战车往撒益去，夜间起来，攻打围困他的以东人和车兵长。犹大兵就逃跑，各回各家去了。
Then Joram went over to Zair, with all his war-carriages; ... made an attack by night on the Edomites, whose forces were all round him, ... the captains of the war-carriages; and the people went in flight to their tents.

这样，以东人背叛犹大，脱离他的权下，直到今日。那时立拿人也背叛了。
So Edom made themselves free from the rule of Judah to this day. And at the same time, Libnah made itself free.

约兰其余的事，凡他所行的，都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Joram, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

约兰与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子亚哈谢接续他作王。
And Joram went to rest with his fathers and was put into the earth with his fathers in the town of David: and Ahaziah his son became king in his place.

以色列王亚哈的儿子约兰十二年，犹大王约兰的儿子亚哈谢登基。
In the twelfth year that Joram, the son of Ahab, was king of Israel, Ahaziah, the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, became king;

他登基的时候年二十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王一年。他母亲名叫亚他利雅，是以色列王暗利的孙女。
Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for one year. His mother's name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri, king of Israel.

亚哈谢效法亚哈家行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，与亚哈家一样，因为他是亚哈家的女婿。
He went in the ways of the family of Ahab, and did evil in the eyes of the Lord as the family of Ahab did, for he was a son-in-law of the family of Ahab.

他与亚哈的儿子约兰同往基列的拉末去，与亚兰王哈薛争战。亚兰人打伤了约兰，
He went with Joram, the son of Ahab, to make war on Hazael, king of Aram, at Ramoth-gilead: and Joram was wounded by the Aramaeans.

约兰王回到耶斯列，医治在拉末与亚兰王哈薛打仗的时候所受的伤。犹大王约兰的儿子亚哈谢因为亚哈的儿子约兰病了，就下到耶斯列看望他。
So King Joram went back to Jezreel to get well from the wounds which the bowmen had given him at Ramah, when he was fighting against Hazael, king of Aram. And Ahaziah, the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to see Joram, the son of Ahab, in Jezreel, because he was ill.

先知以利沙叫了一个先知门徒来，吩咐他说，你束上腰，手拿这瓶膏油往基列的拉末去。
And Elisha the prophet sent for one of the sons of the prophets, and said to him, Make yourself ready for a journey, and take this bottle of oil in your hand, and go to Ramoth-gilead.

到了那里，要寻找宁示的孙子，约沙法的儿子耶户，使他从同僚中起来，带他进严密的屋子，
And when you get there, go in search of Jehu, the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi; and go in and make him get up from among his brothers, and take him to an inner room.

将瓶里的膏油倒在他头上，说，耶和华如此说，我膏你作以色列王。说完了，就开门逃跑，不要迟延。
Then take the bottle and put the oil on his head, and say, The Lord says, I have put the holy oil on you to make you king over Israel. Then, opening the door, go in flight, without waiting.

于是那少年先知往基列的拉末去了。
So the young prophet went to Ramoth-gilead.

到了那里，看见众军长都坐着，就说，将军哪，我有话对你说。耶户说，我们众人里，你要对哪一个说呢？回答说，将军哪，我要对你说。
And when he came, he saw the captains of the army seated together; and he said, I have something to say to you, O captain. And Jehu said, To which of us? And he said, To you, O captain.

耶户就起来，进了屋子，少年人将膏油倒在他头上，对他说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，我膏你作耶和华民以色列的王。
And he got up and went into the house; then he put the holy oil on his head and said to him, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, I have made you king over the people of the Lord, over Israel.

你要击杀你主人亚哈的全家，我好在耶洗别身上伸我仆人众先知和耶和华一切仆人流血的冤。
You are to see that the family of Ahab your master is cut off, so that I may take from Jezebel payment for the blood of my servants the prophets, and for the blood of all the servants of the Lord.

亚哈全家必都灭亡，凡属亚哈的男丁，无论是困住的，自由的，我必从以色列中剪除，
For the family of Ahab will come to an end; every male of Ahab's family will be cut off, he who is shut up and he who goes free in Israel.

使亚哈的家像尼八儿子耶罗波安的家，又像亚希雅儿子巴沙的家。
I will make the family of Ahab like that of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and Baasha, the son of Ahijah.

耶洗别必在耶斯列田里被狗所吃，无人葬埋。说完了，少年人就开门逃跑了。
And Jezebel will become food for the dogs in the heritage of Jezreel, and there will be no one to put her body into the earth. Then, opening the door, he went in flight.

耶户出来，回到他主人的臣仆那里，有一人问他说，平安吗？这狂妄的人来见你有什么事呢？回答说，你们认得那人，也知道他说什么。
Then Jehu came out again to the servants of his lord, and one said to him, Is all well? why did this man, who is off his head, come to you? And he said to them, You have knowledge of the man and of his talk.

他们说，这是假话，你据实地告诉我们。回答说，他如此如此对我说。他说，耶和华如此说，我膏你作以色列王。
And they said, That is not true; now give us his story. Then he said, This is what he said to me: The Lord says, I have made you king over Israel.

他们就急忙各将自己的衣服铺在上层台阶，使耶户坐在其上。他们吹角，说，耶户作王了。
Then straight away everyone took his robe and put it under him on the top of the steps, and, sounding the horn, they said, Jehu is king.

这样，宁示的孙子，约沙法的儿子耶户背叛约兰。先是约兰和以色列众人因为亚兰王哈薛的缘故，把守基列的拉末。
So Jehu, the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi, made designs against Joram. (Now Joram and all the army of Israel were keeping watch on Ramoth-gilead because of Hazael, king of Aram:

但约兰王回到耶斯列，医治与亚兰王哈薛打仗所受的伤。耶户说，若合你们的意思，就不容人逃出城往耶斯列报信去。
But King Joram had gone back to Jezreel to get well from the wounds which the Aramaeans had given him when he was fighting against Hazael, king of Aram.) And Jehu said, If this is your purpose, then let no one get away and go out of the town to give news of it in Jezreel.

于是耶户坐车往耶斯列去，因为约兰病卧在那里。犹大王亚哈谢已经下去看望他。
So Jehu got into his carriage and went to Jezreel, for Joram was ill in bed there; and Ahaziah, king of Judah, had come down to see Joram.

有一个守望的人站在耶斯列的楼上，看见耶户带着一群人来，就说，我看见一群人。约兰说，打发一个骑马的去迎接他们，问说，平安不平安。
And the watchman on the tower in Jezreel saw Jehu and his band coming, and said, I see a band of people. And Joram said, Send out a horseman to them, and let him say, Is it peace?

骑马的就去迎接耶户，说，王问说，平安不平安。耶户说，平安不平安与你何干。你转在我后头吧。守望的人又说，使者到了他们那里，却不回来。
So a horseman went out to them and said, The king says, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What have you to do with peace? come after me. And the watchman gave them word, saying, The horseman went up to them, but has not come back.

王又打发一个骑马的去。这人到了他们那里，说，王问说，平安不平安。耶户说，平安不平安与你何干。你转在我后头吧。
Then he sent out a second horseman, who came up to them and said, The king says, Is it peace? And Jehu said in answer, What have you to do with peace? come after me.

守望的人又说，他到了他们那里，也不回来。车赶得甚猛，像宁示的孙子耶户的赶法。
And the watchman gave them word, saying, He went up to them and has not come back again; and the driving is like the driving of Jehu, son of Nimshi, for he is driving violently.

约兰吩咐说，套车。人就给他套车。以色列王约兰和犹大王亚哈谢各坐自己的车出去迎接耶户，在耶斯列人拿伯的田那里遇见他。
Then Joram said, Make ready. So they made his carriage ready; and Joram, king of Israel, with Ahaziah, king of Judah, went out in their carriages for the purpose of meeting Jehu; and they came face to face with him at the field of Naboth the Jezreelite.

约兰见耶户就说，耶户阿，平安吗？耶户说，你母亲耶洗别的淫行邪术这样多，焉能平安呢？
Now when Joram saw Jehu he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he said in answer, What peace is possible while all the land is full of the disgusting sins of your mother Jezebel, and her secret arts?

约兰就转车逃跑，对亚哈谢说，亚哈谢阿，反了。
Then Joram, turning his horses in flight, said to Ahaziah, Broken faith, O Ahaziah!

耶户开满了弓，射中约兰的脊背，箭从心窝穿出，约兰就仆倒在车上。
Then Jehu took his bow in his hand, and with all his strength sent an arrow, wounding Joram between the arms; and the arrow came out at his heart, and he went down on his face in his carriage.

耶户对他的军长毕甲说，你把他抛在耶斯列人拿伯的田间。你当追想，你我一同坐车跟随他父亚哈的时候，耶和华对亚哈所说的预言，
Then Jehu said to Bidkar, his captain, Take him up, and put him in the field of Naboth the Jezreelite: for is not that day in your memory when you and I together on our horses were going after Ahab, his father, and the Lord put this fate on him, saying:

说，我昨日看见拿伯的血和他众子的血，我必在这块田上报应你。这是耶和华说的，现在你要照着耶和华的话，把他抛在这田间。
I saw the blood of Naboth and of his sons yesterday; and I will give you full payment in this field, says the Lord? So now, take him and put him in this field, as the Lord said.

犹大王亚哈谢见这光景，就从园亭之路逃跑。耶户追赶他，说，把这人也杀在车上。到了靠近以伯莲姑珥的坡上击伤了他。他逃到米吉多，就死在那里。
Now when Ahaziah, king of Judah, saw this, he went in flight by the way of the garden house. And Jehu came after him and said, Put him to death in the same way; and they gave him a death-wound in his carriage, on the slope up to Gur, by Ibleam; and he went in flight to Megiddo, where death came to him.

他的臣仆用车将他的尸首送到耶路撒冷，葬在大卫城他自己的坟墓里，与他列祖同葬。
And his servants took him in a carriage to Jerusalem, and put him into the earth with his fathers in the town of David.

亚哈谢登基作犹大王的时候，是在亚哈的儿子约兰第十一年。
(In the eleventh year of the rule of Joram, the son of Ahab, Ahaziah became king over Judah.)

耶户到了耶斯列。耶洗别听见就擦粉，梳头，从窗户里往外观看。
And when Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel had news of it; and, painting her eyes and dressing her hair with ornaments, she put her head out of the window.

耶户进门的时候，耶洗别说，杀主人的心利阿，平安吗？
And when Jehu was coming into the town, she said, Is all well, O Zimri, taker of your master's life?

耶户抬头向窗户观看，说，谁顺从我。有两三个太监从窗户往外看他。
Then, looking up to the window, he said, Who is on my side, who? and two or three unsexed servants put out their heads.

耶户说，把她扔下来。他们就把她扔下来。她的血溅在墙上和马上。于是把她践踏了。
And he said, Take her and put her out of the window. So they sent her down with force, and her blood went in a shower on the wall and on the horses; and she was crushed under their feet.

耶户进去，吃了喝了，吩咐说，你们把这被咒诅的妇人葬埋了，因为她是王的女儿。
And he came in, and took food and drink; then he said, Now see to this cursed woman, and put her body into the earth, for she is a king's daughter.

他们就去葬埋她，只寻得她的头骨和脚，并手掌。
And they went out to put her body into the earth, but nothing of her was to be seen, only the bones of her head, and her feet, and parts of her hands.

他们回去告诉耶户，耶户说，这正应验耶和华借他仆人提斯比人以利亚所说的话，说，在耶斯列田间，狗必吃耶洗别的肉。
So they came back and gave him word of it. And he said, This is what the Lord said by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the heritage of Jezreel the flesh of Jezebel will become food for dogs;

耶洗别的尸首必在耶斯列田间如同粪土，甚至人不能说这是耶洗别。
And the dead body of Jezebel will be like waste dropped on the face of the earth in the heritage of Jezreel; so that they will not be able to say, This is Jezebel.

亚哈有七十个儿子在撒玛利亚。耶户写信送到撒玛利亚，通知耶斯列的首领，就是长老和教养亚哈众子的人，说，
Now there were in Samaria seventy of Ahab's sons. And Jehu sent letters to Samaria, to the rulers of the town, and to the responsible men, and to those who had the care of the sons of Ahab, saying,

你们那里既有你们主人的众子和车马，器械，坚固城，
Straight away, when you get this letter, seeing that your master's sons are with you, and that you have carriages and horses and a walled town and arms;

接了这信，就可以在你们主人的众子中选择一个贤能合宜的，使他坐他父亲的位，你们也可以为你们主人的家争战。
Take the best and most upright of your master's sons, and make him king in his father's place, and put up a fight for your master's family.

他们却甚惧怕，彼此说，二王在他面前尚且站立不住，我们怎能站得住呢？
But they were full of fear, and said, The two kings have gone down before him: how may we keep our place?

家宰，邑宰，和长老，并教养众子的人，打发人去见耶户，说，我们是你的仆人，凡你所吩咐我们的都必遵行，我们不立谁作王，你看怎样好就怎样行。
So the controller of the king's house, with the ruler of the town, and the responsible men, and those who had the care of Ahab's sons, sent to Jehu, saying, We are your servants and will do all your orders; we will not make any man king; do whatever seems best to you.

耶户又给他们写信说，你们若归顺我，听从我的话，明日这时候，要将你们主人众子的首级带到耶斯列来见我。那时王的儿子七十人都住在教养他们那城中的尊贵人家里。
Then he sent them a second letter, saying, If you are on my side, and if you will do my orders, come to me at Jezreel by this time tomorrow, with the heads of your master's sons. Now the king's seventy sons were with the great men of the town, who had the care of them.

信一到，他们就把王的七十个儿子杀了，将首级装在筐里，送到耶斯列耶户那里。
And when the letter came to them, they took the king's sons and put them to death, all the seventy, and put their heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezreel.

有使者来告诉耶户说，他们将王众子的首级送来了。耶户说，将首级在城门口堆作两堆，搁到明日。
And a man came and said to him, They have come with the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Put them down in two masses at the doorway of the town till the morning.

次日早晨，耶户出来，站着对众民说，你们都是公义的，我背叛我主人，将他杀了。这些人却是谁杀的呢？
And in the morning he went out and, stopping, said to all the people there, You are upright men: it is true that I made designs against my master, and put him to death; but who is responsible for the death of all these?

由此可知，耶和华指着亚哈家所说的话一句没有落空，因为耶和华借他仆人以利亚所说的话都成就了。
You may be certain that nothing which the Lord has said about the family of Ahab will be without effect; for the Lord has done what he said by his servant Elijah.

凡亚哈家在耶斯列所剩下的人和他的大臣，密友，祭司，耶户尽都杀了，没有留下一个。
So Jehu put to death all the rest of the seed of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his relations and his near friends and his priests, till there were no more of them.

耶户起身往撒玛利亚去。在路上，牧人剪羊毛之处，
Then he got up and came to Samaria. And he was at the meeting-place of the keepers of sheep, by the way,

遇见犹大王亚哈谢的弟兄，问他们说，你们是谁。回答说，我们是亚哈谢的弟兄，现在下去要问王和太后的众子安。
When he came across the brothers of Ahaziah, king of Judah, and said, Who are you? And they said, We are the brothers of Ahaziah, king of Judah; we are going down to see the children of the king and of the queen.

耶户吩咐说，活捉他们。跟从的人就活捉了他们，将他们杀在剪羊毛之处的坑边，共四十二人，没有留下一个。
And he said, Take them living. So they took them living, and put them to death in the water-hole of Beth-eked; of the forty-two men he put every one to death;

耶户从那里前行，恰遇利甲的儿子约拿达来迎接他，耶户问他安，对他说，你诚心待我像我诚心待你吗？约拿达回答说，是。耶户说，若是这样，你向我伸手，他就伸手。耶户拉他上车。
And when he had gone away from there, he came across Jehonadab, the son of Rechab: and he said good-day to him, and said to him, Is your heart true to mine, as mine is to yours? And Jehonadab in answer said, It is; and Jehu said, If it is, give me your hand. And he gave him his hand, and he made him come up into his carriage.

耶户说，你和我同去，看我为耶和华怎样热心。于是请他坐在车上，
And he said, Come with me and see how I am on fire for the Lord's cause. So he made him go with him in his carriage.

到了撒玛利亚，就把撒玛利亚亚哈家剩下的人都杀了，直到灭尽，正如耶和华对以利亚所说的。
And when he came to Samaria, he put to death all those of Ahab's family who were still in Samaria, till there were no more of them, as the Lord had said to Elijah.

耶户招聚众民，对他们说，亚哈事奉巴力还冷淡，耶户却更热心。
Then Jehu got all the people together and said to them, Ahab was Baal's servant in a small way, but Jehu will be his servant on a great scale.

现在我要给巴力献大祭。应当叫巴力的众先知和一切拜巴力的人，并巴力的众祭司，都到我这里来，不可缺少一个。凡不来的必不得活。耶户这样行，是用诡计要杀尽拜巴力的人。
Now send for all the prophets of Baal and all his servants and all his priests, to come to me; let no one keep away: for I have a great offering to make to Baal; anyone who is not present, will be put to death. This Jehu did with deceit, his purpose being the destruction of the servants of Baal.

耶户说，要为巴力宣告严肃会。于是宣告了。
And Jehu said, Let there be a special holy meeting for the worship of Baal. So a public statement was made.

耶户差人走遍以色列地。凡拜巴力的人都来齐了，没有一个不来的。他们进了巴力庙，巴力庙中从前边直到后边都满了人。
And Jehu sent out through all Israel; and all the servants of Baal came, not one kept away. And they came into the house of Baal, so that it was full from end to end.

耶户吩咐掌管礼服的人说，拿出礼服来，给一切拜巴力的人穿。他就拿出礼服来给了他们。
And Jehu said to him who kept the robes, Get out robes for all the servants of Baal. So he got out robes for them.

耶户和利甲的儿子约拿达进了巴力庙，对拜巴力的人说，你们察看察看，在你们这里不可有耶和华的仆人，只可容留拜巴力的人。
And Jehu, with Jehonadab, the son of Rechab, went into the house of Baal; and he said to the servants of Baal, Make a search with care, to see that no servant of the Lord is with you, but only servants of Baal.

耶户和约拿达进去，献平安祭和燔祭。耶户先安排八十人在庙外，吩咐说，我将这些人交在你们手中，若有一人脱逃，谁放的必叫他偿命。
Then they went in to make offerings and burned offerings. Now Jehu had put eighty men outside, and said to them, If any man whom I give into your hands gets away, the life of him who lets him go will be the price of his life.

耶户献完了燔祭，就出来吩咐护卫兵和众军长说，你们进去杀他们，不容一人出来。护卫兵和军长就用刀杀他们，将尸首抛出去，便到巴力庙的城去了，
Then when the burned offering was ended, straight away Jehu said to the armed men and the captains, Go in and put them to death; let not one come out. So they put them to the sword; and, pulling the images to the earth, they went into the holy place of the house of Baal.

将巴力庙中的柱像都拿出来烧了。
And they took out the image of Asherah from the house of Baal, and had it burned.

毁坏了巴力柱像，拆毁了巴力庙作为厕所，直到今日。
The altar of Baal was pulled down and the house of Baal was broken up and made an unclean place, as it is to this day.

这样，耶户在以色列中灭了巴力。
So Jehu put an end to the worship of Baal in Israel.

只是耶户不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，就是拜伯特利和但的金牛犊。
But Jehu did not keep himself from all the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, and the evil he made Israel do; the gold oxen were still in Beth-el and in Dan.

耶和华对耶户说，因你办好我眼中看为正的事，照我的心意待亚哈家，你的子孙必接续你坐以色列的国位，直到四代。
And the Lord said to Jehu, Because you have done well in doing what is right in my eyes and effecting all my purpose for the family of Ahab, your sons will be kings of Israel to the fourth generation.

只是耶户不尽心遵守耶和华以色列神的律法，不离开耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
But Jehu did not take care to keep the law of the Lord with all his heart: he did not keep himself from the sin which Jeroboam did and made Israel do.

在那些日子，耶和华才割裂以色列国，使哈薛攻击以色列的境界，
In those days the Lord was angry first with Israel; and Hazael made attacks on all the land of Israel,

乃是约旦河东，基列全地，从靠近亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥起，就是基列和巴珊的迦得人，流便人，玛拿西人之地。
East of Jordan, in all the land of Gilead, the Gadites and the Reubenites and the Manassites, from Aroer by the valley of the Arnon, all Gilead and Bashan.

耶户其余的事，凡他所行的和他的勇力都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all he did, and his great power, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

耶户与他列祖同睡，葬在撒玛利亚。他儿子约哈斯接续他作王。
And Jehu went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son became king in his place.

耶户在撒玛利亚作以色列王二十八年。
And the time of Jehu's rule over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.

亚哈谢的母亲亚他利雅见她儿子死了，就起来剿灭王室。
Now when Athaliah, the mother of Ahaziah, saw that her son was dead, she had all the rest of the seed of the kingdom put to death.

但约兰王的女儿，亚哈谢的妹子约示巴，将亚哈谢的儿子约阿施从那被杀的王子中偷出来，把他和他的乳母都藏在卧房里，躲避亚他利雅，免得被杀。
But Jehosheba, the daughter of King Joram, sister of Ahaziah, secretly took Joash, the son of Ahaziah, with the woman who took care of him, away from among the king's sons who were put to death, and put him in the bedroom; and they kept him safe from Athaliah, so that he was not put to death.

约阿施和他的乳母藏在耶和华的殿里六年。亚他利雅篡了国位。
And for six years she kept him safe in the house of the Lord, while Athaliah was ruling over the land.

第七年，耶何耶大打发人叫迦利人（或作亲兵）和护卫兵的众百夫长来，领他们进了耶和华的殿，与他们立约，使他们在耶和华殿里起誓，又将王的儿子指给他们看，
Then in the seventh year, Jehoiada sent for the captains of hundreds of the Carians, and the armed men, and taking them into the house of the Lord, made an agreement with them, and made them take an oath in the house of the Lord, and let them see the king's son.

吩咐他们说，你们当这样行，凡安息日进班的三分之一要看守王宫，
And he gave them orders, saying, This is what you are to do: the third part of you, who come in on the Sabbath and keep the watch of the king's house,

三分之一要在苏珥门，三分之一要在护卫兵院的后门。这样把守王宫，拦阻闲人。
...

你们安息日所有出班的三分之二要在耶和华的殿里护卫王。
And the two divisions of you, who go out on the Sabbath and keep the watch of the house of the Lord,

各人手拿兵器，四围护卫王。凡擅入你们班次的必当治死，王出入的时候，你们当跟随他。
Will make a circle round the king, every man being armed; and whoever comes inside your lines is to be put to death; keep with the king, when he goes out and when he comes in.

众百夫长就照着祭司耶何耶大一切所吩咐的去行，各带所管安息日进班出班的人来见祭司耶何耶大。
And the captains of hundreds did as Jehoiada the priest gave them orders; every one took with him his men, those who came in and those who went out on the Sabbath, and they came in to Jehoiada the priest.

祭司便将耶和华殿里所藏大卫王的枪和盾牌交给百夫长。
And the priest gave to the captains of hundreds the spears and body-covers which had been King David's, and which were kept in the house of the Lord.

护卫兵手中各拿兵器，在坛和殿那里，从殿右直到殿左，站在王子的四围。
Then the armed men took up their positions, every man with his instruments of war in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left, round about the altar and the house.

祭司领王子出来，给他戴上冠冕，将律法书交给他，膏他作王。众人就拍掌说，愿王万岁。
Then he made the king's son come out, and put the crown on him and the arm-bands, and made him king, and put the holy oil on him; and they all, making sounds of joy with their hands, said, Long life to the king.

亚他利雅听见护卫兵和民的声音，就到民那里，进耶和华的殿，
Now Athaliah, hearing the noise made by the people, came to the people in the house of the Lord;

看见王照例站在柱旁，百夫长和吹号的人侍立在王左右，国中的众民欢乐吹号。亚他利雅就撕裂衣服，喊叫说，反了。反了。
And looking, she saw the king in his regular place by the pillar, and the captains and the horns near him; and all the people of the land giving signs of joy and sounding the horns. Then Athaliah, violently parting her robes, gave a cry, saying, Broken faith, broken faith!

祭司耶何耶大吩咐管辖军兵的百夫长说，将她赶出班外，凡跟随她的必用刀杀死。因为祭司说不可在耶和华殿里杀她，
Then Jehoiada the priest gave orders to those who were placed in authority over the army, saying, Take her outside the lines, and let anyone who goes after her be put to death with the sword, for he said, Let her not be put to death in the house of the Lord.

众兵就闪开让她去。她从马路上王宫去，便在那里被杀。
So they put their hands on her, and she went to the king's house by the doorway of the horses, and there she was put to death.

耶何耶大使王和民与耶和华立约，作耶和华的民。又使王与民立约。
And Jehoiada made an agreement between the Lord and the king and the people, that they would be the Lord's people; and in the same way between the king and the people.

于是国民都到巴力庙，拆毁了庙，打碎坛和像，又在坛前将巴力的祭司玛坦杀了。祭司耶何耶大派官看守耶和华的殿，
Then all the people of the land went to the house of Baal and had it pulled down: its altars and images were all broken to bits, and Mattan, the priest of Baal, they put to death before the altars. And the priest put overseers over the Lord's house.

又率领百夫长和迦利人（或作亲兵）与护卫兵，以及国中的众民，请王从耶和华殿下来，由护卫兵的门进入王宫，他就坐了王位。
Then he took the captains of hundreds, and the Carians, and the armed men, and all the people of the land; and they came down with the king from the house of the Lord, through the doorway of the armed men, to the king's house. And he took his place on the seat of the kings.

国民都欢乐，合城都安静。众人已将亚他利雅在王宫那里用刀杀了。
So all the people of the land were glad, and the town was quiet; and they had put Athaliah to death with the sword at the king's house.

约阿施登基的时候年方七岁。
And Jehoash was seven years old when he became king.

耶户第七年，约阿施登基，在耶路撒冷作王四十年。他母亲名叫西比亚，是别是巴人。
In the seventh year of Jehu's rule, Jehoash became king; and he was ruling for forty years in Jerusalem; his mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.

约阿施在祭司耶何耶大教训他的时候，就行耶和华眼中看为正的事。
Jehoash did what was right in the eyes of the Lord all his days, because he was guided by the teaching of Jehoiada the priest.

只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓仍在那里献祭烧香。
But the high places were not taken away; the people went on making offerings and burning them in the high places.

约阿施对众祭司说，凡奉到耶和华殿分别为圣之物所值通用的银子，或各人当纳的身价，或乐意奉到耶和华殿的银子，
And Jehoash said to the priests, All the money of the holy things, which comes into the house of the Lord, (the amount fixed for every man's payment,) and all the money given by any man freely from the impulse of his heart,

你们当从所认识的人收了来，修理殿的一切破坏之处。
Let the priests take, every man from his friends and neighbours, to make good what is damaged in the house, wherever it is to be seen.

无奈到了约阿施王二十三年，祭司仍未修理殿的破坏之处。
But in the twenty-third year of King Jehoash, the priests had not made good the damaged parts of the house.

所以约阿施王召了大祭司耶何耶大和众祭司来，对他们说，你们怎么不修理殿的破坏之处呢？从今以后，你们不要从所认识的人再收银子，要将所收的交出来，修理殿的破坏之处。
Then King Jehoash sent for Jehoiada the priest, and the other priests, and said to them, Why have you not made good what is damaged in the house? now take no more money from your neighbours, but give it for the building up of the house.

众祭司答应不再收百姓的银子，也不修理殿的破坏之处。
So the priests made an agreement to take no more money from the people, and not to make good what was damaged in the house.

祭司耶何耶大取了一个柜子，在柜盖上钻了一个窟窿，放于坛旁，在进耶和华殿的右边。守门的祭司将奉到耶和华殿的一切银子投在柜里。
But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and making a hole in the cover of it, put it by the altar, on the right side when one comes into the house of the Lord; and the priests who kept the door put in it regularly all the money which was taken into the house of the Lord.

他们见柜里的银子多了，便叫王的书记和大祭司上来，将耶和华殿里的银子数算包起来。
And when they saw that there was much money in the chest, the king's scribe and the high priest came and put it in bags, noting the amount of all the money there was in the house of the Lord.

把所平的银子交给督工的，就是耶和华殿里办事的人。他们把银子转交修理耶和华殿的木匠和工人，
And the money which was measured out they gave regularly to those who were responsible for overseeing the work, and these gave it in payment to the woodworkers and the builders who were working on the house of the Lord,

并瓦匠，石匠，又买木料和凿成的石头，修理耶和华殿的破坏之处，以及修理殿的各样使用。
And to the wall-builders and the stone-cutters, and to get wood and cut stone for building up the broken parts of the house of the Lord, and for everything needed to put the house in good order.

但那奉到耶和华殿的银子，没有用以作耶和华殿里的银杯，蜡剪，碗，号，和别样的金银器皿，
But the money was not used for making silver cups or scissors or basins or wind-instruments or any vessels of gold or silver for the house of the Lord;

乃将那银子交给督工的人修理耶和华的殿。
But it was all given to the workmen who were building up the house.

且将银子交给办事的人转交作工的人，不与他们算账，因为他们办事诚实。
And they did not get any statement of accounts from the men to whom the money was given for the workmen, for they made use of it with good faith.

惟有赎愆祭，赎罪祭的银子没有奉到耶和华的殿，都归祭司。
The money of the offerings for error and the sin-offerings was not taken into the house of the Lord; it was the priests'.

那时，亚兰王哈薛上来攻打迦特，攻取了，就定意上来攻打耶路撒冷。
Then Hazael, king of Aram, went up against Gath and took it; and his purpose was to go up to Jerusalem.

犹大王约阿施将他列祖犹大王约沙法，约兰，亚哈谢所分别为圣的物和自己所分别为圣的物，并耶和华殿与王宫府库里所有的金子都送给亚兰王哈薛。哈薛就不上耶路撒冷来了。
Then Jehoash, king of Judah, took all the holy things which Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah his fathers, the kings of Judah, had given to the Lord, together with the things he himself had given, and all the gold in the Temple store and in the king's house, and sent it to Hazael, king of Aram; and he went away from Jerusalem.

约阿施其余的事，凡他所行的都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

约阿施的臣仆起来背叛，在下悉拉的米罗宫那里将他杀了。
And his servants made a secret design and put Joash to death at the house of Millo on the way down to Silla.

杀他的那臣仆就是示米押的儿子约撒甲和朔默的儿子约萨拔。众人将他葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子亚玛谢接续他作王。
And Jozacar, the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad, the son of Shomer, his servants, came to him and put him to death; and they put him into the earth with his fathers in the town of David; and Amaziah his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚哈谢的儿子约阿施二十三年，耶户的儿子约哈斯在撒玛利亚登基作以色列王十七年。
In the twenty-third year of Joash, the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, became king over Israel in Samaria, ruling for seventeen years.

约哈斯行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，总不离开。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, copying the sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, which he did and made Israel do; he did not keep himself from them.

于是，耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作，将他们屡次交在亚兰王哈薛和他儿子便哈达的手里。
So the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and he gave them up into the power of Hazael, king of Aram, and into the power of Ben-hadad, the son of Hazael, again and again.

约哈斯恳求耶和华，耶和华就应允他，因为见以色列人所受亚兰王的欺压。
Then Jehoahaz made prayer to the Lord, and the Lord gave ear to him, for he saw how cruelly Israel was crushed by the king of Aram.

耶和华赐给以色列人一位拯救者，使他们脱离亚兰人的手。于是以色列人仍旧安居在家里。
(And the Lord gave Israel a saviour, so that they became free from the hands of the Aramaeans; and the children of Israel were living in their tents as in the past.

然而他们不离开耶罗波安家使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪，仍然去行，并且在撒玛利亚留下亚舍拉。
But still they did not give up the sin of Jeroboam, which he made Israel do, but went on with it; and there was an image of Asherah in Samaria.)

亚兰王灭绝约哈斯的民，践踏他们如禾场上的尘沙，只给约哈斯留下五十马兵，十辆战车，一万步兵。
For out of all his army, Jehoahaz had only fifty horsemen and ten carriages and ten thousand footmen; the king of Aram had given them up to destruction, crushing them like dust.

约哈斯其余的事，凡他所行的和他的勇力都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all he did, and his great power, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

约哈斯与他列祖同睡，葬在撒玛利亚。他儿子约阿施接续他作王。
And Jehoahaz went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in Samaria; and Joash his son became king in his place.

犹大王约阿施三十七年，约哈斯的儿子约阿施在撒玛利亚登基作以色列王十六年。
In the thirty-seventh year of the rule of Joash, king of Judah, Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, became king over Israel in Samaria, ruling for sixteen years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的一切罪，仍然去行。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, not turning away from the sin of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, which he did and made Israel do, but he went on with it.

约阿施其余的事，凡他所行的和他与犹大王亚玛谢争战的勇力，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all he did, and the force with which he went to war against Amaziah, king of Judah, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

约阿施与他列祖同睡，耶罗波安坐了他的位。约阿施与以色列诸王一同葬在撒玛利亚。
And Joash went to rest with his fathers and Jeroboam took his place as king; and Joash was put into the earth in Samaria with the kings of Israel.

以利沙得了必死的病，以色列王约阿施下来看他，伏在他脸上哭泣，说，我父阿。我父阿。以色列的战车马兵阿。
Now Elisha became ill with the disease which was the cause of his death: and Joash, king of Israel, came down to him, and weeping over him said, My father, my father, the war-carriages of Israel and its horsemen!

以利沙对他说，你取弓箭来。王就取了弓箭来。
Then Elisha said to him, Take bow and arrows: and he took bow and arrows.

又对以色列王说，你用手拿弓。王就用手拿弓。以利沙按手在王的手上，
And he said to the king of Israel, Put your hand on the bow: and he put his hand on it; and Elisha put his hands on the king's hands.

说，你开朝东的窗户。他就开了。以利沙说，射箭吧。他就射箭。以利沙说，这是耶和华的得胜箭，就是战胜亚兰人的箭。因为你必在亚弗攻打亚兰人，直到灭尽他们。
Then he said; Let the window be open to the east: and he got it open. Then Elisha said, Let the arrow go; and he let it go. And he said, The Lord's arrow of salvation, of salvation over Aram; for you will overcome the Aramaeans in Aphek and put an end to them.

以利沙又说，取几枝箭来。他就取了来。以利沙说，打地吧。他打了三次，便止住了。
And he said, Take the arrows: and he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, Send them down into the earth; and he did so three times and no more.

神人向他发怒，说，应当击打五六次，就能攻打亚兰人直到灭尽。现在只能打败亚兰人三次。
Then the man of God was angry with him and said, If you had done it five or six times, then you would have overcome Aram completely; but now you will only overcome them three times.

以利沙死了，人将他葬埋。到了新年，有一群摩押人犯境，
And death came to Elisha and they put his body into the earth. Now in the spring of the year, armed bands of Moabites frequently came, overrunning the land.

有人正葬死人，忽然看见一群人，就把死人抛在以利沙的坟墓里，一碰着以利沙的骸骨，死人就复活，站起来了。
And while they were putting a dead man into the earth, they saw a band coming; and they put the man quickly into the place where Elisha's body was; and the dead man, on touching Elisha's bones, came to life again, and got up on his feet.

约哈斯年间，亚兰王哈薛屡次欺压以色列人。
And Israel was crushed under the power of Hazael, king of Aram, all the days of Jehoahaz.

耶和华却因与亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各所立的约，仍施恩给以色列人，怜恤他们，眷顾他们，不肯灭尽他们，尚未赶逐他们离开自己面前。
But the Lord was kind to them and had pity on them, caring for them, because of his agreement with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; he would not put them to destruction or send them away from before his face till now.

亚兰王哈薛死了，他儿子便哈达接续他作王。
Then Hazael, king of Aram, came to his end; and Ben-hadad his son became king in his place.

从前哈薛和约阿施的父亲约哈斯争战，攻取了些城邑，现在约哈斯的儿子约阿施三次打败哈薛的儿子便哈达，就收回了以色列的城邑。
And Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz, took again from Ben-hadad, the son of Hazael, the towns which he had taken from Jehoahaz his father in war. Three times Jehoash overcame him and got back the towns of Israel.

以色列王约哈斯的儿子约阿施第二年，犹大王约阿施的儿子亚玛谢登基。
In the second year of Joash, son of Joahaz, king of Israel, Amaziah, the son of Joash, became king of Judah.

他登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十九年。他母亲名叫约耶但，是耶路撒冷人。
He was twenty-five years old when he became king; and he was ruling in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years; his mother's name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem.

亚玛谢行耶和华眼中看为正的事，但不如他祖大卫，乃效法他父约阿施一切所行的。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, though not like David his father; he did as Joash his father had done.

只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓仍在那里献祭烧香。
But still the high places were not taken away; the people went on making offerings and burning them in the high places.

国一坚定，就把杀他父王的臣仆杀了，
Now when he became strong in the kingdom, straight away he put to death those servants who had taken the life of the king his father;

却没有治死杀王之人的儿子，是照摩西律法书上耶和华所吩咐的说，不可因子杀父，也不可因父杀子，各人要为本身的罪而死。
But he did not put their children to death; for the orders of the Lord recorded in the book of the law of Moses say, The fathers are not to be put to death for the children, or the children for their fathers; but a man is to be put to death for the sin which he himself has done.

亚玛谢在盐谷杀了以东人一万，又攻取了西拉，改名叫约帖，直到今日。
He put to the sword twelve thousand men of Edom in the Valley of Salt, and took Sela in war, naming it Joktheel, as it is to this day.

那时，亚玛谢差遣使者去见耶户的孙子约哈斯的儿子以色列王约阿施，说，你来，我们二人相见于战场。
Then Amaziah sent representatives to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us have a meeting face to face.

以色列王约阿施差遣使者去见犹大王亚玛谢，说，利巴嫩的蒺藜差遣使者去见利巴嫩的香柏树，说，将你的女儿给我儿子为妻。后来利巴嫩有一个野兽经过，把蒺藜践踏了。
And Jehoash, king of Israel, sent to Amaziah, king of Judah, saying, The thorn-tree in Lebanon sent to the cedar in Lebanon, saying, Give your daughter to my son for a wife: and a beast from the woodland in Lebanon went by, crushing the thorn under his feet.

你打败了以东人就心高气傲，你以此为荣耀，在家里安居就罢了，为何要惹祸，使自己和犹大国一同败亡呢？
It is true that you have overcome Edom and your heart is uplifted; let that glory be enough for you, and keep in your country; why do you make causes of trouble, putting yourself, and Judah with you, in danger of downfall?

亚玛谢却不肯听这话。于是以色列王约阿施上来，在犹大的伯示麦与犹大王亚玛谢相见于战场。
But Amaziah gave no attention. So Jehoash, king of Israel, went up, and he and Amaziah, king of Judah, came face to face at Beth-shemesh, which is in Judah.

犹大人败在以色列人面前，各自逃回家里去了。
And Judah was overcome before Israel, so that they went in flight, every man to his tent.

以色列王约阿施在伯示麦擒住亚哈谢的孙子，约阿施的儿子犹大王亚玛谢，就来到耶路撒冷，拆毁耶路撒冷的城墙，从以法莲门直到角门共四百肘，
And Jehoash, king of Israel, made Amaziah, king of Judah, the son of Jehoash, son of Ahaziah, prisoner at Beth-shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and had the wall of Jerusalem pulled down from the doorway of Ephraim to the door in the angle, four hundred cubits.

又将耶和华殿里与王宫府库里所有的金银和器皿都拿了去，并带人去为质，就回撒玛利亚去了。
And he took all the gold and silver and all the vessels which were in the house of the Lord and in the store-house of the king, together with those whose lives would be the price of broken faith, and went back to Samaria.

约阿施其余所行的事和他的勇力，并与犹大王亚玛谢争战的事，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash, and his power, and how he went to war with Amaziah, king of Judah, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

约阿施与他列祖同睡，葬在撒玛利亚，以色列诸王的坟地里。他儿子耶罗波安接续他作王。
And Jehoash went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son became king in his place.

以色列王约哈斯的儿子约阿施死后，犹大王约阿施的儿子亚玛谢又活了十五年。
Amaziah, the son of Joash, king of Judah, went on living for fifteen years after the death of Jehoash, son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel.

亚玛谢其余的事都写在犹大列王记上。
And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

耶路撒冷有人背叛亚玛谢，他就逃到拉吉。叛党却打发人到拉吉将他杀了。
Now they made a secret design against him in Jerusalem; and he went in flight to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and put him to death there.

人就用马将他的尸首驮到耶路撒冷，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。
And they took his body on horseback and put it into the earth with his fathers in Jerusalem, the town of David.

犹大众民立亚玛谢的儿子亚撒利雅（又名乌西雅）接续他父作王，那时他年十六岁。
Then all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.

亚玛谢与他列祖同睡之后，亚撒利雅收回以拉他仍归犹大，又重新修理。
He was the builder of Elath, which he got back for Judah after the death of the king.

犹大王约阿施的儿子亚玛谢十五年，以色列王约阿施的儿子耶罗波安在撒玛利亚登基，作王四十一年。
In the fifteenth year of the rule of Amaziah, son of Joash, king of Judah, Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel, became king in Samaria, ruling for forty-one years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的一切罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, not turning away from the sin which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do.

他收回以色列边界之地，从哈马口直到亚拉巴海，正如耶和华以色列的神，借他仆人迦特希弗人亚米太的儿子先知约拿所说的。
He got back the old limits of Israel from the way into Hamath to the sea of the Arabah, as the Lord had said by his servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the prophet of Gath-hepher.

因为耶和华看见以色列人甚是艰苦，无论困住的，自由的都没有了，也无人帮助以色列人。
For the Lord saw how bitter was the trouble of Israel, and that everyone was cut off, he who was shut up and he who went free, and that Israel had no helper.

耶和华并没有说要将以色列的名从天下涂抹，乃借约阿施的儿子耶罗波安拯救他们。
And the Lord had not said that the name of Israel was to be taken away from the earth; but he gave them a saviour in Jeroboam, the son of Joash.

耶罗波安其余的事，凡他所行的和他的勇力，他怎样争战，怎样收回大马色和先前属犹大的哈马归以色列，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all he did, and his power, and how he went to war with Damascus, causing the wrath of the Lord to be turned away from Israel, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

耶罗波安与他列祖以色列诸王同睡。他儿子撒迦利雅接续他作王。
And Jeroboam went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth with the kings of Israel; and Zechariah his son became king in his place.

以色列王耶罗波安二十七年，犹大王亚玛谢的儿子亚撒利雅登基，
In the twenty-seventh year of the rule of Jeroboam, king of Israel, Azariah, son of Amaziah, became king of Judah.

他登基的时候年十六岁，在耶路撒冷作王五十二年。他母亲名叫耶可利雅，是耶路撒冷人。
He was sixteen years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for fifty-two years; his mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.

亚撒利雅行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他父亲亚玛谢一切所行的。
And he did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as his father Amaziah had done.

只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓仍在那里献祭烧香。
But he did not take away the high places, and the people still went on making offerings and burning them in the high places.

耶和华降灾与王，使他长大麻疯，直到死日，他就住在别的宫里。他的儿子约坦管理家事，治理国民。
And the Lord sent disease on the king and he became a leper, and to the day of his death he was living separately in his private house. And Jotham his son was over his house, judging the people of the land.

亚撒利雅其余的事，凡他所行的都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

亚撒利雅与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子约坦接续他作王。
And Azariah went to rest with his fathers and was put into the earth with his fathers in the town of David; and Jotham his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚撒利雅三十八年，耶罗波安的儿子撒迦利雅在撒玛利亚作以色列王六个月。
In the thirty-eighth year of Azaliah, king of Judah, Zechariah, son of Jeroboam, was king over Israel for six months.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他列祖所行的，不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as his father had done, not turning away from the sin which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do.

雅比的儿子沙龙背叛他，在百姓面前击杀他，篡了他的位。
And Shallum, the son of Jabesh, made a secret design against him, and, attacking him in Ibleam, put him to death and became king in his place.

撒迦利雅其余的事都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah are recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel.

这是从前耶和华应许耶户说，你的子孙必坐以色列的国位直到四代。这话果然应验了。
This was what the Lord had said to Jehu, Your sons to the fourth generation will be kings of Israel. And so it came about.

犹大王乌西雅（就是亚撒利雅）三十九年，雅比的儿子沙龙登基在撒玛利亚作王一个月。
Shallum, the son of Jabesh, became king in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah, king of Judah; and he was ruling in Samaria for the space of one month.

迦底的儿子米拿现从得撒上撒玛利亚，杀了雅比的儿子沙龙，篡了他的位。
Then Menahem, the son of Gadi, went up from Tirzah and came to Samaria, and attacking Shallum, son of Jabesh, in Samaria, put him to death and made himself king in his place.

沙龙其余的事和他背叛的情形都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and the secret design which he made, are recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel.

那时米拿现从得撒起攻打提斐萨和其四境，击杀城中一切的人，剖开其中所有的孕妇，都因他们没有给他开城。
Then Menahem sent destruction on Tappuah and all the people in it, and its limits, from Tirzah, because they would not let him come in; and he had all the women who were with child cut open.

犹大王亚撒利雅三十九年，迦底的儿子米拿现登基，在撒玛利亚作以色列王十年。
In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah, king of Judah, Menahem, the son of Gadi, became king over Israel, and was ruling in Samaria for ten years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，终身不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord; he did not keep himself from the sin which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do.

亚述王普勒来攻击以色列国，米拿现给他一千他连得银子，请普勒帮助他坚定国位。
In his day, Pul, the king of Assyria, came up against the land; and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver so that he might let him keep the kingdom.

米拿现向以色列一切大富户索要银子，使他们各出五十舍客勒，就给了亚述王。于是亚述王回去，不在国中停留。
And Menahem got the money from Israel, from all the men of wealth, fifty silver shekels from every man, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria went back without stopping in the land.

米拿现其余的事，凡他所行的都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel?

米拿现与他列祖同睡。他儿子比加辖接续他作王。
And Menahem went to rest with his fathers; and Pekahiah his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚撒利雅五十年，米拿现的儿子比加辖在撒玛利亚登基作以色列王二年。
In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah, the son of Menahem, became king over Israel in Samaria, ruling for two years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, not turning from the sin which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do.

比加辖的将军，利玛利的儿子比加背叛他，在撒玛利亚王宫里的卫所杀了他。亚珥歌伯和亚利耶并基列的五十人帮助比加。比加击杀他，篡了他的位。
And Pekah, the son of Remaliah, his captain, made a secret design against him, attacking him in the king's great house in Samaria; and with him were fifty men of Gilead; and he put him to death and became king in his place.

比加辖其余的事，凡他所行的都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all he did, are recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel.

犹大王亚撒利雅五十二年，利玛利的儿子比加在撒玛利亚登基作以色列王二十年。
In the fifty-second year of Azariah, king of Judah, Pekah, the son of Remaliah, became king over Israel in Samaria, ruling for twenty years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，不离开尼八的儿子耶罗波安使以色列人陷在罪里的那罪。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, not turning from the sin which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did and made Israel do.

以色列王比加年间，亚述王提革拉毗列色来夺了以云，亚伯伯玛迦，亚挪，基低斯，夏琐，基列，加利利，和拿弗他利全地，将这些地方的居民都掳到亚述去了。
In the days of Pekah, king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, came and took Ijon and Abel-beth-maacah and Janoah and Kedesh and Hazor and Gilead and Galilee and all the land of Naphtali; and he took the people away to Assyria.

乌西雅的儿子约坦二十年，以拉的儿子何细亚背叛利玛利的儿子比加，击杀他，篡了他的位。
And Hoshea, the son of Elah, made a secret design against Pekah, the son of Remaliah, and, attacking him, put him to death and became king in his place, in the twentieth year of Jotham, the son of Uzziah.

比加其余的事，凡他所行的都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all he did, are recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Israel.

以色列王利玛利的儿子比加第二年，犹大王乌西雅的儿子约坦登基。
In the second year of Pekah, the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, Jotham, the son of Uzziah, became king of Judah.

他登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王十六年。他母亲名叫耶路沙，是撒督的女儿。
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he was ruling for sixteen years in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok.

约坦行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他父亲乌西雅一切所行的。
And he did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as his father Uzziah had done.

只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓仍在那里献祭烧香。约坦建立耶和华殿的上门。
But he did not take away the high places, and the people still went on making offerings and burning them in the high places. He was the builder of the higher doorway of the house of the Lord.

约坦其余的事，凡他所行的都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

在那些日子，耶和华才使亚兰王利汛和利玛利的儿子比加去攻击犹大。
In those days the Lord first sent against Judah, Rezin, the king of Aram, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah.

约坦与他列祖同睡，葬在他祖大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子亚哈斯接续他作王。
And Jotham went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in the town of David his father; and Ahaz his son became king in his place.

利玛利的儿子比加十七年，犹大王约坦的儿子亚哈斯登基。
In the seventeenth year of Pekah, the son of Remaliah, Ahaz, the son of Jotham, became king of Judah.

他登基的时候年二十岁，在耶路撒冷作王十六年。不像他祖大卫行耶和华他神眼中看为正的事，
Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king; he was ruling for sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the eyes of the Lord his God, as David his father did.

却效法以色列诸王所行的，又照着耶和华从以色列人面前赶出的外邦人所行可憎的事，使他的儿子经火，
But he went in the ways of the kings of Israel, and even made his son go through the fire, copying the disgusting ways of the nations whom the Lord had sent out of the land before the children of Israel.

并在丘坛上，山冈上，各青翠树下献祭烧香。
And he made offerings, burning them in the high places and on the hills and under every green tree.

亚兰王利汛和以色列王利玛利的儿子比加上来攻打耶路撒冷，围困亚哈斯，却不能胜他。
Then Rezin, king of Aram, and Pekah, son of Remaliah, king of Israel, came up to Jerusalem to make war; and they made an attack on Ahaz, shutting him in, but were not able to overcome him.

当时亚兰王利汛收回以拉他归与亚兰，将犹大人从以拉他赶出去。亚兰人（有作以东人的）就来到以拉他，住在那里，直到今日。
At that time the king of Edom got Elath back for Edom, and sent the Jews out of Elath; and the Edomites came back to Elath where they are living to this day.

亚哈斯差遣使者去见亚述王提革拉毗列色，说，我是你的仆人，你的儿子。现在亚兰王和以色列王攻击我，求你来救我脱离他们的手。
So Ahaz sent representatives to Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, saying, I am your servant and your son; come to my help against the kings of Aram and Israel who have taken up arms against me.

亚哈斯将耶和华殿里和王宫府库里所有的金银都送给亚述王为礼物。
And Ahaz took the silver and gold which were in the house of the Lord and in the king's store-house, and sent them as an offering to the king of Assyria.

亚述王应允了他，就上去攻打大马色，将城攻取，杀了利汛，把居民掳到吉珥。
And the king of Assyria, in answer to his request, went up against Damascus and took it, and took its people away as prisoners to Kir, and put Rezin to death.

亚哈斯王上大马色去迎接亚述王提革拉毗列色，在大马色看见一座坛，就照坛的规模样式作法画了图样，送到祭司乌利亚那里。
Then King Ahaz went to Damascus for a meeting with Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria; and there he saw the altar which was at Damascus; and King Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest a copy of the altar, giving the design of it and all the details of its structure.

祭司乌利亚照着亚哈斯王从大马色送来的图样，在亚哈斯王没有从大马色回来之先，建筑一座坛。
And from the copy King Ahaz sent from Damascus, Urijah made an altar and had it ready by the time King Ahaz came back from Damascus.

王从大马色回来看见坛，就近前来，在坛上献祭。
And when the king came from Damascus, he saw the altar; and he went up on it and made an offering on it.

烧燔祭，素祭，浇奠祭，将平安祭牲的血洒在坛上，
He made his burned offering and his meal offering and his drink offering there, draining out the blood of his peace-offerings on the altar.

又将耶和华面前的铜坛从耶和华殿和新坛的中间搬到新坛的北边。
And the brass altar, which was before the Lord, he took from the front of the house, from between his altar and the house of the Lord, and put it on the north side of his altar.

亚哈斯王吩咐祭司乌利亚说，早晨的燔祭，晚上的素祭，王的燔祭，素祭，国内众民的燔祭，素祭，奠祭都要烧在大坛上。燔祭牲和平安祭牲的血也要洒在这坛上，只是铜坛我要用以求问耶和华。
And King Ahaz gave orders to Urijah the priest, saying, Make the morning burned offering and the evening meal offering and the king's burned offering and meal offering, with the burned offerings of all the people and their meal offerings and drink offerings, on the great altar, and put on it all the blood of the burned offerings and of the beasts which are offered; but the brass altar will be for my use to get directions from the Lord.

祭司乌利亚就照着亚哈斯王所吩咐的行了。
So Urijah the priest did everything as the king said

亚哈斯王打掉盆座四面镶着的心子，把盆从座上挪下来，又将铜海从驮海的铜牛上搬下来，放在铺石地。
And King Ahaz took off the sides of the wheeled bases, and took down the great water-vessel from off the brass oxen which were under it and put it on a floor of stone.

又因亚述王的缘故，将耶和华殿为安息日所盖的廊子和王从外入殿的廊子挪移，围绕耶和华的殿。
*** the house of the Lord, because of the king of Assyria.

亚哈斯其余所行的事都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the things which Ahaz did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

亚哈斯与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子希西家接续他作王。
And Ahaz went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth with his fathers in the town of David; and Hezekiah his son became king in his place.

犹大王亚哈斯十二年，以拉的儿子何细亚在撒玛利亚登基作以色列王九年。
In the twelfth year of Ahaz, king of Judah, Hoshea, the son of Elah, became king over Israel in Samaria, ruling for nine years.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，只是不像在他以前的以色列诸王。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, though not like the kings of Israel before him.

亚述王撒缦以色上来攻击何细亚，何细亚就服事他，给他进贡。
Against him came up Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, and Hoshea became his servant and sent him offerings.

何细亚背叛，差人去见埃及王梭，不照往年所行的与亚述王进贡。亚述王知道了，就把他锁禁，囚在监里。
But Hoshea's broken faith became clear to the king of Assyria because he had sent representatives to So, king of Egypt, and did not send his offering to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year: so the king of Assyria had him shut up in prison and put in chains.

亚述王上来攻击以色列遍地，上到撒玛利亚，围困三年。
Then the king of Assyria went through all the land and came up to Samaria, shutting it in with his forces for three years.

何细亚第九年亚述王攻取了撒玛利亚，将以色列人掳到亚述，把他们安置在哈腊与歌散的哈博河边，并玛代人的城邑。
In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria, and took Israel away to Assyria, placing them in Halah and in Habor on the river Gozan, and in the towns of the Medes.

这是因以色列人得罪那领他们出埃及地，脱离埃及王法老手的耶和华他们的神，去敬畏别神，
And the wrath of the Lord came on Israel because they had done evil against the Lord their God, who took them out of the land of Egypt from under the yoke of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and had become worshippers of other gods,

随从耶和华在他们面前所赶出外邦人的风俗和以色列诸王所立的条规。
Living by the rules of the nations whom the Lord had sent out from before the children of Israel.

以色列人暗中行不正的事，违背耶和华他们的神，在他们所有的城邑，从了望楼直到坚固城，建筑丘坛。
And the children of Israel did secretly against the Lord their God things which were not right, building high places for themselves in all their towns, from the tower of the watchmen to the walled town.

在各高冈上，各青翠树下立柱像和木偶。
They put up pillars of stone and wood on every high hill and under every green tree:

在丘坛上烧香，效法耶和华在他们面前赶出的外邦人所行的，又行恶事惹动耶和华的怒气。
Burning their offerings in all the high places, as those nations did whom the Lord sent away from before them; they did evil things, moving the Lord to wrath;

且事奉偶像，就是耶和华警戒他们不可行的。
And they made themselves servants of disgusting things, though the Lord had said, You are not to do this.

但耶和华借众先知，先见劝戒以色列人和犹大人说，当离开你们的恶行，谨守我的诫命律例，遵行我吩咐你们列祖，并借我仆人众先知所传给你们的律法。
And he gave witness to Israel and Judah, by every prophet and seer, saying, Come back from your evil ways, and do my orders and keep my rules, and be guided by the law which I gave to your fathers and sent to you by my servants the prophets.

他们却不听从，竟硬着颈项，效法他们列祖，不信服耶和华他们的神，
And they did not give ear, but became stiff-necked, like their fathers who had no faith in the Lord their God.

厌弃他的律例和他与他们列祖所立的约，并劝戒他们的话，随从虚无的神，自己成为虚妄，效法周围的外邦人，就是耶和华嘱咐他们不可效法的。
And they went against his rules, and the agreement which he made with their fathers, and his laws which he gave them; they gave themselves up to things without sense or value, and became foolish like the nations round them, of whom the Lord had said, Do not as they do.

离弃耶和华他们神的一切诫命，为自己铸了两个牛犊的像，立了亚舍拉，敬拜天上的万象，事奉巴力，
And turning their backs on all the orders which the Lord had given them, they made for themselves images of metal, and the image of Asherah, worshipping all the stars of heaven and becoming servants to Baal.

又使他们的儿女经火，用占卜，行法术卖了自己，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，惹动他的怒气。
And they made their sons and their daughters go through the fire, and they made use of secret arts and unnatural powers, and gave themselves up to doing evil in the eyes of the Lord, till he was moved to wrath.

所以耶和华向以色列人大大发怒，从自己面前赶出他们，只剩下犹大一个支派。
So the Lord was very angry with Israel, and his face was turned away from them: only the tribe of Judah kept its place.

犹大人也不遵守耶和华他们神的诫命，随从以色列人所立的条规。
(But even Judah did not keep the orders of the Lord their God, but were guided by the rules which Israel had made.

耶和华就厌弃以色列全族，使他们受苦，把他们交在抢夺他们的人手中，以致赶出他们离开自己面前，
So the Lord would have nothing to do with all the offspring of Israel, and sent trouble on them, and gave them up into the hands of their attackers, till he had sent them away from before his face.)

将以色列国从大卫家夺回。他们就立尼八的儿子耶罗波安作王。耶罗波安引诱以色列人不随从耶和华，陷在大罪里。
For Israel was broken off from the family of David, and they made Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, king, who, driving them away from the laws of the Lord, made them do a great sin.

以色列人犯耶罗波安所犯的一切罪，总不离开，
And the children of Israel went on with all the sins which Jeroboam did; they did not keep themselves from them;

以致耶和华从自己面前赶出他们，正如借他仆人众先知所说的。这样，以色列人从本地被掳到亚述，直到今日。
Till the Lord put Israel away from before his face, as he had said by all his servants the prophets. So Israel was taken away from their land to Assyria, to this day.

亚述王从巴比伦，古他，亚瓦，哈马，和西法瓦音迁移人来，安置在撒玛利亚的城邑，代替以色列人。他们就得了撒玛利亚，住在其中。
Then the king of Assyria took men from Babylon and from Cuthah and Avva and Hamath and Sepharvaim, and put them in the towns of Samaria in place of the children of Israel; so they got Samaria for their heritage, living in its towns.

他们才住那里的时候，不敬畏耶和华，所以耶和华叫狮子进入他们中间，咬死了些人。
Now when first they were living there they did not give worship to the Lord. So the Lord sent lions among them, causing the death of some of them.

有人告诉亚述王说，你所迁移安置在撒玛利亚各城的那些民，不知道那地之神的规矩，所以那神叫狮子进入他们中间，咬死他们。
So they said to the king of Assyria, The nations whom you have taken as prisoners and put in the towns of Samaria, have no knowledge of the way of the god of the land: so he has sent lions among them, causing their death, because they have no knowledge of his way.

亚述王就吩咐说，叫所掳来的祭司回去一个，使他住在那里，将那地之神的规矩指教那些民。
Then the king of Assyria gave orders, saying, Send there one of the priests whom you took away, and let him be living there and teaching the people the way of the god of the land.

于是有一个从撒玛利亚掳去的祭司回来，住在伯特利，指教他们怎样敬畏耶和华。
So one of the priests whom they had taken away as a prisoner from Samaria came back, and, living in Beth-el, became their teacher in the worship of the Lord.

然而，各族之人在所住的城里各为自己制造神像，安置在撒玛利亚人所造有丘坛的殿中。
And every nation made gods for themselves, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in the towns where they were living.

巴比伦人造疏割比讷像。古他人造匿甲像。哈马人造亚示玛像。
The men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,

亚瓦人造匿哈和他珥他像。西法瓦音人用火焚烧儿女，献给西法瓦音的神亚得米勒和亚拿米勒。
The Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites gave their children to be burned in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.

他们惧怕耶和华，也从他们中间立丘坛的祭司，为他们在有丘坛的殿中献祭。
So they went on worshipping the Lord, and made for themselves, from among all the people, priests for the high places, to make offerings for them in the houses of the high places.

他们又惧怕耶和华，又事奉自己的神，从何邦迁移，就随何邦的风俗。
They gave worship to the Lord, but they gave honour to their gods like the nations did from whom they had been taken as prisoners.

他们直到如今仍照先前的风俗去行，不专心敬畏耶和华，不全守自己的规矩，典章，也不遵守耶和华吩咐雅各后裔的律法，诫命。雅各，就是从前耶和华起名叫以色列的。
So to this day they go on in their old ways, not worshipping the Lord or keeping his orders or his ways or the law and the rule which the Lord gave to the children of Jacob, to whom he gave the name Israel;

耶和华曾与他们立约，嘱咐他们说，不可敬畏别神，不可跪拜事奉他，也不可向他献祭。
And the Lord made an agreement with them and gave them orders, saying, You are to have no other gods; you are not to give worship to them or be their servants or make them offerings:

但那用大能和伸出来的膀臂领你们出埃及地的耶和华，你们当敬畏，跪拜，向他献祭。
But the Lord, who took you out of the land of Egypt with his great power and his outstretched arm, he is your God, to whom you are to give worship and make offerings:

他给你们写的律例，典章，律法，诫命，你们应当永远谨守遵行，不可敬畏别神。
And the rules and the orders and the law which he put in writing for you, you are to keep and do for ever; you are to have no other gods.

我耶和华与你们所立的约你们不可忘记，也不可敬畏别神。
And you are to keep in memory the agreement which I have made with you; and you are to have no other gods.

但要敬畏耶和华你们的神，他必救你们脱离一切仇敌的手。
And you are to give worship to the Lord your God; for it is he who will give you salvation from the hands of all who are against you.

他们却不听从，仍照先前的风俗去行。
But they gave no attention, but went on in their old way.

如此这些民又惧怕耶和华，又事奉他们的偶像。他们子子孙孙也都照样行，效法他们的祖宗，直到今日。
So these nations, worshipping the Lord, still were servants to the images they had made; their children and their children's children did the same; as their fathers did, so do they, to this day.

以色列王以拉的儿子何细亚第三年，犹大王亚哈斯的儿子希西家登基。
Now in the third year of Hoshea, son of Elah, king of Israel, Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, became king of Judah.

他登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十九年。他母亲名叫亚比，是撒迦利雅的女儿。
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, ruling in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years; his mother's name was Abi, the daughter of Zechariah.

希西家行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他祖大卫一切所行的。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord as David his father had done.

他废去丘坛，毁坏柱像，砍下木偶，打碎摩西所造的铜蛇，因为到那时以色列人仍向铜蛇烧香。希西家叫铜蛇为铜块（或作人称铜蛇为铜像）。
He had the high places taken away, and the stone pillars broken to bits, and the Asherah cut down; and the brass snake which Moses had made was crushed to powder at his order, because in those days the children of Israel had offerings burned before it, and he gave it the name Nehushtan.

希西家倚靠耶和华以色列的神，在他前后的犹大列王中没有一个及他的。
He had faith in the Lord, the God of Israel; so that there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah who were before him.

因为他专靠耶和华，总不离开，谨守耶和华所吩咐摩西的诫命。
For his heart was fixed on the Lord, not turning from his ways, and he did his orders which the Lord gave to Moses.

耶和华与他同在，他无论往何处去尽都亨通。他背叛，不肯事奉亚述王。
And the Lord was with him; he did well in all his undertakings: and he took up arms against the king of Assyria and was his servant no longer.

希西家攻击非利士人，直到迦萨，并迦萨的四境，从了望楼到坚固城。
He overcame the Philistines as far as Gaza and its limits, from the tower of the watchman to the walled town.

希西家王第四年，就是以色列王以拉的儿子何细亚第七年，亚述王撒缦以色上来围困撒玛利亚。
Now in the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea, son of Elah, king of Israel, Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, came up against Samaria, shutting it in with his armies.

过了三年就攻取了城。希西家第六年，以色列王何细亚第九年，撒玛利亚被攻取了。
And at the end of three years they took it; in the sixth year of Hezekiah's rule, which was the ninth year of Hoshea, king of Israel, Samaria was taken.

亚述王将以色列人掳到亚述，把他们安置在哈腊与歌散的哈博河边，并玛代人的城邑。
And the king of Assyria took Israel away as prisoners into Assyria, placing them in Halah and in Habor on the river Gozan, and in the towns of the Medes;

都因他们不听从耶和华他们神的话，违背他的约，就是耶和华仆人摩西吩咐他们所当守的。
Because they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord their God, but went against his agreement, even against everything ordered by Moses, the servant of the Lord, and they did not give ear to it or do it.

希西家王十四年，亚述王西拿基立上来攻击犹大的一切坚固城，将城攻取。
Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up against all the walled towns of Judah and took them.

犹大王希西家差人往拉吉去见亚述王，说，我有罪了，求你离开我。凡你罚我的，我必承当。于是亚述王罚犹大王希西家银子三百他连得，金子三十他连得。
And Hezekiah, king of Judah, sent to Lachish, to the king of Assyria, saying, I have done wrong; give up attacking me, and whatever you put on me I will undergo. And the payment he was to make was fixed by the king of Assyria at three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.

希西家就把耶和华殿里和王宫府库里所有的银子都给了他。
So Hezekiah gave him all the silver in the house of the Lord, and in the king's store-house.

那时，犹大王希西家将耶和华殿门上的金子，和他自己包在柱上的金子，都刮下来，给了亚述王。
And at that time Hezekiah had the gold from the doors of the Lord's house, and from the door-pillars plated by him, cut off and gave it to the king of Assyria.

亚述王从拉吉差遣他珥探，拉伯撒利，和拉伯沙基率领大军往耶路撒冷，到希西家王那里去。他们上到耶路撒冷，就站在上池的水沟旁，在漂布地的大路上。
Then the king of Assyria sent the Tartan and the Rab-saris and the Rab-shakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem, to King Hezekiah, with a strong force. And they went up and came to Jerusalem, and took up their position by the stream of the higher pool, by the highway of the washerman's field.

他们呼叫王的时候，就有希勒家的儿子家宰以利亚敬，并书记舍伯那和亚萨的儿子史官约亚，出来见他们。
And they sent for the king, and Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, came out to them.

拉伯沙基说，你们去告诉希西家说，亚述大王如此说，你所倚靠的有什么可仗赖的呢？
And the Rab-shakeh said to them, Say now to Hezekiah, These are the words of the great king, the king of Assyria: In what are you placing your hope?

你说有打仗的计谋和能力，我看不过是虚话。你到底倚靠谁才背叛我呢？
You say you have a design, and strength for war, but these are only words. Now to whom are you looking for support, that you have gone against my authority?

看哪，你所倚靠的埃及是那压伤的苇杖人若靠这杖，就必刺透他的手。埃及王法老向一切倚靠他的人也是这样。
See, now, you are basing your hope on that broken rod of Egypt, which will go through a man's hand if he makes use of it for a support; for so is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all who put their faith in him.

你们若对我说，我们倚靠耶和华我们的神，希西家岂不是将神的丘坛和祭坛废去，且对犹大和耶路撒冷的人说，你们当在耶路撒冷这坛前敬拜吗？
And if you say to me, Our hope is in the Lord our God: is it not he, whose high places and altars Hezekiah has taken away, saying to Judah and Jerusalem that worship may only be given before this altar in Jerusalem?

现在你把当头给我主亚述王，我给你二千匹马，看你这一面骑马的人够不够。
And now, take a chance with my master, the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able to put horsemen on them.

若不然，怎能打败我主臣仆中最小的军长呢？你竟倚靠埃及的战车马兵吗？
How then may you put to shame the least of my master's servants? and you have put your hope in Egypt for war-carriages and horsemen:

现在我上来攻击毁灭这地，岂没有耶和华的意思吗？耶和华吩咐我说，你上去攻击毁灭这地吧。
And have I now come up to send destruction on this place without the Lord's authority? It was the Lord himself who said to me, Go up against this land and make it waste.

希勒家的儿子以利亚敬和舍伯那，并约亚，对拉伯沙基说，求你用亚兰言语和仆人说话，因为我们懂得。不要用犹大言语和我们说话，达到城上百姓的耳中。
Then Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, and Shebna and Joah said to the Rab-shakeh, Will you kindly make use of the Aramaean language in talking to your servants, for we are used to it, and do not make use of the Jews' language in the hearing of the people on the wall.

拉伯沙基说，我主差遣我来，岂是单对你和你的主说这些话吗？不也是对这些坐在城上，要与你们一同吃自己粪，喝自己尿的人说吗？
But the Rab-shakeh said to them, Is it to your master or to you that my master has sent me to say these words? has he not sent me to the men seated on the wall? for they are the people who will be short of food with you when the town is shut in.

于是拉伯沙基站着，用犹大言语大声喊着说，你们当听亚述大王的话。
Then the Rab-shakeh got up and said with a loud voice in the Jews' language, Give ear to the words of the great king, the king of Assyria;

王如此说，你们不要被希西家欺哄了。因他不能救你们脱离我的手。
This is what the king says: Do not be tricked by Hezekiah, for there is no salvation for you in him.

也不要听希西家使你们倚靠耶和华，说耶和华必要拯救我们，这城必不交在亚述王的手中。
And do not let Hezekiah make you put your faith in the Lord, saying, The Lord will certainly keep us safe, and this town will not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.

不要听希西家的话。因亚述王如此说，你们要与我和好，出来投降我，各人就可以吃自己葡萄树和无花果树的果子，喝自己井里的水。
Do not give ear to Hezekiah, for this is what the king of Assyria says: Make peace with me and come out to me; and everyone will be free to take the fruit of his vine and of his fig-tree, and the water of his spring;

等我来领你们到一个地方与你们本地一样，就是有五谷和新酒之地，有粮食和葡萄园之地，有橄榄树和蜂蜜之地，好使你们存活，不至于死。希西家劝导你们，说耶和华必拯救我们；你们不要听他的话。
Till I come and take you away to a land like yours, a land of grain and wine, a land of bread and vine-gardens, a land of oil-giving olives and of honey, so that life and not death may be your fate. Give no attention to Hezekiah when he says to you, The Lord will keep us safe.

列国的神有哪一个救他本国脱离亚述王的手呢？
Has any one of the gods of the nations kept his land from falling into the hands of the king of Assyria?

哈马，亚珥拔的神在哪里呢？西法瓦音，希拿，以瓦的神在哪里呢？他们曾救撒玛利亚脱离我的手吗？
Where are the gods of Hamath and of Arpad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena and Ivvah? have they kept Samaria out of my hands?

这些国的神有谁曾救自己的国脱离我的手呢？难道耶和华能救耶路撒冷脱离我的手吗？
Who among all the gods of these countries have kept their country from falling into my hands, to give cause for the thought that the Lord will keep Jerusalem from falling into my hands?

百姓静默不言，并不回答一句，因为王曾吩咐说，不要回答他。
But the people kept quiet and gave him no answer: for the king's order was, Give him no answer.

当下，希勒家的儿子家宰以利亚敬和书记舍伯那，并亚萨的儿子史官约亚，都撕裂衣服，来到希西家那里，将拉伯沙基的话告诉了他。
Then Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, came to Hezekiah, with their clothing parted as a sign of grief, and gave him an account of what the Rab-shakeh had said.

希西家王听见，就撕裂衣服，披上麻布，进了耶和华的殿。
And on hearing it, King Hezekiah took off his robe, and put on haircloth, and went into the house of the Lord.

使家宰以利亚敬和书记舍伯那，并祭司中的长老，都披上麻布，去见亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚，
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and the chief priests, dressed in haircloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.

对他说，希西家如此说，今日是急难，责罚，凌辱的日子，就如妇人将要生产婴孩，却没有力量生产。
And they said to him, Hezekiah says, This day is a day of trouble and punishment and shame; for the children are ready to come to birth, but there is no strength to give birth to them.

或者耶和华你的神听见拉伯沙基的一切话，就是他主人亚述王打发他来辱骂永生神的话，耶和华你的神听见这话，就发斥责。故此，求你为余剩的民扬声祷告。
It may be that the Lord your God will give ear to the words of the Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria, his master, sent to say evil things against the living God, and will make his words come to nothing: so then make your prayer for the rest of the people.

希西家王的臣仆就去见以赛亚。
So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

以赛亚对他们说，要这样对你们的主人说，耶和华如此说，你听见亚述王的仆人亵渎我的话，不要惧怕。
And Isaiah said to them, This is what you are to say to your master: The Lord says, Be not troubled by the words which the servants of the king of Assyria have said against me in your hearing.

我必惊动（原文作使灵进入）他的心，他要听见风声就归回本地。我必使他在那里倒在刀下。
See, I will put a spirit into him, and bad news will come to his ears, and he will go back to his land; and there I will have him put to death by the sword.

拉伯沙基回去，正遇见亚述王攻打立拿，原来他早听见亚述王拔营离开拉吉。
So the Rab-shakeh went back, and when he got there the king of Assyria was making war against Libnah, for it had come to his ears that he had gone away from Lachish.

亚述王听见人论古实王特哈加说，他出来要与你争战。于是亚述王又打发使者去见希西家，吩咐他们说，
And when news came to him that Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, had made an attack on him, he sent representatives to Hezekiah again, saying,

你们对犹大王希西家如此说，不要听你所倚靠的神欺哄你说，耶路撒冷必不交在亚述王的手中。
This is what you are to say to Hezekiah, king of Judah: Let not your God, in whom is your faith, give you a false hope, saying, Jerusalem will not be given into the hands of the king of Assyria.

你总听说亚述诸王向列国所行的，乃是尽行灭绝，难道你还能得救吗？
No doubt the story has come to your ears of what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, putting them to the curse; and will you be kept safe?

我列祖所毁灭的，就是歌散，哈兰，利色，和属提拉撒的伊甸人，这些国的神何曾拯救这些国呢？
Did the gods of the nations keep safe those on whom my fathers sent destruction, Gozan and Haran and Rezeph and the children of Eden who were in Telassar?

哈马的王，亚珥拔的王，西法瓦音城的王，希拿，和以瓦的王都在哪里呢？
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the town of Sepharvaim, of Hena and of Ivvah?

希西家从使者手里接过书信来，看完了，就上耶和华的殿，将书信在耶和华面前展开。
And Hezekiah took the letter from the hands of those who had come with it; and after reading it, Hezekiah went up to the house of the Lord, opening the letter there before the Lord.

希西家向耶和华祷告说，坐在二基路伯上耶和华以色列的神阿，你是天下万国的神，你曾创造天地。
And Hezekiah made his prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, the God of Israel, seated between the winged ones, you only are the God of all the kingdoms of the earth; you have made heaven and earth.

耶和华阿，求你侧耳而听。耶和华阿，求你睁眼而看。要听西拿基立打发使者来辱骂永生神的话。
Let your ear be turned to us, O Lord, and let your eyes be open, O Lord, and see; take note of all the words of Sennacherib who has sent men to say evil against the living God.

耶和华阿，亚述诸王果然使列国和列国之地变为荒凉，
Truly, O Lord, the kings of Assyria have made waste the nations and their lands,

将列国的神像都扔在火里。因为它本不是神，乃是人手所造的，是木头石头的，所以灭绝它。
And have given their gods to the fire; for they were no gods, but wood and stone, the work of men's hands; so they have given them to destruction.

耶和华我们的神阿，现在求你救我们脱离亚述王的手，使天下万国都知道惟独你耶和华是神。
But now, O Lord our God, give us salvation from his hands, so that it may be clear to all the kingdoms of the earth that you and only you, O Lord, are God.

亚摩斯的儿子以赛亚就打发人去见希西家，说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，你既然求我攻击亚述王西拿基立，我已听见了。
Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent to Hezekiah, saying, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, The prayer which you have made to me against Sennacherib, king of Assyria, has come to my ears.

耶和华论他这样说，锡安的处女藐视你，嗤笑你。耶路撒冷的女子向你摇头。
This is the word which the Lord has said about him: In the eyes of the virgin daughter of Zion you are shamed and laughed at; the daughter of Jerusalem has made sport of you.

你辱骂谁。亵渎谁。扬起声来，高举眼目攻击谁呢？乃是攻击以色列的圣者。
Against whom have you said evil and bitter things? against whom has your voice been loud and your eyes lifted up? even against the Holy One of Israel.

你借你的使者辱骂主，并说，我率领许多战车上山顶，到利巴嫩极深之处。我要砍伐其中高大的香柏树和佳美的松树。我必上极高之处，进入肥田的树林。
You have sent your servants with evil words against the Lord, and have said, With all my war-carriages I have come up to the top of the mountains, to the inmost parts of Lebanon; its tall cedars will be cut down, and the best trees of its woods; I will come up into his highest places, into his thick woods.

我已经在外邦挖井喝水。我必用脚掌踏干埃及的一切河。
I have made water-holes and taken their waters, and with my foot I have made all the rivers of Egypt dry.

耶和华说，我早先所作的，古时所立的，就是现在借你使坚固城荒废，变为乱堆，这事你岂没有听见吗？
Has it not come to your ears how I did it long before, purposing it in times long past? Now I have given effect to my design, so that by you strong towns might be turned into masses of broken walls.

所以其中的居民力量甚小，惊惶羞愧。他们像野草，像青菜，如房顶上的草，又如未长成而枯干的禾稼。
This is why their townsmen had no power, they were broken and put to shame; they were like the grass of the field and the green plant, like grass on the house-tops.

你坐下，你出去，你进来，你向我发烈怒，我都知道。
But I have knowledge of your getting up and your resting, of your going out and your coming in.

因你向我发烈怒，又因你狂傲的话达到我耳中，我就要用钩子钩上你的鼻子，把嚼环放在你口里，使你从你来的路转回去。
Because your wrath against me and your words of pride have come up to my ears, I will put my hook in your nose and my cord in your lips, and I will make you go back by the way you came.

以色列人哪，我赐你们一个证据，你们今年要吃自生的，明年也要吃自长的。至于后年，你们要耕种收割，栽植葡萄园，吃其中的果子。
And this will be the sign to you: you will get your food this year from what comes up of itself; and in the second year from the produce of the same; and in the third year you will put in your seed and get in the grain and make vine-gardens and take of their fruit.

犹大家所逃脱余剩的，仍要往下扎根，向上结果。
And those of Judah who are still living will again take root in the earth and give fruit.

必有余剩的民从耶路撒冷而出。必有逃脱的人从锡安山而来。耶和华的热心必成就这事。
For from Jerusalem those who have been kept safe will go out, and those who are still living will go out of Mount Zion: by the fixed purpose of the Lord of armies this will be done.

所以，耶和华论亚述王如此说，他必不得来到这城，也不在这里射箭，不得拿盾牌到城前，也不筑垒攻城。
For this cause the Lord says about the king of Assyria, He will not come into this town, or send an arrow against it; he will not come before it with arms, or put up an earthwork against it;

他从哪条路来，必从那条路回去，必不得来到这城。这是耶和华说的。
By the way he came he will go back, and he will not get into this town, says the Lord.

因我为自己的缘故，又为我仆人大卫的缘故，必保护拯救这城。
For I will keep this town safe, for my honour, and for the honour of my servant David.

当夜，耶和华的使者出去，在亚述营中杀了十八万五千人。清早有人起来，一看，都是死尸了。
And that night the angel of the Lord went out and put to death in the army of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand men; and when the people got up early in the morning, there was nothing to be seen but dead bodies.

亚述王西拿基立就拔营回去，住在尼尼微。
So Sennacherib, king of Assyria, went back to his place at Nineveh.

一日在他的神尼斯洛庙里叩拜，他儿子亚得米勒和沙利色用刀杀了他，就逃到亚拉腊地。他儿子以撒哈顿接续他作王。
And it came about, when he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer put him to death with the sword; and they went in flight into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon his son became king in his place.

那时，希西家病得要死。亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚去见他，对他说，耶和华如此说，你当留遗命与你的家，因为你必死，不能活了。
In those days Hezekiah was ill and near death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to him, The Lord says, Put your house in order, for your death is near.

希西家就转脸朝墙，祷告耶和华说，
Then, turning his face to the wall, he made his prayer to the Lord, saying,

耶和华阿，求你记念我在你面前怎样存完全的心，按诚实行事，又作你眼中所看为善的。希西家就痛哭了。
O Lord, keep in mind how I have been true to you with all my heart, and have done what is good in your eyes. And Hezekiah gave way to bitter weeping.

以赛亚出来，还没有到中院（院或作城），耶和华的话就临到他，说，
Now before Isaiah had gone out of the middle of the town, the word of the Lord came to him, saying,

你回去告诉我民的君希西家说，耶和华你祖大卫的神如此说，我听见了你的祷告，看见了你的眼泪，我必医治你。到第三日，你必上到耶和华的殿。
Go back and say to Hezekiah, the ruler of my people, The Lord, the God of David your father, says, Your prayer has come to my ears, and I have seen your weeping; see, I will make you well: on the third day you will go up to the house of the Lord.

我必加增你十五年的寿数，并且我要救你和这城脱离亚述王的手。我为自己和我仆人大卫的缘故，必保护这城。
I will give you fifteen more years of life; and I will keep you and this town safe from the hands of the king of Assyria; I will keep this town safe, for my honour, and for the honour of my servant David.

以赛亚说，当取一块无花果饼来。人就取了来，贴在疮上，王便痊愈了。
Then Isaiah said, Take a cake of figs. So they took it and put it on his wound, and he got better.

希西家问以赛亚说，耶和华必医治我，到第三日，我能上耶和华的殿，有什么兆头呢？
And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, What is to be the sign that the Lord will make me well, and that I will go up to the house of the Lord on the third day?

以赛亚说，耶和华必成就他所说的。这是他给你的兆头，你要日影向前进十度呢？是要往后退十度呢？
And Isaiah said, This is the sign the Lord will give you, that he will do what he has said; will the shade go forward ten degrees or back?

希西家回答说，日影向前进十度容易，我要日影往后退十度。
And Hezekiah said in answer, It is a simple thing for the shade to go forward; but let it go back ten degrees.

先知以赛亚求告耶和华，耶和华就使亚哈斯的日晷向前进的日影，往后退了十度。
Then Isaiah the prophet made prayer to the Lord, and he made the shade go back ten degrees from its position on the steps of Ahaz.

那时，巴比伦王巴拉但的儿子比罗达巴拉但听见希西家病而痊愈，就送书信和礼物给他。
At that time, Merodach-baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters with an offering to Hezekiah, because he had news that Hezekiah had been ill.

希西家听从使者的话，就把他宝库的金子，银子，香料，贵重的膏油，和他武库的一切军器，并他所有的财宝，都给他们看。他家中和他全国之内，希西家没有一样不给他们看的。
And Hezekiah was glad at their coming and let them see all his store of wealth, the silver and the gold and the spices and the oil of great price, and the house of his arms, and everything there was in his stores; there was nothing in all his house or his kingdom which Hezekiah did not let them see.

于是先知以赛亚来见希西家王，问他说，这些人说什么。他们从哪里来见你。希西家说，他们从远方的巴比伦来。
Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah and said to him, What did these men say and where did they come from? And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country, even from Babylon.

以赛亚说，他们在你家里看见了什么。希西家说，凡我家中所有的，他们都看见了。我财宝中没有一样不给他们看的。
And he said, What have they seen in your house? And Hezekiah said in answer, They saw everything in my house: there is nothing among my stores which I did not let them see.

以赛亚对希西家说，你要听耶和华的话，
And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Give ear to the word of the Lord.

日子必到，凡你家里所有的，并你列祖积蓄到如今的，都要被掳到巴比伦去，不留下一样。这是耶和华说的。
Truly, days are coming when everything in your house, and whatever your fathers have put in store till this day, will be taken away to Babylon: all will be gone, says the Lord.

并且从你本身所生的众子，其中必有被掳去在巴比伦王宫里当太监的。
And your sons, the offspring of your body, they will take away to be unsexed servants in the house of the king of Babylon.

希西家对以赛亚说，你所说耶和华的话甚好。若在我的年日中有太平和稳固的景况，岂不是好吗？
Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which you have said. Then he said, ... if in my time there is peace and righteousness?

希西家其余的事和他的勇力，他怎样挖池，挖沟，引水入城，都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his power, and how he made the pool and the stream, to take water into the town, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

希西家与他列祖同睡。他儿子玛拿西接续他作王。
And Hezekiah went to rest with his fathers; and Manasseh his son became king in his place.

玛拿西登基的时候年十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王五十五年。他母亲名叫协西巴。
Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king; for fifty-five years he was ruling in Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Hephzi-bah.

玛拿西行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法耶和华在以色列人面前赶出的外邦人所行可憎的事。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, copying the disgusting ways of those nations whom the Lord had sent out before the children of Israel.

重新建筑他父希西家所毁坏的丘坛，又为巴力筑坛，作亚舍拉像，效法以色列王亚哈所行的，且敬拜事奉天上的万象。
He put up again the high places which had been pulled down by Hezekiah his father; he made altars for Baal, and an Asherah, as Ahab, king of Israel, had done; he was a worshipper and servant of all the stars of heaven.

在耶和华殿宇中筑坛。耶和华曾指着这殿说，我必立我的名在耶路撒冷。
And he put up altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord had said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.

他在耶和华殿的两院中为天上的万象筑坛，
And he put up altars for all the stars of heaven in the two outer squares of the house of the Lord.

并使他的儿子经火，又观兆，用法术，立交鬼的和行巫术的，多行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，惹动他的怒气。
And he made his son go through the fire, and made use of secret arts and signs for reading the future; he gave positions to those who had control of spirits and to wonder-workers; he did much evil in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to wrath.

又在殿内立雕刻的亚舍拉像。耶和华曾对大卫和他儿子所罗门说，我在以色列众支派中所选择的耶路撒冷和这殿，必立我的名，直到永远。
He put the image of Asherah which he had made in the house of which the Lord had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, the town which I have made mine out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name for ever.

以色列人若谨守遵行我一切所吩咐他们的，和我仆人摩西所吩咐他们的一切律法，我就不再使他们挪移离开我所赐给他们列祖之地。
And never again will I send the feet of Israel wandering from the land which I gave to their fathers; if only they will take care to do all my orders, and keep all the law which my servant Moses gave them.

他们却不听从。玛拿西引诱他们行恶，比耶和华在以色列人面前所灭的列国更甚。
But they did not give ear; and Manasseh made them do more evil than those nations did, whom the Lord gave up to destruction before the children of Israel.

耶和华借他仆人众先知说，
And the Lord said, by his servants the prophets,

因犹大王玛拿西行这些可憎的恶事比先前亚摩利人所行的更甚，使犹大人拜他的偶像，陷在罪里。
Because Manasseh, king of Judah, has done these disgusting things, doing more evil than all the Amorites before him, and making Judah do evil with his false gods,

所以耶和华以色列的神如此说，我必降祸与耶路撒冷和犹大，叫一切听见的人无不耳鸣。
For this cause, says the Lord, the God of Israel, I will send such evil on Jerusalem and Judah that the ears of all to whom the news comes will be burning.

我必用量撒玛利亚的准绳和亚哈家的线铊拉在耶路撒冷上，必擦净耶路撒冷，如人擦盘，将盘倒扣。
And over Jerusalem will be stretched the line of Samaria and the weight of Ahab; Jerusalem will be washed clean as a plate is washed, and turned over on its face.

我必弃掉所余剩的子民（原文作产业），把他们交在仇敌手中，使他们成为一切仇敌掳掠之物。
And I will put away from me the rest of my heritage, and give them up into the hands of their haters, who will take their property and their goods for themselves;

是因他们自从列祖出埃及直到如今，常行我眼中看为恶的事，惹动我的怒气。
Because they have done evil in my eyes, moving me to wrath, from the day when their fathers came out of Egypt till this day.

玛拿西行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，使犹大人陷在罪里，又流许多无辜人的血，充满了耶路撒冷，从这边直到那边。
More than this, Manasseh took the lives of upright men, till Jerusalem from one end to the other was full of blood; in addition to his sin in making Judah do evil in the eyes of the Lord.

玛拿西其余的事，凡他所行的和他所犯的罪都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all he did, and his sins, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

玛拿西与他列祖同睡，葬在自己宫院乌撒的园内。他儿子亚们接续他作王。
So Manasseh went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzza; and Amon his son became king in his place.

亚们登基的时候年二十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王二年。他母亲名叫米舒利密，是约提巴人哈鲁斯的女儿。
Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, ruling in Jerusalem for two years; his mother's name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.

亚们行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，与他父亲玛拿西所行的一样。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as Manasseh his father had done.

行他父亲一切所行的，敬奉他父亲所敬奉的偶像，
He went in all the ways of his father, being a servant and worshipper of the false gods to which his father had been a servant;

离弃耶和华他列祖的神，不遵行耶和华的道。
Turning away from the Lord, the God of his fathers, and not walking in his ways.

亚们王的臣仆背叛他，在宫里杀了他。
And the servants of Amon made a secret design against him, and put the king to death in his house.

但国民杀了那些背叛亚们王的人，立他儿子约西亚接续他作王。
But the people of the land put to death all those who had taken part in the design against the king, and made Josiah his son king in his place.

亚们其余所行的事都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts which Amon did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

亚们葬在乌撒的园内自己的坟墓里。他儿子约西亚接续他作王。
He was put in his last resting-place in the garden of Uzza, and Josiah his son became king in his place.

约西亚登基的时候年八岁，在耶路撒冷作王三十一年。他母亲名叫耶底大，是波斯加人亚大雅的女儿。
Josiah was eight years old when he became king; and he was ruling in Jerusalem for thirty-one years; his mother's name was Jedidah, daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath.

约西亚行耶和华眼中看为正的事，行他祖大卫一切所行的，不偏左右。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, walking in the ways of David his father, without turning to the right hand or to the left.

约西亚王十八年，王差遣米书兰的孙子，亚萨利的儿子书记沙番上耶和华殿去，吩咐他说，
Now in the eighteenth year after he became king, Josiah sent Shaphan, the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the Lord, saying to him,

你去见大祭司希勒家，使他将奉到耶和华殿的银子，就是守门的从民中收聚的银子，数算数算，
Go up to Hilkiah, the chief priest, and let him give out the money which is taken into the house of the Lord, which the keepers of the door have got together from the people;

交给耶和华殿里办事的人，使他们转交耶和华殿里作工的人，好修理殿的破坏之处，
And let it be given to the overseers of the work of the Lord's house, to give to the workmen who are making good what was damaged in the house of the Lord;

就是转交木匠和工人，并瓦匠，又买木料和凿成的石头修理殿宇，
To the woodworkers and the builders and the stone-cutters; and for getting wood and cut stones for the building up of the house.

将银子交在办事的人手里，不与他们算帐，因为他们办事诚实。
They did not have to give any account of the money which was handed to them, for they made use of it with good faith.

大祭司希勒家对书记沙番说，我在耶和华殿里得了律法书。希勒家将书递给沙番，沙番就看了。
Then Hilkiah, the chief priest, said to Shaphan the scribe, I have made discovery of the book of the law in the house of the Lord. So Hilkiah gave it to Shaphan;

书记沙番到王那里，回覆王说，你的仆人已将殿里的银子倒出数算，交给耶和华殿里办事的人了。
Then, after reading it, Shaphan the scribe went in to the king and gave him an account of what had been done, saying, Your servants have given out the money which was in the house, and have given it to the overseers of the work of the house of the Lord.

书记沙番又对王说，祭司希勒家递给我一卷书。沙番就在王面前读那书。
Then Shaphan the scribe said to the king, Hilkiah the priest has given me a book; and he was reading it before the king.

王听见律法书上的话，便撕裂衣服，
And the king, hearing the words of the book of the law, took his robe in his hands, violently parting it as a sign of his grief;

吩咐祭司希勒家与沙番的儿子亚希甘，米该亚的儿子亚革波，书记沙番和王的臣仆亚撒雅，说，
And he gave orders to Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Achbor, the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying,

你们去为我，为民，为犹大众人，以这书上的话求问耶和华。因为我们列祖没有听从这书上的言语，没有遵着书上所吩咐我们的去行，耶和华就向我们大发烈怒。
Go and get directions from the Lord for me and for the people and for all Judah, about the words of this book which has come to light; for great is the wrath of the Lord which is burning against us, because our fathers have not given ear to the words of this book, to do all the things which are recorded in it.

于是，祭司希勒家和亚希甘，亚革波，沙番，亚撒雅都去见女先知户勒大。户勒大是掌管礼服沙龙的妻。沙龙是哈珥哈斯的孙子，特瓦的儿子。户勒大住在耶路撒冷第二区。他们请问于她。
So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam and Achbor and Shaphan and Asaiah, went to Huldah the woman prophet, the wife of Shallum, the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the robes, (now she was living in Jerusalem, in the second part of the town;) and they had talk with her.

她对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们可以回覆那差遣你们来见我的人说，
And she said to them, The Lord, the God of Israel, says, Say to the man who sent you to me,

耶和华如此说，我必照着犹大王所读那书上的一切话，降祸与这地和其上的居民。
These are the words of the Lord: See, I will send evil on this place and on its people, even everything which the king of Judah has been reading in the book;

因为他们离弃我，向别神烧香，用他们手所作的惹我发怒，所以我的忿怒必向这地发作，总不止息。
Because they have given me up, burning offerings to other gods and moving me to wrath by all the work of their hands; so my wrath will be on fire against this place, and will not be put out.

然而，差遣你们来求问耶和华的犹大王，你们要这样回覆他说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，至于你所听见的话，
But to the king of Judah who sent you to get directions from the Lord, say, This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said: As to the words which have come to your ears,

就是听见我指着这地和其上的居民所说，要使这地变为荒场，民受咒诅的话，你便心里敬服，在我面前自卑，撕裂衣服，向我哭泣，因此我应允了你。这是我耶和华说的。
Because your heart was soft, and you made yourself low before me, when you had word of what I said against this place and its people, that they would become a waste and a curse, and you gave signs of grief, weeping before me: truly, I have given ear to you, says the Lord.

我必使你平平安安地归到坟墓到你列祖那里。我要降与这地的一切灾祸，你也不至亲眼看见。他们就回覆王去了。
For this cause I will let you go to your fathers and be put in your last resting-place in peace, and your eyes will not see all the evil which I will send on this place. So they took this news back to the king.

王差遣人招聚犹大和耶路撒冷的众长老来。
Then the king sent and got together all the responsible men of Judah and of Jerusalem.

王和犹大众人与耶路撒冷的居民，并祭司，先知，和所有的百姓，无论大小，都一同上到耶和华的殿。王就把耶和华殿里所得的约书念给他们听。
And the king went up to the house of the Lord, with all the men of Judah and all the people of Jerusalem, and the priests and the prophets and all the people, small and great; and they were present at his reading of the book of the law which had come to light in the house of the Lord.

王站在柱旁，在耶和华面前立约，要尽心尽性地顺从耶和华，遵守他的诫命，法度，律例，成就这书上所记的约言。众民都服从这约。
And the king took his place by the pillar, and made an agreement before the Lord, to go in the way of the Lord, and keep his orders and his decisions and his rules with all his heart and all his soul, and to keep the words of the agreement recorded in the book; and all the people gave their word to keep the agreement.

王吩咐大祭司希勒家和副祭司，并把门的，将那为巴力和亚舍拉，并天上万象所造的器皿，都从耶和华殿里搬出来，在耶路撒冷外汲沦溪旁的田间烧了，把灰拿到伯特利去。
Then the king gave orders to Hilkiah, the chief priest, and to the priests of the second order, and to the keepers of the door, to take out of the house of the Lord all the vessels made for Baal and for the Asherah and for all the stars of heaven; and he had them burned outside Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and took the dust of them to Beth-el.

从前犹大列王所立拜偶像的祭司，在犹大城邑的丘坛和耶路撒冷的周围烧香，现在王都废去，又废去向巴力和日，月，行星（行星或作十二宫），并天上万象烧香的人。
And he put an end to the false priests, who had been put in their positions by the kings of Judah to see to the burning of offerings in the high places in the towns of Judah and the outskirts of Jerusalem, and all those who made offerings to Baal and to the sun and the moon and the twelve signs and all the stars of heaven.

又从耶和华殿里将亚舍拉搬到耶路撒冷外汲沦溪边焚烧，打碎成灰，将灰撒在平民的坟上。
And he took the Asherah from the house of the Lord, outside Jerusalem to the stream Kidron, burning it by the stream and crushing it to dust, and he put the dust on the place where the bodies of the common people were put to rest.

又拆毁耶和华殿里娈童的屋子，就是妇女为亚舍拉织帐子的屋子，
And he had the houses pulled down of those who were used for sex purposes in the house of the Lord, where women were making robes for the Asherah.

并且从犹大的城邑带众祭司来，污秽祭司烧香的丘坛，从迦巴直到别是巴，又拆毁城门旁的丘坛，这丘坛在邑宰约书亚门前，进城门的左边。
And he made all the priests from the towns of Judah come into Jerusalem, and he made unclean the high places where the priests had been burning offerings, from Geba to Beer-sheba; and he had the high places of the evil spirits pulled down which were by the doorway of Joshua, the ruler of the town, on the left side of the way into the town.

但是丘坛的祭司不登耶路撒冷耶和华的坛，只在他们弟兄中间吃无酵饼。
Still the priests of the high places never came up to the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem; but they took their food of unleavened bread among their brothers.

又污秽欣嫩子谷的陀斐特，不许人在那里使儿女经火献给摩洛。
And Topheth, in the valley of the sons of Hinnom, he made unclean, so that no man might make his son or his daughter go through the fire to Molech.

又将犹大列王在耶和华殿门旁，太监拿单米勒靠近游廊的屋子，向日头所献的马废去，且用火焚烧日车。
And he took away the horses which the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the way into the house of the Lord, by the room of Nathan-melech, the unsexed servant, which was in the outer part of the building, and the carriages of the sun he put on fire.

犹大列王在亚哈斯楼顶上所筑的坛和玛拿西在耶和华殿两院中所筑的坛，王都拆毁打碎了，就把灰倒在汲沦溪中。
And the altars on the roof of the high room of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two outer squares of the house of the Lord, were pulled down and crushed to bits, and the dust of them was put into the stream Kidron.

从前以色列王所罗门在耶路撒冷前，邪僻山右边为西顿人可憎的神亚斯他录，摩押人可憎的神基抹，亚扪人可憎的神米勒公所筑的丘坛，王都污秽了，
And the high places before Jerusalem, on the south side of the mountain of destruction, which Solomon, king of Israel, had made for Ashtoreth, the disgusting god of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh, the disgusting god of Moab, and for Milcom, the disgusting god of the children of Ammon, the king made unclean.

又打碎柱像，砍下木偶，将人的骨头充满了那地方。
The stone pillars were broken to bits and the wood pillars cut down, and the places where they had been were made full of the bones of the dead.

他将伯特利的坛，就是叫以色列人陷在罪里，尼八的儿子耶罗波安所筑的那坛，都拆毁焚烧，打碎成灰，并焚烧了亚舍拉。
And the altar at Beth-el, and the high place put up by Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made Israel do evil, that altar and that high place were pulled down; and the high place was burned and crushed to dust and the Asherah was burned.

约西亚回头，看见山上的坟墓，就打发人将坟墓里的骸骨取出来，烧在坛上，污秽了坛，正如从前神人宣传耶和华的话。
Then Josiah, turning round, saw on the mountain the places of the dead, and he sent and had the bones taken out of their places and burned on the altar, so making it unclean, as the Lord had said by the man of God when Jeroboam was in his place by the altar on that feast-day. And he, turning his eyes to the resting-place of the man of God who had given word of these things, said:

约西亚问说，我所看见的是什么碑。那城里的人回答说，先前有神人从犹大来，预先说王现在向伯特利坛所行的事，这就是他的墓碑。
What is that headstone I see over there? And the men of the town said to him, It is the resting-place of the man of God who came from Judah and gave word of all these things which you have done to the altar of Beth-el.

约西亚说，由他吧。不要挪移他的骸骨。他们就不动他的骸骨，也不动从撒玛利亚来那先知的骸骨。
So he said, Let him be; let not his bones be moved. So they let his bones be with the bones of the prophet who came from Samaria.

从前以色列诸王在撒玛利亚的城邑建筑丘坛的殿，惹动耶和华的怒气，现在约西亚都废去了，就如他在伯特利所行的一般。
Then Josiah took away all the houses of the high places in the towns of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had put up, moving the Lord to wrath, and he did with them as he had done in Beth-el.

又将丘坛的祭司都杀在坛上，并在坛上烧人的骨头，就回耶路撒冷去了。
And all the priests of the high places there he put to death on the altars, burning the bones of the dead on them; and then he went back to Jerusalem.

王吩咐众民说，你们当照这约书上所写的，向耶和华你们的神守逾越节。
And the king gave orders to all the people, saying, Keep the Passover to the Lord your God, as it says in this book of the law.

自从士师治理以色列人和以色列王，犹大王的时候，直到如今，实在没有守过这样的逾越节。
Truly, such a Passover had not been kept in all the days of the judges of Israel or of the kings of Israel or the kings of Judah;

只有约西亚王十八年在耶路撒冷向耶和华守这逾越节。
In the eighteenth year of the rule of King Josiah this Passover was kept to the Lord in Jerusalem.

凡犹大国和耶路撒冷所有交鬼的，行巫术的，与家中的神像和偶像，并一切可憎之物，约西亚尽都除掉，成就了祭司希勒家在耶和华殿里所得律法书上所写的话。
And all those who had control of spirits, and the wonder-workers, and the images, and the false gods, and all the disgusting things which were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, Josiah put away, so that he might give effect to the words of the agreement recorded in the book which Hilkiah the priest made discovery of in the house of the Lord.

在约西亚以前没有王像他尽心，尽性，尽力地归向耶和华，遵行摩西的一切律法。在他以后也没有兴起一个王像他。
Never before had there been a king like him, turning to the Lord with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his power, as the law of Moses says; and after him there was no king like him.

然而，耶和华向犹大所发猛烈的怒气仍不止息，是因玛拿西诸事惹动他。
But still the heat of the Lord's wrath was not turned back from Judah, because of all Manasseh had done in moving him to wrath.

耶和华说，我必将犹大人从我面前赶出，如同赶出以色列人一般。我必弃掉我从前所选择的这城耶路撒冷和我所说立我名的殿。
And the Lord said, I will send Judah away from before my face, as I have sent Israel; I will have nothing more to do with this town, which I had made mine, even Jerusalem, and the holy house of which I said, My name will be there.

约西亚其余的事，凡他所行的都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

约西亚年间，埃及王法老尼哥上到伯拉河攻击亚述王。约西亚王去抵挡他。埃及王遇见约西亚在米吉多，就杀了他。
In his days, Pharaoh-necoh, king of Egypt, sent his armies against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates; and King Josiah went out against him; and he put him to death at Megiddo, when he had seen him.

他的臣仆用车将他的尸首从米吉多送到耶路撒冷，葬在他自己的坟墓里。国民膏约西亚的儿子约哈斯接续他父亲作王。
And his servants took his body in a carriage from Megiddo to Jerusalem, and put him into the earth there. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz, the son of Josiah, and put the holy oil on him and made him king in place of his father.

约哈斯登基的时候年二十三岁，在耶路撒冷作王三个月。他母亲名叫哈慕她，是立拿人耶利米的女儿。
Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, ruling in Jerusalem for three months; his mother's name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

约哈斯行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他列祖一切所行的。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as his fathers had done.

法老尼哥将约哈斯锁禁在哈马地的利比拉，不许他在耶路撒冷作王，又罚犹大国银子一百他连得，金子一他连得。
And Pharaoh-necoh put him in chains at Riblah in the land of Hamath, so that he might not be king in Jerusalem; and took from the land a tax of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.

法老尼哥立约西亚的儿子以利亚敬接续他父亲约西亚作王，给他改名叫约雅敬，却将约哈斯带到埃及，他就死在那里。
Then Pharaoh-necoh made Eliakim, the son of Josiah, king in place of Josiah his father, changing his name to Jehoiakim; but Jehoahaz he took away to Egypt, where he was till his death.

约雅敬将金银给法老，遵着法老的命向国民征取金银，按着各人的力量派定，索要金银，好给法老尼哥。
And Jehoiakim gave the silver and gold to Pharaoh, taxing the land by his orders to get the money; the people of the land had to give silver and gold, everyone as he was taxed, to make the payment to Pharaoh-necoh.

约雅敬登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王十一年。他母亲名叫西布大，是鲁玛人毗大雅的女儿。
Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for eleven years; his mother's name was Zebidah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.

约雅敬行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他列祖一切所行的。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord as his fathers had done.

约雅敬年间，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒上到犹大。约雅敬服事他三年，然后背叛他。
In his days, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came up and Jehoiakim was his servant for three years; then he took up arms against him.

耶和华使迦勒底军，亚兰军，摩押军，和亚扪人的军来攻击约雅敬，毁灭犹大，正如耶和华借他仆人众先知所说的。
And the Lord sent against him bands of the Chaldaeans and of the Edomites and of the Moabites and of the children of Ammon; sending them against Judah for its destruction, as he had said by his servants the prophets.

这祸临到犹大人，诚然是耶和华所命的，要将他们从自己面前赶出，是因玛拿西所犯的一切罪。
Only by the word of the Lord did this fate come on Judah, to take them away from before his face; because of the sins of Manasseh and all the evil he did;

又因他流无辜人的血，充满了耶路撒冷。耶和华决不肯赦免。
And because of the death of those who had done no wrong, for he made Jerusalem full of the blood of the upright; and the Lord had no forgiveness for it.

约雅敬其余的事，凡他所行的都写在犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all he did, are they not recorded in the book of the history of the kings of Judah?

约雅敬与他列祖同睡。他儿子约雅斤接续他作王。
So Jehoiakim went to rest with his fathers; and Jehoiachin his son became king in his place.

埃及王不再从他国中出来。因为巴比伦王将埃及王所管之地，从埃及小河直到伯拉河都夺去了。
And the king of Egypt did not come out of his land again, for the king of Babylon had taken all his country, from the stream of Egypt to the river Euphrates.

约雅斤登基的时候年十八岁，在耶路撒冷作王三个月。他母亲名叫尼护施她，是耶路撒冷人以利拿单的女儿。
Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, he was ruling in Jerusalem for three months, and his mother's name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.

约雅斤行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他父亲一切所行的。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as his father had done.

那时，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒的军兵上到耶路撒冷，围困城。
At that time the armies of Nebuchadnezzar came up to Jerusalem and the town was shut in on every side.

当他军兵围困城的时候，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒就亲自来了。
And Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came there, while his servants were shutting in the town;

犹大王约雅斤和他母亲，臣仆，首领，太监一同出城，投降巴比伦王。巴比伦王便拿住他。那时是巴比伦王第八年。
Then Jehoiachin, king of Judah, went out to the king of Babylon, with his mother and his servants and his chiefs and his unsexed servants; and in the eighth year of his rule the king of Babylon took him.

巴比伦王将耶和华殿和王宫里的宝物都拿去了，将以色列王所罗门所造耶和华殿里的金器都毁坏了，正如耶和华所说的。
And he took away all the stored wealth of the Lord's house, and the goods from the king's store-house, cutting up all the gold vessels which Solomon, king of Israel, had made in the house of the Lord, as the Lord had said.

又将耶路撒冷的众民和众首领，并所有大能的勇士，共一万人，连一切木匠，铁匠都掳了去。除了国中极贫穷的人以外，没有剩下的。
And he took away all the people of Jerusalem and all the chiefs and all the men of war, ten thousand prisoners; and all the expert workmen and the metal-workers; only the poorest sort of the people of the land were not taken away.

并将约雅斤和王母，后妃，太监，与国中的大官，都从耶路撒冷掳到巴比伦去了。
He took Jehoiachin a prisoner to Babylon, with his mother and his wives and his unsexed servants and the great men of the land; he took them all as prisoners from Jerusalem to Babylon.

又将一切勇士七千人和木匠，铁匠一千人，都是能上阵的勇士，全掳到巴比伦去了。
And all the men of war, seven thousand of them, and a thousand expert workmen and metal-workers, all of them strong and able to take up arms, the king of Babylon took away as prisoners into Babylon.

巴比伦王立约雅斤的叔叔玛探雅代替他作王，给玛探雅改名叫西底家。
And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, his father's brother, king in place of Jehoiachin, changing his name to Zedekiah.

西底家登基的时候年二十一岁，在耶路撒冷作王十一年。他母亲名叫哈慕她，是立拿人耶利米的女儿。
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he was king in Jerusalem for eleven years; his mother's name was Hamutal, daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

西底家行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，是照约雅敬一切所行的。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as Jehoiakim had done.

因此耶和华的怒气在耶路撒冷和犹大发作，以致将人民从自己面前赶出。
And because of the wrath of the Lord, this came about in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had sent them all away from before him: and Zedekiah took up arms against the king of Babylon.

西底家背叛巴比伦王。他作王第九年十月初十日，巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒率领全军来攻击耶路撒冷，对城安营，四围筑垒攻城。
Now in the ninth year of his rule, on the tenth day of the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came against Jerusalem with all his army and took up his position before it, building earthworks all round the town.

于是城被围困，直到西底家王十一年。
And the town was shut in by their forces till the eleventh year of King Zedekiah.

四月初九日，城里有大饥荒，甚至百姓都没有粮食。
Now on the ninth day of the fourth month, the store of food in the town was almost gone, so that there was no food for the people of the land.

城被攻破，一切兵丁就在夜间从靠近王园两城中间的门逃跑。迦勒底人正在四围攻城，王就向亚拉巴逃走。
So an opening was made in the wall of the town, and all the men of war went in flight by night through the doorway between the two walls which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldaeans were stationed round the town:) and the king went by the way of the Arabah.

迦勒底的军队追赶王，在耶利哥的平原追上他。他的全军都离开他四散了。
But the Chaldaean army went after the king, and overtook him in the lowlands of Jericho, and all his army went in flight from him in every direction.

迦勒底人就拿住王，带他到利比拉巴比伦王那里审判他。
And they made the king a prisoner and took him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah to be judged.

在西底家眼前杀了他的众子，并且剜了西底家的眼睛，用铜链锁着他，带到巴比伦去。
And they put the sons of Zedekiah to death before his eyes, and then they put out his eyes, and chaining him with iron bands, took him to Babylon.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒十九年五月初七日，巴比伦王的臣仆，护卫长尼布撒拉旦来到耶路撒冷，
Now in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem;

用火焚烧耶和华的殿和王宫，又焚烧耶路撒冷的房屋，就是各大户家的房屋。
And he had the house of the Lord and the king's house and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house, burned with fire;

跟从护卫长迦勒底的全军就拆毁耶路撒冷四围的城墙。
And the walls round Jerusalem were broken down by the Chaldaean army which was with the captain.

那时护卫长尼布撒拉旦将城里所剩下的百姓，并已经投降巴比伦王的人，以及大众所剩下的人，都掳去了。
And the rest of the people who were still in the town, and all those who had given themselves up to the king of Babylon, and all the rest of the workmen, Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took away as prisoners;

但护卫长留下些民中最穷的，使他们修理葡萄园，耕种田地。
But he let the poorest of the land go on living there, to take care of the vines and the fields.

耶和华殿的铜柱，并耶和华殿的盆座和铜海，迦勒底人都打碎了，将那铜运到巴比伦去了，
And the brass pillars in the house of the Lord, and the wheeled bases, and the great brass water-vessel in the house of the Lord, were broken up by the Chaldaeans, who took the brass to Babylon.

又带去锅，铲子，蜡剪，调羹，并所用的一切铜器，
And the pots and the spades and the scissors for the lights and the spoons, and all the brass vessels used in the Lord's house, they took away.

火鼎，碗，无论金的银的，护卫长也都带去了。
And the fire-trays and the basins; the gold of the gold vessels and the silver of the silver vessels, were all taken away by the captain of the armed men.

所罗门为耶和华殿所造的两根铜柱，一个铜海，和几个盆座，这一切的铜，多得无法可称。
The two pillars, the great water-vessel and the wheeled bases, which Solomon had made for the house of the Lord: the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

这一根柱子高十八肘，柱上有铜顶，高三肘。铜顶的周围有网子和石榴，都是铜的。那一根柱子，照此一样，也有网子。
One of the pillars was eighteen cubits high, with a crown of brass on it; the crown was three cubits high, circled with a network and apples all of brass; and the second pillar had the same.

护卫长拿住大祭司西莱雅，副祭司西番亚，和三个把门的，
And the captain of the armed men took Seraiah, the chief priest, and Zephaniah, the second priest, and the three door-keepers;

又从城中拿住一个管理兵丁的官（或作太监），并在城里所遇常见王面的五个人和检点国民军长的书记，以及城里遇见的国民六十个人。
And from the town he took the unsexed servant who was over the men of war, and five of the king's near friends who were in the town, and the scribe of the captain of the army, who was responsible for getting the people of the land together in military order, and sixty men of the people of the land who were in the town.

护卫长尼布撒拉旦将这些人带到利比拉巴比伦王那里。
These Nebuzaradan, the captain of the armed men, took with him to the king of Babylon at Riblah.

巴比伦王就把他们击杀在哈马地的利比拉。这样，犹大人被掳去离开本地。
And the king of Babylon put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was taken away prisoner from his land.

至于犹大国剩下的民，就是巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒所剩下的，巴比伦王立了沙番的孙子，亚希甘的儿子基大利作他们的省长。
As for the people who were still living in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, did not take away, he made Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, ruler over them.

众军长和属他们的人听见巴比伦王立了基大利作省长，于是军长尼探雅的儿子以实玛利，加利亚的儿子约哈难，尼陀法人单户蔑的儿子西莱雅，玛迦人的儿子雅撒尼亚，和属他们的人都到米斯巴见基大利。
Now the captains of the armed forces, hearing that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah ruler, came with their men to Gedaliah at Mizpah; Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Seraiah, the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah, the son of the Maacathite, came with all their men.

基大利向他们和属他们的人起誓说，你们不必惧怕迦勒底臣仆，只管住在这地服事巴比伦王，就可以得福。
Then Gedaliah gave his oath to them and their men, saying, Have no fear because of the servants of the Chaldaeans; go on living in the land under the rule of the king of Babylon, and all will be well.

七月间，宗室以利沙玛的孙子，尼探雅的儿子以实玛利带着十个人来，杀了基大利和同他在米斯巴的犹大人与迦勒底人。
But in the seventh month, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the king's seed, came with ten men and made an attack on Gedaliah, causing his death and the death of the Jews and the Chaldaeans who were with him at Mizpah.

于是众民，无论大小，连众军长。因为惧怕迦勒底人，都起身往埃及去了。
Then all the people, small and great, and the captains of the forces, got up and went away to Egypt, for fear of the Chaldaeans.

犹大王约雅斤被掳后三十七年，巴比伦王以未米罗达元年十二月二十七日，使犹大王约雅斤抬头，提他出监。
And in the thirty-seventh year after Jehoiachin, king of Judah, had been taken prisoner, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, Evil-merodach, king of Babylon, in the first year of his rule, took Jehoiachin, king of Judah, out of prison;

又对他说恩言，使他的位高过与他一同在巴比伦众王的位，
And said kind words to him, and put his seat higher than the seats of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.

给他脱了囚服。他终身常在巴比伦王面前吃饭。
And his prison clothing was changed, and he was a guest at the king's table every day for the rest of his life.

王赐他所需用的食物，日日赐他一分，终身都是这样。
And for his food, the king gave him a regular amount every day for the rest of his life.

at Mizpah; Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan, the son of Kareah, and Seraiah, the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah, the son of the Maacathite, came with all their men.

基大利向他们和属他们的人起誓说，你们不必惧怕迦勒底臣仆，只管住在这地服事巴比伦王，就可以得福。
Then Gedaliah gave his oath to them and their men, saying, Have no fear because of the servants of the Chaldaeans; go on living in the land under the rule of the king of Babylon, and all will be well.

七月间，宗室以利沙玛的孙子，尼探雅的儿子以实玛利带着十个人来，杀了基大利和同他在米斯巴的犹大人与迦勒底人。
But in the seventh month, Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the king's seed, came with ten men and made an attack on Gedaliah, causing his death and the death of the Jews and the Chaldaeans who were with him at Mizpah.

于是众民，无论大小，连众军长。因为惧怕迦勒底人，都起身往埃及去了。
Then all the people, small and great, and the captains of the forces, got up and went away to Egypt, for fear of the Chaldaeans.

犹大王约雅斤被掳后三十七年，巴比伦王以未米罗达元年十二月二十七日，使犹大王约雅斤抬头，提他出监。
And in the thirty-seventh year after Jehoiachin, king of Judah, had been taken prisoner, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, Evil-merodach, king of Babylon, in the first year of his rule, took Jehoiachin, king of Judah, out of prison;

又对他说恩言，使他的位高过与他一同在巴比伦众王的位，
And said kind words to him, and put his seat higher than the seats of the other kings who were with him in Babylon.

给他脱了囚服。他终身常在巴比伦王面前吃饭。
And his prison clothing was changed, and he was a guest at the king's table every day for the rest of his life.

王赐他所需用的食物，日日赐他一分，终身都是这样。
And for his food, the king gave him a regular amount every day for the rest of his life.

