创世纪 Genesis


起初神创造天地。
At the first God made the heaven and the earth.

地是空虚混沌。渊面黑暗。神的灵运行在水面上。
And the earth was waste and without form; and it was dark on the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God was moving on the face of the waters.

神说，要有光，就有了光。
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

神看光是好的，就把光暗分开了。
And God, looking on the light, saw that it was good: and God made a division between the light and the dark,

神称光为昼，称暗为夜。有晚上，有早晨，这是头一日。
Naming the light, Day, and the dark, Night. And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.

神说，诸水之间要有空气，将水分为上下。
And God said, Let there be a solid arch stretching over the waters, parting the waters from the waters.

神就造出空气，将空气以下的水，空气以上的水分开了。事就这样成了。
And God made the arch for a division between the waters which were under the arch and those which were over it: and it was so.

神称空气为天。有晚上，有早晨，是第二日。
And God gave the arch the name of Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.

神说，天下的水要聚在一处，使旱地露出来。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven come together in one place, and let the dry land be seen: and it was so.

神称旱地为地，称水的聚处为海。神看着是好的。
And God gave the dry land the name of Earth; and the waters together in their place were named Seas: and God saw that it was good.

神说，地要发生青草，和结种子的菜蔬，并结果子的树木，各从其类，果子都包着核。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let grass come up on the earth, and plants producing seed, and fruit-trees giving fruit, in which is their seed, after their sort: and it was so.

于是地发生了青草，和结种子的菜蔬，各从其类，并结果子的树木，各从其类，果子都包着核。神看着是好的。
And grass came up on the earth, and every plant producing seed of its sort, and every tree producing fruit, in which is its seed, of its sort: and God saw that it was good.

有晚上，有早晨，是第三日。
And there was evening and there was morning, the third day.

神说，天上要有光体，可以分昼夜，作记号，定节令，日子，年岁。
And God said, Let there be lights in the arch of heaven, for a division between the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and for marking the changes of the year, and for days and for years:

并要发光在天空，普照在地上。事就这样成了。
And let them be for lights in the arch of heaven to give light on the earth: and it was so.

于是神造了两个大光，大的管昼，小的管夜。又造众星。
And God made the two great lights: the greater light to be the ruler of the day, and the smaller light to be the ruler of the night: and he made the stars.

就把这些光摆列在天空，普照在地上。
And God put them in the arch of heaven, to give light on the earth;

管理昼夜，分别明暗。神看着是好的。
To have rule over the day and the night, and for a division between the light and the dark: and God saw that it was good.

有晚上，有早晨，是第四日。
And there was evening and there was morning, the fourth day.

神说，水要多多滋生有生命的物，要有雀鸟飞在地面以上，天空之中。
And God said, Let the waters be full of living things, and let birds be in flight over the earth under the arch of heaven.

神就造出大鱼和水中所滋生各样有生命的动物，各从其类。又造出各样飞鸟，各从其类。神看着是好的。
And God made great sea-beasts, and every sort of living and moving thing with which the waters were full, and every sort of winged bird: and God saw that it was good.

神就赐福给这一切，说，滋生繁多，充满海中的水。雀鸟也要多生在地上。
And God gave them his blessing, saying, Be fertile and have increase, making all the waters of the seas full, and let the birds be increased in the earth.

有晚上，有早晨，是第五日。
And there was evening and there was morning, the fifth day.

神说，地要生出活物来，各从其类。牲畜，昆虫，野兽，各从其类。事就这样成了。
And God said, Let the earth give birth to all sorts of living things, cattle and all things moving on the earth, and beasts of the earth after their sort: and it was so.

于是神造出野兽，各从其类。牲畜，各从其类。地上一切昆虫，各从其类。神看着是好的。
And God made the beast of the earth after its sort, and the cattle after their sort, and everything moving on the face of the earth after its sort: and God saw that it was good.

神说，我们要照着我们的形像，按着我们的样式造人，使他们管理海里的鱼，空中的鸟，地上的牲畜，和全地，并地上所爬的一切昆虫。
And God said, Let us make man in our image, like us: and let him have rule over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the air and over the cattle and over all the earth and over every living thing which goes flat on the earth.

神就照着自己的形像造人，乃是照着他的形像造男造女。
And God made man in his image, in the image of God he made him: male and female he made them.

神就赐福给他们，又对他们说，要生养众多，遍满地面，治理这地。也要管理海里的鱼，空中的鸟，和地上各样行动的活物。
And God gave them his blessing and said to them, Be fertile and have increase, and make the earth full and be masters of it; be rulers over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the air and over every living thing moving on the earth.

神说，看哪，我将遍地上一切结种子的菜蔬和一切树上所结有核的果子，全赐给你们作食物。
And God said, See, I have given you every plant producing seed, on the face of all the earth, and every tree which has fruit producing seed: they will be for your food:

至于地上的走兽和空中的飞鸟，并各样爬在地上有生命的物，我将青草赐给它们作食物。事就这样成了。
And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the air and every living thing moving on the face of the earth I have given every green plant for food: and it was so.

神看着一切所造的都甚好。有晚上，有早晨，是第六日。
And God saw everything which he had made and it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.

天地万物都造齐了。
And the heaven and the earth and all things in them were complete.

到第七日，神造物的工已经完毕，就在第七日歇了他一切的工，安息了。
And on the seventh day God came to the end of all his work; and on the seventh day he took his rest from all the work which he had done.

神赐福给第七日，定为圣日，因为在这日神歇了他一切创造的工，就安息了。
And God gave his blessing to the seventh day and made it holy: because on that day he took his rest from all the work which he had made and done.

创造天地的来历，在耶和华神造天地的日子，乃是这样。
These are the generations of the heaven and the earth when they were made.

野地还没有草木，田间的菜蔬还没有长起来，因为耶和华神还没有降雨在地上，也没有人耕地。
In the day when the Lord God made earth and heaven there were no plants of the field on the earth, and no grass had come up: for the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth and there was no man to do work on the land.

但有雾气从地上腾，滋润遍地。
But a mist went up from the earth, watering all the face of the land.

耶和华神用地上的尘土造人，将生气吹在他鼻孔里，他就成了有灵的活人，名叫亚当。
And the Lord God made man from the dust of the earth, breathing into him the breath of life: and man became a living soul.

耶和华神在东方的伊甸立了一个园子，把所造的人安置在那里。
And the Lord God made a garden in the east, in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had made.

耶和华神使各样的树从地里长出来，可以悦人的眼目，其上的果子好作食物。园子当中又有生命树和分别善恶的树。
And out of the earth the Lord made every tree to come, delighting the eye and good for food; and in the middle of the garden, the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

有河从伊甸流出来，滋润那园子，从那里分为四道。
And a river went out of Eden giving water to the garden; and from there it was parted and became four streams.

第一道名叫比逊，就是环绕哈腓拉全地的。在那里有金子，
The name of the first is Pishon, which goes round about all the land of Havilah where there is gold.

并且那地的金子是好的。在那里又有珍珠和红玛瑙。
And the gold of that land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone.

第二道河名叫基训，就是环绕古实全地的。
And the name of the second river is Gihon: this river goes round all the land of Cush.

第三道河名叫希底结，流在亚述的东边。第四道河就是伯拉河。
And the name of the third river is Tigris, which goes to the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.

耶和华神将那人安置在伊甸园，使他修理看守。
And the Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to do work in it and take care of it.

耶和华神吩咐他说，园中各样树上的果子，你可以随意吃。
And the Lord God gave the man orders, saying, You may freely take of the fruit of every tree of the garden:

只是分别善恶树上的果子，你不可吃，因为你吃的日子必定死。
But of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you may not take; for on the day when you take of it, death will certainly come to you.

耶和华神说，那人独居不好，我要为他造一个配偶帮助他。
And the Lord God said, It is not good for the man to be by himself: I will make one like himself as a help to him

耶和华神用土所造成的野地各样走兽和空中各样飞鸟都带到那人面前，看他叫什么。那人怎样叫各样的活物，那就是它的名字。
And from the earth the Lord God made every beast of the field and every bird of the air, and took them to the man to see what names he would give them: and whatever name he gave to any living thing, that was its name.

那人便给一切牲畜和空中飞鸟，野地走兽都起了名。只是那人没有遇见配偶帮助他。
And the man gave names to all cattle and to the birds of the air and to every beast of the field; but Adam had no one like himself as a help.

耶和华神使他沉睡，他就睡了。于是取下他的一条肋骨，又把肉合起来。
And the Lord God sent a deep sleep on the man, and took one of the bones from his side while he was sleeping, joining up the flesh again in its place:

耶和华神就用那人身上所取的肋骨，造成一个女人，领她到那人跟前。
And the bone which the Lord God had taken from the man he made into a woman, and took her to the man.

那人说，这是我骨中的骨，肉中的肉，可以称她为女人，因为她是从男人身上取出来的。
And the man said, This is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh: let her name be Woman because she was taken out of Man.

因此，人要离开父母与妻子连合，二人成为一体。
For this cause will a man go away from his father and his mother and be joined to his wife; and they will be one flesh.

当时夫妻二人赤身露体，并不羞耻。
And the man and his wife were without clothing, and they had no sense of shame.

耶和华神所造的，惟有蛇比田野一切的活物更狡猾。蛇对女人说，神岂是真说，不许你们吃园中所有树上的果子吗？
Now the snake was wiser than any beast of the field which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman, Has God truly said that you may not take of the fruit of any tree in the garden?

女人对蛇说，园中树上的果子，我们可以吃，
And the woman said, We may take of the fruit of the trees in the garden:

惟有园当中那棵树上的果子，神曾说，你们不可吃，也不可摸，免得你们死。
But of the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden, God has said, If you take of it or put your hands on it, death will come to you.

蛇对女人说，你们不一定死，
And the snake said, Death will not certainly come to you:

因为神知道，你们吃的日子眼睛就明亮了，你们便如神能知道善恶。
For God sees that on the day when you take of its fruit, your eyes will be open, and you will be as gods, having knowledge of good and evil.

于是女人见那棵树的果子好作食物，也悦人的眼目，且是可喜爱的，能使人有智慧，就摘下果子来吃了。又给她丈夫，她丈夫也吃了。
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and a delight to the eyes, and to be desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit, and gave it to her husband.

他们二人的眼睛就明亮了，才知道自己是赤身露体，便拿无花果树的叶子，为自己编作裙子。
And their eyes were open and they were conscious that they had no clothing and they made themselves coats of leaves stitched together.

天起了凉风，耶和华神在园中行走。那人和他妻子听见神的声音，就藏在园里的树木中，躲避耶和华神的面。
And there came to them the sound of the Lord God walking in the garden in the evening wind: and the man and his wife went to a secret place among the trees of the garden, away from the eyes of the Lord God.

耶和华神呼唤那人，对他说，你在哪里。
And the voice of the Lord God came to the man, saying, Where are you?

他说，我在园中听见你的声音，我就害怕。因为我赤身露体，我便藏了。
And he said, Hearing your voice in the garden I was full of fear, because I was without clothing: and I kept myself from your eyes.

耶和华说，谁告诉你赤身露体呢？莫非你吃了我吩咐你不可吃的那树上的果子吗？
And he said, Who gave you the knowledge that you were without clothing? Have you taken of the fruit of the tree which I said you were not to take?

那人说，你所赐给我，与我同居的女人，她把那树上的果子给我，我就吃了。
And the man said, The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me the fruit of the tree and I took it.

耶和华神对女人说，你作的是什么事呢？女人说，那蛇引诱我，我就吃了。
And the Lord God said to the woman, What have you done? And the woman said, I was tricked by the deceit of the snake and I took it.

耶和华神对蛇说，你既作了这事，就必受咒诅，比一切的牲畜野兽更甚。你必用肚子行走，终身吃土。
And the Lord God said to the snake, Because you have done this you are cursed more than all cattle and every beast of the field; you will go flat on the earth, and dust will be your food all the days of your life:

我又要叫你和女人彼此为仇。你的后裔和女人的后裔也彼此为仇。女人的后裔要伤你的头，你要伤他的脚跟。
And there will be war between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed: by him will your head be crushed and by you his foot will be wounded.

又对女人说，我必多多加增你怀胎的苦楚，你生产儿女必多受苦楚。你必恋慕你丈夫，你丈夫必管辖你。
To the woman he said, Great will be your pain in childbirth; in sorrow will your children come to birth; still your desire will be for your husband, but he will be your master.

又对亚当说，你既听从妻子的话，吃了我所吩咐你不可吃的那树上的果子，地必为你的缘故受咒诅。你必终身劳苦，才能从地里得吃的。
And to Adam he said, Because you gave ear to the voice of your wife and took of the fruit of the tree which I said you were not to take, the earth is cursed on your account; in pain you will get your food from it all your life.

地必给你长出荆棘和蒺藜来，你也要吃田间的菜蔬。
Thorns and waste plants will come up, and the plants of the field will be your food;

你必汗流满面才得糊口，直到你归了土，因为你是从土而出的。你本是尘土，仍要归于尘土。
With the hard work of your hands you will get your bread till you go back to the earth from which you were taken: for dust you are and to the dust you will go back.

亚当给他妻子起名叫夏娃，因为她是众生之母。
And the man gave his wife the name of Eve because she was the mother of all who have life.

耶和华神为亚当和他妻子用皮子作衣服给他们穿。
And the Lord God made for Adam and for his wife coats of skins for their clothing.

耶和华神说，那人已经与我们相似，能知道善恶。现在恐怕他伸手又摘生命树的果子吃，就永远活着。
And the Lord God said, Now the man has become like one of us, having knowledge of good and evil; and now if he puts out his hand and takes of the fruit of the tree of life, he will go on living for ever.

耶和华神便打发他出伊甸园去，耕种他所自出之土。
So the Lord God sent him out of the garden of Eden to be a worker on the earth from which he was taken.

于是把他赶出去了。又在伊甸园的东边安设基路伯和四面转动发火焰的剑，要把守生命树的道路。
So he sent the man out; and at the east of the garden of Eden he put winged ones and a flaming sword turning every way to keep the way to the tree of life.

有一日，那人和他妻子夏娃同房。夏娃就怀孕，生了该隐（就是得的意思），便说，耶和华使我得了一个男子。
And the man had connection with Eve his wife, and she became with child and gave birth to Cain, and said, I have got a man from the Lord.

又生了该隐的兄弟亚伯。亚伯是牧羊的，该隐是种地的。
Then again she became with child and gave birth to Abel, his brother. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a farmer.

有一日，该隐拿地里的出产为供物献给耶和华。
And after a time, Cain gave to the Lord an offering of the fruits of the earth.

亚伯也将他羊群中头生的和羊的脂油献上。耶和华看中了亚伯和他的供物，
And Abel gave an offering of the young lambs of his flock and of their fat. And the Lord was pleased with Abel's offering;

只是看不中该隐和他的供物。该隐就大大地发怒，变了脸色。
But in Cain and his offering he had no pleasure. And Cain was angry and his face became sad.

耶和华对该隐说，你为什么发怒呢？你为什么变了脸色呢？
And the Lord said to Cain, Why are you angry? and why is your face sad?

你若行得好，岂不蒙悦纳，你若行得不好，罪就伏在门前。它必恋慕你，你却要制伏它。
If you do well, will you not have honour? and if you do wrong, sin is waiting at the door, desiring to have you, but do not let it be your master.

该隐与他兄弟亚伯说话，二人正在田间。该隐起来打他兄弟亚伯，把他杀了。
And Cain said to his brother, Let us go into the field: and when they were in the field, Cain made an attack on his brother Abel and put him to death.

耶和华对该隐说，你兄弟亚伯在哪里？他说，我不知道，我岂是看守我兄弟的吗？
And the Lord said to Cain, Where is your brother Abel? And he said, I have no idea: am I my brother's keeper?

耶和华说，你作了什么事呢？你兄弟的血，有声音从地里向我哀告。
And he said, What have you done? the voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the earth.

地开了口，从你手里接受你兄弟的血。现在你必从这地受咒诅。
And now you are cursed from the earth, whose mouth is open to take your brother's blood from your hand;

你种地，地不再给你效力。你必流离飘荡在地上。
No longer will the earth give you her fruit as the reward of your work; you will be a wanderer in flight over the earth.

该隐对耶和华说，我的刑罚太重，过于我所能当的。
And Cain said, My punishment is greater than my strength.

你如今赶逐我离开这地，以致不见你面。我必流离飘荡在地上，凡遇见我的必杀我。
You have sent me out this day from the face of the earth and from before your face; I will be a wanderer in flight over the earth, and whoever sees me will put me to death.

耶和华对他说，凡杀该隐的，必遭报七倍。耶和华就给该隐立一个记号，免得人遇见他就杀他。
And the Lord said, Truly, if Cain is put to death, seven lives will be taken for his. And the Lord put a mark on Cain so that no one might put him to death.

于是该隐离开耶和华的面，去住在伊甸东边挪得之地。
And Cain went away from before the face of the Lord, and made his living-place in the land of Nod on the east of Eden.

该隐与妻子同房，他妻子就怀孕，生了以诺。该隐建造了一座城，就按着他儿子的名，将那城叫作以诺。
And Cain had connection with his wife and she became with child and gave birth to Enoch: and he made a town, and gave the town the name of Enoch after his son.

以诺生以拿。以拿生米户雅利。米户雅利生玛土撒利。玛土撒利生拉麦。
And Enoch had a son Irad: and Irad became the father of Mehujael: and Mehujael became the father of Methushael: and Methushael became the father of Lamech.

拉麦娶了两个妻，一个名叫亚大，一个名叫洗拉。
And Lamech had two wives; the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

亚大生雅八。雅八就是住帐棚，牧养牲畜之人的祖师。
And Adah gave birth to Jabal: he was the father of such as are living in tents and keep cattle.

雅八的兄弟名叫犹八。他是一切弹琴吹箫之人的祖师。
And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of all players on instruments of music.

洗拉又生了土八该隐。他是打造各样铜铁利器的（或作是铜匠铁匠的祖师）。土八该隐的妹子是拿玛。
And Zillah gave birth to Tubal-cain, who is the father of every maker of cutting instruments of brass and iron: and the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.

拉麦对他两个妻子说，亚大，洗拉，听我的声音。拉麦的妻子，细听我的话语，壮年人伤我，我把他杀了。少年人损我，我把他害了。（或作我杀壮士却伤自己，我害幼童却损本身）
And Lamech said to his wives, Adah and Zillah, give ear to my voice; you wives of Lamech, give attention to my words, for I would put a man to death for a wound, and a young man for a blow;

若杀该隐，遭报七倍。杀拉麦，必遭报七十七倍。
If seven lives are to be taken as punishment for Cain's death, seventy-seven will be taken for Lamech's.

亚当又与妻子同房，她就生了一个儿子，起名叫塞特，意思说，神另给我立了一个儿子代替亚伯，因为该隐杀了他。
And Adam had connection with his wife again, and she gave birth to a son to whom she gave the name of Seth: for she said, God has given me another seed in place of Abel, whom Cain put to death.

塞特也生了一个儿子，起名叫以挪士。那时候，人才求告耶和华的名。
And Seth had a son, and he gave him the name of Enosh: at this time men first made use of the name of the Lord in worship.

亚当的后代记在下面。当神造人的日子，是照着自己的样式造的。
This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day when God made man, he made him in the image of God;

并且造男造女。在他们被造的日子，神赐福给他们，称他们为人。
Male and female he made them, naming them Man, and giving them his blessing on the day when they were made.

亚当活到一百三十岁，生了一个儿子，形像样式和自己相似，就给他起名叫塞特。
Adam had been living for a hundred and thirty years when he had a son like himself, after his image, and gave him the name of Seth:

亚当生塞特之后，又在世八百年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Seth, Adam went on living for eight hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

亚当共活了九百三十岁就死了。
And all the years of Adam's life were nine hundred and thirty: and he came to his end.

塞特活到一百零五岁，生了以挪士。
And Seth was a hundred and five years old when he became the father of Enosh:

塞特生以挪士之后，又活了八百零七年，并且生儿养女。
And he went on living after the birth of Enosh for eight hundred and seven years, and had sons and daughters:

塞特共活了九百一十二岁就死了。
And all the years of Seth's life were nine hundred and twelve: and he came to his end.

以挪士活到九十岁，生了该南。
And Enosh was ninety years old when he became the father of Kenan:

以挪士生该南之后，又活了八百一十五年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Kenan, Enosh went on living for eight hundred and fifteen years, and had sons and daughters:

以挪士共活了九百零五岁就死了。
And all the years of Enosh were nine hundred and five: and he came to his end.

该南活到七十岁，生了玛勒列。
And Kenan was seventy years old when he became the father of Mahalalel:

该南生玛勒列之后，又活了八百四十年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Mahalalel, Kenan went on living for eight hundred and forty years, and had sons and daughters:

该南共活了九百一十岁就死了。
And all the years of Kenan's life were nine hundred and ten; and he came to his end.

玛勒列活到六十五岁，生了雅列。
And Mahalalel was sixty-five years old when he became the father of Jared:

玛勒列生雅列之后，又活了八百三十年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Jared, Mahalalel went on living for eight hundred and thirty years, and had sons and daughters:

玛勒列共活了八百九十五岁就死了。
And all the years of Mahalalel's life were eight hundred and ninety-five: and he came to his end.

雅列活到一百六十二岁，生了以诺。
And Jared was a hundred and sixty-two years old when he became the father of Enoch:

雅列生以诺之后，又活了八百年，并且生儿养女。
And Jared went on living after the birth of Enoch for eight hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

雅列共活了九百六十二岁就死了。
And all the years of Jared's life were nine hundred and sixty-two: and he came to his end.

以诺活到六十五岁，生了玛土撒拉。
And Enoch was sixty-five years old when he became the father of Methuselah:

以诺生玛土撒拉之后，与神同行三百年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Methuselah, Enoch went on in God's ways for three hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

以诺共活了三百六十五岁。
And all the years of Enoch's life were three hundred and sixty-five:

以诺与神同行，神将他取去，他就不在世了。
And Enoch went on in God's ways: and he was not seen again, for God took him.

玛土撒拉活到一百八十七岁，生了拉麦。
And Methuselah was a hundred and eighty-seven years old when he became the father of Lamech:

玛土撒拉生拉麦之后，又活了七百八十二年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Lamech, Methuselah went on living for seven hundred and eighty-two years, and had sons and daughters:

玛土撒拉共活了九百六十九岁就死了。
And all the years of Methuselah's life were nine hundred and sixty-nine: and he came to his end.

拉麦活到一百八十二岁，生了一个儿子，
And Lamech was a hundred and eighty-two years old when he had a son:

给他起名叫挪亚，说，这个儿子必为我们的操作和手中的劳苦安慰我们。这操作劳苦是因为耶和华咒诅地。
And he gave him the name of Noah, saying, Truly, he will give us rest from our trouble and the hard work of our hands, because of the earth which was cursed by God.

拉麦生挪亚之后，又活了五百九十五年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Noah, Lamech went on living for five hundred and ninety-five years, and had sons and daughters:

拉麦共活了七百七十七岁就死了。
And all the years of Lamech's life were seven hundred and seventy-seven: and he came to his end.

挪亚五百岁生了闪，含，雅弗。
And when Noah was five hundred years old, he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

当人在世上多起来，又生女儿的时候，
And after a time, when men were increasing on the earth, and had daughters,

神的儿子们看见人的女子美貌，就随意挑选，娶来为妻。
The sons of God saw that the daughters of men were fair; and they took wives for themselves from those who were pleasing to them.

耶和华说，人既属乎血气，我的灵就不永远住在他里面。然而他的日子还可到一百二十年。
And the Lord said, My spirit will not be in man for ever, for he is only flesh; so the days of his life will be a hundred and twenty years.

那时候有伟人在地上，后来神的儿子们和人的女子们交合生子，那就是上古英武有名的人。
There were men of great strength and size on the earth in those days; and after that, when the sons of God had connection with the daughters of men, they gave birth to children: these were the great men of old days, the men of great name.

耶和华见人在地上罪恶很大，终日所思想的尽都是恶。
And the Lord saw that the sin of man was great on the earth, and that all the thoughts of his heart were evil.

耶和华就后悔造人在地上，心中忧伤。
And the Lord had sorrow because he had made man on the earth, and grief was in his heart.

耶和华说，我要将所造的人和走兽，并昆虫，以及空中的飞鸟，都从地上除灭，因为我造他们后悔了。
And the Lord said, I will take away man, whom I have made, from the face of the earth, even man and beast and that which goes on the earth and every bird of the air; for I have sorrow for having made them.

惟有挪亚在耶和华眼前蒙恩。
But Noah had grace in the eyes of God.

挪亚的后代记在下面。挪亚是个义人，在当时的世代是个完全人。挪亚与神同行。
These are the generations of Noah. Noah was an upright man and without sin in his generation: he went in the ways of God.

挪亚生了三个儿子，就是闪，含，雅弗。
And Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

世界在神面前败坏，地上满了强暴。
And the earth was evil in God's eyes and full of violent ways.

神观看世界，见是败坏了。凡有血气的人，在地上都败坏了行为。
And God, looking on the earth, saw that it was evil: for the way of all flesh had become evil on the earth.

神就对挪亚说，凡有血气的人，他的尽头已经来到我面前。因为地上满了他们的强暴，我要把他们和地一并毁灭。
And God said to Noah, The end of all flesh has come; the earth is full of their violent doings, and now I will put an end to them with the earth.

你要用歌斐木造一只方舟，分一间一间地造，里外抹上松香。
Make for yourself an ark of gopher wood with rooms in it, and make it safe from the water inside and out.

方舟的造法乃是这样，要长三百肘，宽五十肘，高三十肘。
And this is the way you are to make it: it is to be three hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, and thirty cubits high.

方舟上边要留透光处，高一肘。方舟的门要开在旁边。方舟要分上，中，下三层。
You are to put a window in the ark, a cubit from the roof, and a door in the side of it, and you are to make it with a lower and second and third floors.

看哪！我要使洪水泛滥在地上，毁灭天下。凡地上有血肉，有气息的活物，无一不死。
For truly, I will send a great flow of waters over the earth, for the destruction from under the heaven of all flesh in which is the breath of life; everything on the earth will come to an end.

我却要与你立约，你同你的妻，与儿子，儿妇，都要进入方舟。
But with you I will make an agreement; and you will come into the ark, you and your sons and your wife and your sons' wives with you.

凡有血肉的活物，每样两个，一公一母，你要带进方舟，好在你那里保全生命。
And you will take with you into the ark two of every sort of living thing, and keep them safe with you; they will be male and female.

飞鸟各从其类，牲畜各从其类，地上的昆虫各从其类。每样两个，要到你那里，好保全生命。
Two of every sort of bird and cattle and of every sort of living thing which goes on the earth will you take with you to keep them from destruction.

你要拿各样食物积蓄起来，好作你和它们的食物。
And make a store of every sort of food for yourself and them.

挪亚就这样行。凡神所吩咐的，他都照样行了。
And all these things Noah did; as God said, so he did.

耶和华对挪亚说，你和你的全家都要进入方舟，因为在这世代中，我见你在我面前是义人。
And the Lord said to Noah, Take all your family and go into the ark, for you only in this generation have I seen to be upright.

凡洁净的畜类，你要带七公七母。不洁净的畜类，你要带一公一母。
Of every clean beast you will take seven males and seven females, and of the beasts which are not clean, two, the male and his female;

空中的飞鸟，也要带七公七母，可以留种，活在全地上。
And of the birds of the air, seven males and seven females, so that their seed may still be living on the face of the earth.

因为再过七天，我要降雨在地上四十昼夜，把我所造的各种活物，都从地上除灭。
For after seven days I will send rain on the earth for forty days and forty nights, for the destruction of every living thing which I have made on the face of the earth.

挪亚就遵着耶和华所吩咐的行了。
And Noah did everything which the Lord said he was to do.

当洪水泛滥在地上的时候，挪亚整六百岁。
And Noah was six hundred years old when the waters came flowing over all the earth.

挪亚就同他的妻和儿子，儿妇，都进入方舟，躲避洪水。
And Noah, with his sons and his wife and his sons' wives, went into the ark because of the flowing of the waters.

洁净的畜类和不洁净的畜类，飞鸟并地上一切的昆虫，
Of clean beasts, and of beasts which are not clean, and of birds, and of everything which goes on the earth,

都是一对一对地，有公有母，到挪亚那里进入方舟，正如神所吩咐挪亚的。
In twos, male and female, they went into the ark with Noah, as God had said.

过了那七天，洪水泛滥在地上。
And after the seven days, the waters came over all the earth.

当挪亚六百岁，二月十七日那一天，大渊的泉源都裂开了，天上的窗户也敞开了。
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, all the fountains of the great deep came bursting through, and the windows of heaven were open;

四十昼夜降大雨在地上。
And rain came down on the earth for forty days and forty nights.

正当那日，挪亚和他三个儿子闪，含，雅弗，并挪亚的妻子和三个儿妇，都进入方舟。
On the same day Noah, with Shem, Ham, and Japheth, his sons, and his wife and his sons' wives, went into the ark;

他们和百兽，各从其类。一切牲畜，各从其类。爬在地上的昆虫，各从其类。一切禽鸟，各从其类。都进入方舟。
And with them, every sort of beast and cattle, and every sort of thing which goes on the earth, and every sort of bird.

凡有血肉，有气息的活物，都一对一对地到挪亚那里，进入方舟。
They went with Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh in which is the breath of life.

凡有血肉进入方舟的，都是有公有母，正如神所吩咐挪亚的。耶和华就把他关在方舟里头。
Male and female of all flesh went in, as God had said, and the ark was shut by the Lord.

洪水泛滥在地上四十天，水往上长，把方舟从地上漂起。
And for forty days the waters were over all the earth; and the waters were increased so that the ark was lifted up high over the earth.

水势浩大，在地上大大地往上长，方舟在水面上漂来漂去。
And the waters overcame everything and were increased greatly on the earth, and the ark was resting on the face of the waters.

水势在地上极其浩大，天下的高山都淹没了。
And the waters overcame everything on the earth; and all the mountains under heaven were covered.

水势比山高过十五肘，山岭都淹没了。
The waters went fifteen cubits higher, till all the mountains were covered.

凡在地上有血肉的动物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，走兽，和爬在地上的昆虫，以及所有的人都死了。
And destruction came on every living thing moving on the earth, birds and cattle and beasts and everything which went on the earth, and every man.

凡在旱地上，鼻孔有气息的生灵都死了。
Everything on the dry land, in which was the breath of life, came to its end.

凡地上各类的活物，连人带牲畜，昆虫，以及空中的飞鸟，都从地上除灭了，只留下挪亚和那些与他同在方舟里的。
Every living thing on the face of all the earth, man and cattle and things moving on the face of the earth, and birds of the air, came to destruction: only Noah and those who were with him in the ark, were kept from death.

水势浩大，在地上共一百五十天。
And the waters were over the earth a hundred and fifty days.

神记念挪亚和挪亚方舟里的一切走兽牲畜。神叫风吹地，水势渐落。
And God kept Noah in mind, and all the living things and the cattle which were with him in the ark: and God sent a wind over the earth, and the waters went down.

渊源和天上的窗户都闭塞了，天上的大雨也止住了。
And the fountains of the deep and the windows of heaven were shut, and the rain from heaven was stopped.

水从地上渐退。过了一百五十天，水就渐消。
And the waters went slowly back from the earth, and at the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters were lower.

七月十七日，方舟停在亚拉腊山上。
And on the seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.

水又渐消，到十月初一日，山顶都现出来了。
And still the waters went on falling, till on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains were seen.

过了四十天，挪亚开了方舟的窗户，
Then, after forty days, through the open window of the ark which he had made,

放出一只乌鸦去。那乌鸦飞来飞去，直到地上的水都干了。
Noah sent out a raven, which went this way and that till the waters were gone from the earth.

他又放出一只鸽子去，要看看水从地上退了没有。
And he sent out a dove, to see if the waters had gone from the face of the earth;

但遍地上都是水，鸽子找不着落脚之地，就回到方舟挪亚那里，挪亚伸手把鸽子接进方舟来。
But the dove saw no resting-place for her foot, and came back to the ark, for the waters were still over all the earth; and he put out his hand, and took her into the ark.

他又等了七天，再把鸽子从方舟放出去。
And after waiting another seven days, he sent the dove out again;

到了晚上，鸽子回到他那里，嘴里叼着一个新拧下来的橄榄叶子，挪亚就知道地上的水退了。
And the dove came back at evening, and in her mouth was an olive-leaf broken off: so Noah was certain that the waters had gone down on the earth.

他又等了七天，放出鸽子去，鸽子就不再回来了。
And after seven days more, he sent the dove out again, but she did not come back to him.

到挪亚六百零一岁，正月初一日，地上的水都干了。挪亚撤去方舟的盖观看，便见地面上干了。
And in the six hundred and first year, on the first day of the first month, the waters were dry on the earth: and Noah took the cover off the ark and saw that the face of the earth was dry.

到了二月二十七日，地就都干了。
And on the twenty-seventh day of the second month the earth was dry.

神对挪亚说，
And God said to Noah,

你和你的妻子，儿子，儿妇都可以出方舟。
Go out of the ark, you and your wife and your sons and your sons' wives.

在你那里凡有血肉的活物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，和一切爬在地上的昆虫，都要带出来，叫它在地上多多滋生，大大兴旺。
Take out with you every living thing which is with you, birds and cattle and everything which goes on the earth, so that they may have offspring and be fertile and be increased on the earth.

于是挪亚和他的妻子，儿子，儿妇，都出来了。
And Noah went out with his sons and his wife and his sons' wives;

一切走兽，昆虫，飞鸟，和地上所有的动物，各从其类，也都出了方舟。
And every beast and bird and every living thing of every sort which goes on the earth, went out of the ark.

挪亚为耶和华筑了一座坛，拿各类洁净的牲畜，飞鸟献在坛上为燔祭。
And Noah made an altar to the Lord, and from every clean beast and bird he made burned offerings on the altar.

耶和华闻那馨香之气，就心里说，我不再因人的缘故咒诅地（人从小时心里怀着恶念），也不再按着我才行的，灭各种的活物了。
And when the sweet smell came up to the Lord, he said in his heart, I will not again put a curse on the earth because of man, for the thoughts of man's heart are evil from his earliest days; never again will I send destruction on all living things as I have done.

地还存留的时候，稼穑，寒暑，冬夏，昼夜就永不停息了。
While the earth goes on, seed time and the getting in of the grain, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, will not come to an end.

神赐福给挪亚和他的儿子，对他们说，你们要生养众多，遍满了地。
And God gave his blessing to Noah and his sons, and said, Be fertile, and have increase, and make the earth full.

凡地上的走兽和空中的飞鸟，都必惊恐，惧怕你们。连地上一切的昆虫并海里一切的鱼，都交付你们的手。
And the fear of you will be strong in every beast of the earth and every bird of the air; everything which goes on the land, and all the fishes of the sea, are given into your hands.

凡活着的动物，都可以作你们的食物。这一切我都赐给你们，如同菜蔬一样。
Every living and moving thing will be food for you; I give them all to you as before I gave you all green things.

惟独肉带着血，那就是它的生命，你们不可吃。
But flesh with the life-blood in it you may not take for food.

流你们血，害你们命的，无论是兽，是人，我必讨他的罪，就是向各人的弟兄也是如此。
And for your blood, which is your life, will I take payment; from every beast I will take it, and from every man will I take payment for the blood of his brother-man.

凡流人血的，他的血也必被人所流。因为神造人是照自己的形像造的。
Whoever takes a man's life, by man will his life be taken; because God made man in his image.

你们要生养众多，在地上昌盛繁茂。
And now, be fertile and have increase; have offspring on the earth and become great in number.

神晓谕挪亚和他的儿子说，
And God said to Noah and to his sons,

我与你们和你们的后裔立约，
Truly, I will make my agreement with you and with your seed after you,

并与你们这里的一切活物，就是飞鸟，牲畜，走兽，凡从方舟里出来的活物立约。
And with every living thing with you, all birds and cattle and every beast of the earth which comes out of the ark with you.

我与你们立约，凡有血肉的，不再被洪水灭绝，也不再有洪水毁坏地了。
And I will make my agreement with you; never again will all flesh be cut off by the waters; never again will the waters come over all the earth for its destruction.

神说，我与你们并你们这里的各样活物所立的永约，是有记号的。
And God said, This is the sign of the agreement which I make between me and you and every living thing with you, for all future generations:

我把虹放在云彩中，这就可作我与地立约的记号了。
I will put my bow in the cloud and it will be for a sign of the agreement between me and the earth.

我使云彩盖地的时候，必有虹现在云彩中，
And whenever I make a cloud come over the earth, the bow will be seen in the cloud,

我便记念我与你们和各样有血肉的活物所立的约，水就再不泛滥，毁坏一切有血肉的物了。
And I will keep in mind the agreement between me and you and every living thing; and never again will there be a great flow of waters causing destruction to all flesh.

虹必现在云彩中，我看见，就要记念我与地上各样有血肉的活物所立的永约。
And the bow will be in the cloud, and looking on it, I will keep in mind the eternal agreement between God and every living thing on the earth.

神对挪亚说，这就是我与地上一切有血肉之物立约的记号了。
And God said to Noah, This is the sign of the agreement which I have made between me and all flesh on the earth.

出方舟挪亚的儿子就是闪，含，雅弗。含是迦南的父亲。
And the sons of Noah who went out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and Ham is the father of Canaan.

这是挪亚的三个儿子，他们的后裔分散在全地。
These three were the sons of Noah and from them all the earth was peopled.

挪亚作起农夫来，栽了一个葡萄园。
In those days Noah became a farmer, and he made a vine-garden.

他喝了园中的酒便醉了，在帐棚里赤着身子。
And he took of the wine of it and was overcome by drink; and he was uncovered in his tent.

迦南的父亲含，看见他父亲赤身，就到外边告诉他两个弟兄。
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his father unclothed, and gave news of it to his two brothers outside.

于是闪和雅弗，拿件衣服搭在肩上，倒退着进去，给他父亲盖上。他们背着脸就看不见父亲的赤身。
And Shem and Japheth took a robe, and putting it on their backs went in with their faces turned away, and put it over their father so that they might not see him unclothed.

挪亚醒了酒，知道小儿子向他所作的事，
And, awaking from his wine, Noah saw what his youngest son had done to him, and he said,

就说，迦南当受咒诅，必给他弟兄作奴仆的奴仆。
Cursed be Canaan; let him be a servant of servants to his brothers.

又说，耶和华闪的神，是应当称颂的，愿迦南作闪的奴仆。
And he said, Praise to the Lord, the God of Shem; let Canaan be his servant.

愿神使雅弗扩张，使他住在闪的帐棚里，又愿迦南作他的奴仆。
May God make Japheth great, and let his living-place be in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his servant.

洪水以后，挪亚又活了三百五十年。
And Noah went on living three hundred and fifty years after the great flow of waters;

挪亚共活了九百五十岁就死了。
all the years of his life were nine hundred and fifty: and he came to his end.

挪亚的儿子闪，含，雅弗的后代，记在下面。洪水以后，他们都生了儿子。
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: these are the sons which they had after the great flow of waters

雅弗的儿子是歌篾，玛各，玛代，雅完，土巴，米设，提拉。
The sons of Japheth: Gomer and Magog and Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.

歌篾的儿子是亚实基拿，利法，陀迦玛。
And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz and Riphath and Togarmah.

雅完的儿子是以利沙，他施，基提，多单。
And the sons of Javan: Elishah and Tarshish, the Kittim and the Dodanim.

这些人的后裔，将各国的地土，海岛，分开居住，各随各的方言，宗族立国。
From these came the nations of the sea-lands, with their different families and languages.

含的儿子是古实，麦西，弗，迦南。
And the sons of Ham: Cush and Mizraim and Put and Canaan.

古实的儿子是西巴，哈腓拉，撒弗他，拉玛，撒弗提迦。拉玛的儿子是示巴，底但。
And the sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah and Sabtah and Raamah and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.

古实又生宁录，他为世上英雄之首。
And Cush was the father of Nimrod, who was the first of the great men of the earth.

他在耶和华面前是个英勇的猎户，所以俗语说，像宁录在耶和华面前是个英勇的猎户。
He was a very great bowman, so that there is a saying, Like Nimrod, a very great bowman.

他国的起头是巴别，以力，亚甲，甲尼，都在示拿地。
And at the first, his kingdom was Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

他从那地出来往亚述去，建造尼尼微，利河伯，迦拉，
From that land he went out into Assyria, building Nineveh with its wide streets and Calah,

和尼尼微，迦拉中间的利鲜，这就是那大城。
And Resen between Nineveh and Calah, which is a very great town.

麦西生路低人，亚拿米人，利哈比人，拿弗土希人，
And Mizraim was the father of the Ludim and Anamim and Lehabim and Naphtuhim;

帕斯鲁细人，迦斯路希人，迦斐托人。从迦斐托出来的有非利士人。
And Pathrusim and Casluhim and Caphtorim, from whom came the Philistines.

迦南生长子西顿，又生赫
And Canaan was the father of Zidon, who was his oldest son, and Heth,

和耶布斯人，亚摩利人，革迦撒人，
And the Jebusite and the Amorite and the Girgashite,

希未人，亚基人，西尼人，
And the Hivite and the Arkite and the Sinite,

亚瓦底人，洗玛利人，哈马人，后来迦南的诸族分散了。
And the Arvadite and the Zemarite and the Hamathite; after that the families of the Canaanites went far and wide in all directions;

迦南的境界是从西顿向基拉耳的路上，直到迦萨，又向所多玛，蛾摩拉，押玛，洗扁的路上，直到拉沙。
Their country stretching from Zidon to Gaza, in the direction of Gerar; and to Lasha, in the direction of Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim.

这就是含的后裔，各随他们的宗族，方言，所住的地土，邦国。
All these, with their different families, languages, lands, and nations, are the offspring of Ham.

雅弗的哥哥闪，是希伯子孙之祖，他也生了儿子。
And Shem, the older brother of Japheth, the father of the children of Eber, had other sons in addition.

闪的儿子是以拦，亚述，亚法撒，路德，亚兰。
These are the sons of Shem: Elam and Asshur and Arpachshad and Lud and Aram.

亚兰的儿子是乌斯，户勒，基帖，玛施。
And the sons of Aram: Uz and Hul and Gether and Mash.

亚法撒生沙拉。沙拉生希伯。
And Arpachshad became the father of Shelah; and Shelah became the father of Eber.

希伯生了两个儿子，一个名叫法勒（法勒就是分的意思），因为那时人就分地居住。法勒的兄弟名叫约坍。
And Eber had two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, because in his time the peoples of the earth became separate; and his brother's name was Joktan.

约坍生亚摩答，沙列，哈萨玛非，耶拉，
And Joktan was the father of Almodad and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and Jerah

哈多兰，乌萨，德拉，
And Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah

俄巴路，亚比玛利，示巴，
And Obal and Abimael and Sheba

阿斐，哈腓拉，约巴，这都是约坍的儿子。
And Ophir and Havilah and Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan.

他们所住的地方，是从米沙直到西发东边的山。
And their country was from Mesha, in the direction of Sephar, the mountain of the east.

这就是闪的子孙，各随他们的宗族，方言，所住的地土，邦国。
These, with their families and their languages and their lands and their nations, are the offspring of Shem.

这些都是挪亚三个儿子的宗族，各随他们的支派立国。洪水以后，他们在地上分为邦国。
These are the families of the sons of Noah, in the order of their generations and their nations: from these came all the nations of the earth after the great flow of waters.

那时，天下人的口音，言语，都是一样。
And all the earth had one language and one tongue.

他们往东边迁移的时候，在示拿地遇见一片平原，就住在那里。
And it came about that in their wandering from the east, they came to a stretch of flat country in the land of Shinar, and there they made their living-place.

他们彼此商量说，来吧，我们要作砖，把砖烧透了。他们就拿砖当石头，又拿石漆当灰泥。
And they said one to another, Come, let us make bricks, burning them well. And they had bricks for stone, putting them together with sticky earth.

他们说，来吧，我们要建造一座城和一座塔，塔顶通天，为要传扬我们的名，免得我们分散在全地上。
And they said, Come, let us make a town, and a tower whose top will go up as high as heaven; and let us make a great name for ourselves, so that we may not be wanderers over the face of the earth.

耶和华降临，要看看世人所建造的城和塔。
And the Lord came down to see the town and the tower which the children of men were building.

耶和华说，看哪，他们成为一样的人民，都是一样的言语，如今既作起这事来，以后他们所要作的事就没有不成就的了。
And the Lord said, See, they are all one people and have all one language; and this is only the start of what they may do: and now it will not be possible to keep them from any purpose of theirs.

我们下去，在那里变乱他们的口音，使他们的言语彼此不通。
Come, let us go down and take away the sense of their language, so that they will not be able to make themselves clear to one another.

于是，耶和华使他们从那里分散在全地上。他们就停工，不造那城了。
So the Lord God sent them away into every part of the earth: and they gave up building their town.

因为耶和华在那里变乱天下人的言语，使众人分散在全地上，所以那城名叫巴别（就是变乱的意思）。
So it was named Babel, because there the Lord took away the sense of all languages and from there the Lord sent them away over all the face of the earth.

闪的后代记在下面。洪水以后二年，闪一百岁生了亚法撒。
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old when he became the father of Arpachshad, two years after the great flow of waters;

闪生亚法撒之后，又活了五百年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Arpachshad, Shem went on living for five hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

亚法撒活到三十五岁，生了沙拉。
And Arpachshad was thirty-five years old when he became the father of Shelah:

亚法撒生沙拉之后，又活了四百零三年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Shelah, Arpachshad went on living for four hundred and three years, and had sons and daughters:

沙拉活到三十岁，生了希伯。
And Shelah was thirty years old when he became the father of Eber:

沙拉生希伯之后又活了四百零三年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Eber, Shelah went on living for four hundred and three years, and had sons and daughters:

希伯活到三十四岁，生了法勒。
And Eber was thirty-four years old when he became the father of Peleg:

希伯生法勒之后，又活了四百三十年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Peleg, Eber went on living for four hundred and thirty years, and had sons and daughters:

法勒活到三十岁，生了拉吴。
And Peleg was thirty years old when he became the father of Reu:

法勒生拉吴之后，又活了二百零九年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Reu, Peleg went on living for two hundred and nine years, and had sons and daughters:

拉吴活到三十二岁，生了西鹿。
And Reu was thirty-two years old when he became the father of Serug:

拉吴生西鹿之后，又活了二百零七年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Serug, Reu went on living for two hundred and seven years, and had sons and daughters:

西鹿活到三十岁，生了拿鹤。
And Serug was thirty years old when he became the father of Nahor:

西鹿生拿鹤之后，又活了二百年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Nahor, Serug went on living for two hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

拿鹤活到二十九岁，生了他拉。
And Nahor was twenty-nine years old when he became the father of Terah:

拿鹤生他拉之后，又活了一百一十九年，并且生儿养女。
And after the birth of Terah, Nahor went on living for a hundred and nineteen years, and had sons and daughters:

他拉活到七十岁，生了亚伯兰，拿鹤，哈兰。
And Terah was seventy years old when he became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

他拉的后代，记在下面，他拉生亚伯兰，拿鹤，哈兰。哈兰生罗得。
These are the generations of Terah: Terah was the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran was the father of Lot.

哈兰死在他的本地迦勒底的吾珥，在他父亲他拉之先。
And death came to Haran when he was with his father Terah in the land of his birth, Ur of the Chaldees.

亚伯兰，拿鹤各娶了妻。亚伯兰的妻子名叫撒莱。拿鹤的妻子名叫密迦，是哈兰的女儿。哈兰是密迦和亦迦的父亲。
And Abram and Nahor took wives for themselves: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and Iscah.

撒莱不生育，没有孩子。
And Sarai had no child.

他拉带着他儿子，亚伯兰和他孙子，哈兰的儿子罗得，并他儿妇亚伯兰的妻子撒莱，出了迦勒底的吾珥，要往迦南地去。他们走到哈兰，就住在那里。
And Terah took Abram, his son, and Lot, the son of Haran, and Sarai, his daughter-in-law, the wife of his son Abram and they went out from Ur of the Chaldees, to go to the land of Canaan; and they came to Haran, and were there for some time.

他拉共活了二百零五岁，就死在哈兰。
And all the years of Terah's life were two hundred and five: and Terah came to his end in Haran.

耶和华对亚伯兰说，你要离开本地，本族，父家，往我所要指示你的地去。
Now the Lord said to Abram, Go out from your country and from your family and from your father's house, into the land to which I will be your guide:

我必叫你成为大国，我必赐福给你，叫你的名为大，你也要叫别人得福。
And I will make of you a great nation, blessing you and making your name great; and you will be a blessing:

为你祝福的，我必赐福与他。那咒诅你的，我必咒诅他，地上的万族都要因你得福。
To them who are good to you will I give blessing, and on him who does you wrong will I put my curse: and you will become a name of blessing to all the families of the earth.

亚伯兰就照着耶和华的吩咐去了。罗得也和他同去。亚伯兰出哈兰的时候，年七十五岁。
So Abram went as the Lord had said to him, and Lot went with him: Abram was seventy-five years old when he went away from Haran.

亚伯兰将他妻子撒莱和侄儿罗得，连他们在哈兰所积蓄的财物，所得的人口，都带往迦南地去。他们就到了迦南地。
And Abram took Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother's son, and all their goods and the servants which they had got in Haran, and they went out to go to the land of Canaan.

亚伯兰经过那地，到了示剑地方，摩利橡树那里。那时迦南人住在那地。
And Abram went through the land till he came to Shechem, to the holy tree of Moreh. At that time, the Canaanites were still living in the land.

耶和华向亚伯兰显现，说，我要把这地赐给你的后裔。亚伯兰就在那里为向他显现的耶和华筑了一座坛。
And the Lord came to Abram, and said, I will give all this land to your seed; then Abram made an altar there to the Lord who had let himself be seen by him.

从那里他又迁到伯特利东边的山，支搭帐棚。西边是伯特利，东边是艾。他在那里又为耶和华筑了一座坛，求告耶和华的名。
And moving on from there to the mountain on the east of Beth-el, he put up his tent, having Beth-el on the west and Ai on the east: and there he made an altar and gave worship to the name of the Lord.

后来亚伯兰又渐渐迁往南地去。
And he went on, journeying still to the South.

那地遭遇饥荒。因饥荒甚大，亚伯兰就下埃及去，要在那里暂居。
And because there was little food to be had in that land, he went down into Egypt.

将近埃及，就对他妻子撒莱说，我知道你是容貌俊美的妇人。
Now when he came near to Egypt, he said to Sarai, his wife, Truly, you are a fair woman and beautiful to the eye;

埃及人看见你必说，这是他的妻子，他们就要杀我，却叫你存活。
And I am certain that when the men of Egypt see you, they will say, This is his wife: and they will put me to death and keep you.

求你说，你是我的妹子，使我因你得平安，我的命也因你存活。
Say, then, that you are my sister, and so it will be well with me because of you, and my life will be kept safe on your account.

及至亚伯兰到了埃及，埃及人看见那妇人极其美貌。
And so it was that when Abram came into Egypt, the men of Egypt, looking on the woman, saw that she was fair.

法老的臣宰看见了她，就在法老面前夸奖她。那妇人就被带进法老的宫去。
And Pharaoh's great men, having seen her, said words in praise of her to Pharaoh, and she was taken into Pharaoh's house.

法老因这妇人就厚待亚伯兰，亚伯兰得了许多牛，羊，骆驼，公驴，母驴，仆婢。
And because of her, he was good to Abram, and he had sheep and oxen and asses, and men-servants and women-servants, and camels.

耶和华因亚伯兰妻子撒莱的缘故，降大灾与法老和他的全家。
And the Lord sent great troubles on Pharaoh's house because of Sarai, Abram's wife.

法老就召了亚伯兰来，说，你这向我作的是什么事呢？为什么没有告诉我她是你的妻子？
Then Pharaoh sent for Abram, and said, What have you done to me? why did you not say that she was your wife?

为什么说她是你的妹子，以致我把她取来要作我的妻子？现在你的妻子在这里，可以带她走吧。
Why did you say that she was your sister? so that I took her for my wife: now, take your wife and go on your way.

于是法老吩咐人将亚伯兰和他妻子，并他所有的都送走了。
And Pharaoh gave orders to his men, and they sent him on his way, with his wife and all he had.

亚伯兰带着他的妻子与罗得，并一切所有的，都从埃及上南地去。
And Abram went up out of Egypt with his wife and all he had, and Lot with him, and they came in to the South.

亚伯兰的金，银，牲畜极多。
Now Abram had great wealth of cattle and silver and gold.

他从南地渐渐往伯特利去，到了伯特利和艾的中间，就是从前支搭帐棚的地方，
And travelling on from the South, he came to Beth-el, to the place where his tent had been before, between Beth-el and Ai;

也是他起先筑坛的地方，他又在那里求告耶和华的名。
To the place where he had made his first altar, and there Abram gave worship to the name of the Lord.

与亚伯兰同行的罗得也有牛群，羊群，帐棚。
And Lot, who went with him, had flocks and herds and tents;

那地容不下他们，因为他们的财物甚多，使他们不能同居。
So that the land was not wide enough for the two of them: their property was so great that there was not room for them together.

当时，迦南人与比利洗人在那地居住。亚伯兰的牧人和罗得的牧人相争。
And there was an argument between the keepers of Abram's cattle and the keepers of Lot's cattle: at that time the Canaanites and Perizzites were still living in the land.

亚伯兰就对罗得说，你我不可相争，你的牧人和我的牧人也不可相争，因为我们是骨肉（原文作弟兄）。
Then Abram said to Lot, Let there be no argument between me and you, and between my herdmen and your herdmen, for we are brothers.

遍地不都在你眼前吗？请你离开我，你向左，我就向右。你向右，我就向左。
Is not all the land before you? then let us go our separate ways: if you go to the left, I will go to the right; or if you take the right, I will go to the left.

罗得举目看见约旦河的全平原，直到琐珥，都是滋润的，那地在耶和华未灭所多玛，蛾摩拉以先如同耶和华的园子，也像埃及地。
And Lot, lifting up his eyes and looking an the valley of Jordan, saw that it was well watered everywhere, before the Lord had sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah; it was like the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, on the way to Zoar.

于是罗得选择约旦河的全平原，往东迁移。他们就彼此分离了。
So Lot took for himself all the valley of Jordan, and went to the east, and they were parted from one another.

亚伯兰住在迦南地，罗得住在平原的城邑，渐渐挪移帐棚，直到所多玛。
Abram went on living in the land of Canaan, and Lot went to the lowland towns, moving his tent as far as Sodom.

所多玛人在耶和华面前罪大恶极。
Now the men of Sodom were evil, and great sinners before the Lord.

罗得离别亚伯兰以后，耶和华对亚伯兰说，从你所在的地方，你举目向东西南北观看。
And the Lord had said to Abram, after Lot was parted from him, From this place where you are take a look to the north and to the south, to the east and to the west:

凡你所看见的一切地，我都要赐给你和你的后裔，直到永远。
For all the land which you see I will give to you and to your seed for ever.

我也要使你的后裔如同地上的尘沙那样多，人若能数算地上的尘沙才能数算你的后裔。
And I will make your children like the dust of the earth, so that if the dust of the earth may be numbered, then will your children be numbered.

你起来，纵横走遍这地，因为我必把这地赐给你。
Come, go through all the land from one end to the other for I will give it to you.

亚伯兰就搬了帐棚，来到希伯仑幔利的橡树那里居住，在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛。
And Abram, moving his tent, came and made his living-place by the holy tree of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and made an altar there to the Lord.

当暗拉非作示拿王，亚略作以拉撒王，基大老玛作以拦王，提达作戈印王的时候，
Now in the days of Amraphel, king of Shinar, Arioch, king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of Goiim,

他们都攻打所多玛王比拉，蛾摩拉王比沙，押玛王示纳，洗扁王善以别，和比拉王。比拉就是琐珥。
They made war with Bera, king of Sodom, and with Birsha, king of Gomorrah, Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber, king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (which is Zoar).

这五王都在西订谷会合。西订谷就是盐海。
All these came together in the valley of Siddim (which is the Salt Sea).

他们已经事奉基大老玛十二年，到十三年就背叛了。
For twelve years they were under the rule of Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they put off his control.

十四年，基大老玛和同盟的王都来在亚特律加宁，杀败了利乏音人，在哈麦杀败了苏西人，在沙微基列亭杀败了以米人，
And in the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer and the kings who were on his side, overcame the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim,

在何利人的西珥山杀败了何利人，一直杀到靠近旷野的伊勒巴兰。
And the Horites in their mountain Seir, driving them as far as El-paran, which is near the waste land.

他们回到安密巴，就是加低斯，杀败了亚玛力全地的人，以及住在哈洗逊他玛的亚摩利人。
Then they came back to En-mishpat (which is Kadesh), making waste all the country of the Amalekites and of the Amorites living in Hazazon-tamar.

于是所多玛王，蛾摩拉王，押玛王，洗扁王，和比拉王（比拉就是琐珥）都出来，在西订谷摆阵，与他们交战，
And the king of Sodom with the king of Gomorrah and the king of Admah and the king of Zeboiim and the king of Bela (that is Zoar), went out, and put their forces in position in the valley of Siddim,

就是与以拦王基大老玛，戈印王提达，示拿王暗拉非，以拉撒王亚略交战。乃是四王与五王交战。
Against Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal, king of Goiim, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Ellasar: four kings against the five.

西订谷有许多石漆坑。所多玛王和蛾摩拉王逃跑，有掉在坑里的，其余的人都往山上逃跑。
Now the valley of Siddim was full of holes of sticky earth; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah were put to flight and came to their end there, but the rest got away to the mountain.

四王就把所多玛和蛾摩拉所有的财物，并一切的粮食都掳掠去了。
And the four kings took all the goods and food from Sodom and Gomorrah and went on their way.

又把亚伯兰的侄儿罗得和罗得的财物掳掠去了。当时罗得正住在所多玛。
And in addition they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who was living in Sodom, and all his goods.

有一个逃出来的人告诉希伯来人亚伯兰。亚伯兰正住在亚摩利人幔利的橡树那里。幔利和以实各并亚乃都是弟兄，曾与亚伯兰联盟。
And one who had got away from the fight came and gave word of it to Abram the Hebrew, who was living by the holy tree of Mamre, the Amorite, the brother of Eshcol and Aner, who were friends of Abram.

亚伯兰听见他侄儿（原文作弟兄）被掳去，就率领他家里生养的精练壮丁三百一十八人，直追到但，
And Abram, hearing that his brother's son had been made a prisoner, took a band of his trained men, three hundred and eighteen of them, sons of his house, and went after them as far as Dan.

便在夜间，自己同仆人分队杀败敌人，又追到大马色左边的何把，
And separating his forces by night, he overcame them, putting them to flight and going after them as far as Hobah, which is on the north side of Damascus.

将被掳掠的一切财物夺回来，连他侄儿罗得和他的财物，以及妇女，人民也都夺回来。
And he got back all the goods, and Lot, his brother's son, with his goods and the women and the people.

亚伯兰杀败基大老玛和与他同盟的王回来的时候，所多玛王出来，在沙微谷迎接他。沙微谷就是王谷。
And when he was coming back after putting to flight Chedorlaomer and the other kings, he had a meeting with the king of Sodom in the valley of Shaveh, that is, the King's Valley.

又有撒冷王麦基洗德带着饼和酒出来迎接。他是至高神的祭司。
And Melchizedek, king of Salem, the priest of the Most High God, took bread and wine,

他为亚伯兰祝福，说，愿天地的主，至高的神赐福与亚伯兰。
And blessing him, said, May the blessing of the Most High God, maker of heaven and earth, be on Abram:

至高的神把敌人交在你手里，是应当称颂的。亚伯兰就把所得的拿出十分之一来，给麦基洗德。
And let the Most High God be praised, who has given into your hands those who were against you. Then Abram gave him a tenth of all the goods he had taken.

所多玛王对亚伯兰说，你把人口给我，财物你自己拿去吧。
And the king of Sodom said to Abram, Give me the prisoners and take the goods for yourself.

亚伯兰对所多玛王说，我已经向天地的主至高的神耶和华起誓。
But Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have taken an oath to the Lord, the Most High God, maker of heaven and earth,

凡是你的东西，就是一根线，一根鞋带，我都不拿，免得你说，我使亚伯兰富足。
That I will not take so much as a thread or the cord of a shoe of yours; so that you may not say, I have given wealth to Abram:

只有仆人所吃的，并与我同行的亚乃，以实各，幔利所应得的分，可以任凭他们拿去。
Give me nothing but the food which the fighting-men who went with me have had; but let Aner and Eshcol and Mamre have their part of the goods.

这事以后，耶和华在异象中有话对亚伯兰说，亚伯兰，你不要惧怕，我是你的盾牌，必大大地赏赐你。
After these things, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying, Have no fear, Abram: I will keep you safe, and great will be your reward.

亚伯兰说，主耶和华阿，我既无子，你还赐我什么呢？并且要承受我家业的是大马色人以利以谢。
And Abram said, What will you give me? for I have no child and this Eliezer of Damascus will have all my wealth after me.

亚伯兰又说，你没有给我儿子。那生在我家中的人就是我的后嗣。
And Abram said, You have given me no child, and a servant in my house will get the heritage.

耶和华又有话对他说，这人必不成为你的后嗣。你本身所生的才成为你的后嗣。
Then said the Lord, This man will not get the heritage, but a son of your body will have your property after you.

于是领他走到外边，说，你向天观看，数算众星，能数得过来吗？又对他说，你的后裔将要如此。
And he took him out into the open air, and said to him, Let your eyes be lifted to heaven, and see if the stars may be numbered; even so will your seed be.

亚伯兰信耶和华，耶和华就以此为他的义。
And he had faith in the Lord, and it was put to his account as righteousness.

耶和华又对他说，我是耶和华，曾领你出了迦勒底的吾珥，为要将这地赐你为业。
And he said to him, I am the Lord, who took you from Ur of the Chaldees, to give you this land for your heritage.

亚伯兰说，主耶和华阿，我怎能知道必得这地为业呢？
And he said, O Lord God, how may I be certain that it will be mine?

他说，你为我取一只三年的母牛，一只三年的母山羊，一只三年的公绵羊，一只斑鸠，一只雏鸽。
And he said, Take a young cow of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a sheep of three years old, and a dove and a young pigeon.

亚伯兰就取了这些来，每样劈开，分成两半，一半对着一半地摆列，只有鸟没有劈开。
All these he took, cutting them in two and putting one half opposite the other, but not cutting the birds in two.

有鸷鸟下来，落在那死畜的肉上，亚伯兰就把它吓飞了。
And evil birds came down on the bodies, but Abram sent them away.

日头正落的时候，亚伯兰沉沉地睡了。忽然有惊人的大黑暗落在他身上。
Now when the sun was going down, a deep sleep came on Abram, and a dark cloud of fear.

耶和华对亚伯兰说，你要的确知道，你的后裔必寄居别人的地，又服事那地的人。那地的人要苦待他们四百年。
And he said to Abram, Truly, your seed will be living in a land which is not theirs, as servants to a people who will be cruel to them for four hundred years;

并且他们所要服事的那国，我要惩罚，后来他们必带着许多财物从那里出来。
But I will be the judge of that nation whose servants they are, and they will come out from among them with great wealth.

但你要享大寿数，平平安安地归到你列祖那里，被人埋葬。
As for you, you will go to your fathers in peace; at the end of a long life you will be put in your last resting-place.

到了第四代，他们必回到此地，因为亚摩利人的罪孽还没有满盈。
And in the fourth generation they will come back here; for at present the sin of the Amorite is not full.

日落天黑，不料有冒烟的炉并烧着的火把从那些肉块中经过。
Then when the sun went down and it was dark, he saw a smoking fire and a flaming light which went between the parts of the bodies.

当那日，耶和华与亚伯兰立约，说，我已赐给你的后裔，从埃及河直到伯拉大河之地，
In that day the Lord made an agreement with Abram, and said, To your seed have I given this land from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates:

就是基尼人，基尼洗人，甲摩尼人，
The Kenite, the Kenizzite, and the Kadmonite,

赫人，比利洗人，利乏音人，
And the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Rephaim,

亚摩利人，迦南人，革迦撒人，耶布斯人之地。
And the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Girgashite, and the Jebusite.

亚伯兰的妻子撒莱不给他生儿女。撒莱有一个使女，名叫夏甲，是埃及人。
Now Sarai, Abram's wife, had given him no children; and she had a servant, a woman of Egypt whose name was Hagar.

撒莱对亚伯兰说，耶和华使我不能生育。求你和我的使女同房，或者我可以因她得孩子（得孩子原文作被建立）。亚伯兰听从了撒莱的话。
And Sarai said to Abram, See, the Lord has not let me have children; go in to my servant, for I may get a family through her. And Abram did as Sarai said.

于是亚伯兰的妻子撒莱将使女埃及人夏甲给了丈夫为妾。那时亚伯兰在迦南已经住了十年。
So after Abram had been living for ten years in the land of Canaan, Sarai took Hagar, her Egyptian servant, and gave her to Abram for his wife.

亚伯兰与夏甲同房，夏甲就怀了孕。她见自己有孕，就小看她的主母。
And he went in to Hagar and she became with child, and when she saw that she was with child, she no longer had any respect for her master's wife.

撒莱对亚伯兰说，我因你受屈。我将我的使女放在你怀中，她见自己有了孕，就小看我。愿耶和华在你我中间判断。
And Sarai said to Abram, May my wrong be on you: I gave you my servant for your wife and when she saw that she was with child, she no longer had any respect for me: may the Lord be judge between you and me.

亚伯兰对撒莱说，使女在你手下，你可以随意待她。撒莱苦待她，她就从撒莱面前逃走了。
And Abram said, The woman is in your power; do with her whatever seems good to you. And Sarai was cruel to her, so that she went running away from her.

耶和华的使者在旷野书珥路上的水泉旁遇见她，
And an angel of the Lord came to her by a fountain of water in the waste land, by the fountain on the way to Shur.

对她说，撒莱的使女夏甲，你从哪里来，要往哪里去。夏甲说，我从我的主母撒莱面前逃出来。
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's servant, where have you come from and where are you going? And she said, I am running away from Sarai, my master's wife.

耶和华的使者对她说，你回到你主母那里，服在她手下。
And the angel said to her, Go back, and put yourself under her authority.

又说，我必使你的后裔极其繁多，甚至不可胜数。
And the angel of the Lord said, Your seed will be greatly increased so that it may not be numbered.

并说，你如今怀孕要生一个儿子，可以给他起名叫以实玛利，因为耶和华听见了你的苦情。（以实玛利就是神听见的意思）
And the angel of the Lord said, See, you are with child and will give birth to a son, to whom you will give the name Ishmael, because the ears of the Lord were open to your sorrow.

他为人必像野驴。他的手要攻打人，人的手也要攻打他。他必住在众弟兄的东边。
And he will be like a mountain ass among men; his hand will be against every man and every man's hand against him, and he will keep his place against all his brothers.

夏甲就称那对她说话的耶和华为看顾人的神。因而说，在这里我也看见那看顾我的吗？
And to the Lord who was talking with her she gave this name, You are a God who is seen; for she said, Have I not even here in the waste land had a vision of God and am still living?

所以这井名叫庇耳拉海莱。这井正在加低斯和巴列中间。
So that fountain was named, Fountain of Life and Vision: it is between Kadesh and Bered.

后来夏甲给亚伯兰生了一个儿子。亚伯兰给他起名叫以实玛利。
And Hagar gave birth to a child, the son of Abram, to whom Abram gave the name of Ishmael.

夏甲给亚伯兰生以实玛利的时候，亚伯兰年八十六岁。
Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael.

亚伯兰年九十九岁的时候，耶和华向他显现，对他说，我是全能的神。你当在我面前作完全人，
When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord came to him, and said, I am God, Ruler of all; go in my ways and be upright in all things,

我就与你立约，使你的后裔极其繁多。
And I will make an agreement between you and me, and your offspring will be greatly increased.

亚伯兰俯伏在地。神又对他说，
And Abram went down on his face on the earth, and the Lord God went on talking with him, and said,

我与你立约，你要作多国的父。
As for me, my agreement is made with you, and you will be the father of nations without end.

从此以后，你的名不再叫亚伯兰，要叫亚伯拉罕，因为我已立你作多国的父。
No longer will your name be Abram, but Abraham, for I have made you the father of a number of nations.

我必使你的后裔极其繁多。国度从你而立，君王从你而出。
I will make you very fertile, so that nations will come from you and kings will be your offspring.

我要与你并你世世代代的后裔坚立我的约，作永远的约，是要作你和你后裔的神。
And I will make between me and you and your seed after you through all generations, an eternal agreement to be a God to you and to your seed after you.

我要将你现在寄居的地，就是迦南全地，赐给你和你的后裔永远为业，我也必作他们的神。
And to you and to your seed after you, I will give the land in which you are living, all the land of Canaan for an eternal heritage; and I will be their God.

神又对亚伯拉罕说，你和你的后裔，必世世代代遵守我的约。
And God said to Abraham, On your side, you are to keep the agreement, you and your seed after you through all generations.

你们所有的男子，都要受割礼。这就是我与你，并你的后裔所立的约，是你们所当遵守的。
And this is the agreement which you are to keep with me, you and your seed after you: every male among you is to undergo circumcision.

你们都要受割礼（受割礼原文作割阳皮。14，23，24，25节同），这是我与你们立约的证据。
In the flesh of your private parts you are to undergo it, as a mark of the agreement between me and you.

你们世世代代的男子，无论是家里生的，是在你后裔之外用银子从外人买的，生下来第八日，都要受割礼。
Every male among you, from one generation to another, is to undergo circumcision when he is eight days old, with every servant whose birth takes place in your house, or for whom you gave money to someone of another country, and not of your seed.

你家里生的和你用银子买的，都必须受割礼。这样，我的约就立在你们肉体上作永远的约。
He who comes to birth in your house and he who is made yours for a price, all are to undergo circumcision; so that my agreement may be marked in your flesh, an agreement for all time.

但不受割礼的男子，必从民中剪除，因他背了我的约。
And any male who does not undergo circumcision will be cut off from his people: my agreement has been broken by him.

神又对亚伯拉罕说，你的妻子撒莱，不可再叫撒莱，她的名要叫撒拉。
And God said, As for Sarai, your wife, from now her name will be not Sarai, but Sarah.

我必赐福给她，也要使你从她得一个儿子。我要赐福给她，她也要作多国之母。必有百姓的君王从她而出。
And I will give her a blessing so that you will have a son by her: truly my blessing will be on her, and she will be the mother of nations: kings of peoples will be her offspring.

亚伯拉罕就俯伏在地喜笑，心里说，一百岁的人还能得孩子吗？撒拉已经九十岁了，还能生养吗？
Then Abraham went down on his face, and laughing, said in his heart, May a man a hundred years old have a child? will Sarah, at ninety years old, give birth?

亚伯拉罕对神说，但愿以实玛利活在你面前。
And Abraham said to God, If only Ishmael's life might be your care!

神说，不然，你妻子撒拉要给你生一个儿子，你要给他起名叫以撒。我要与他坚定所立的约，作他后裔永远的约。
And God said, Not so; but Sarah, your wife, will have a son, and you will give him the name Isaac, and I will make my agreement with him for ever and with his seed after him.

至于以实玛利，我也应允你，我必赐福给他，使他昌盛极其繁多，他必生十二个族长，我也要使他成为大国。
As for Ishmael, I have given ear to your prayer: truly I have given him my blessing and I will make him fertile and give him great increase; he will be the father of twelve chiefs, and I will make him a great nation.

到明年这时节，撒拉必给你生以撒，我要与他坚定所立的约。
But my agreement will be with Isaac, to whom Sarah will give birth a year from this time.

神和亚伯拉罕说完了话，就离开他上升去了。
And having said these words, God went up from Abraham.

正当那日，亚伯拉罕遵着神的命，给他的儿子以实玛利和家里的一切男子，无论是在家里生的，是用银子买的，都行了割礼。
And Abraham took Ishmael, his son, and all whose birth had taken place in his house, and all his servants whom he had made his for a price, every male of his house, and on that very day he gave them circumcision in the flesh of their private parts as God had said to him.

亚伯拉罕受割礼的时候，年九十九岁。
Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he underwent circumcision.

他儿子以实玛利受割礼的时候，年十三岁。
And Ishmael, his son, was thirteen years old when he underwent circumcision.

正当那日，亚伯拉罕和他儿子以实玛利，一同受了割礼。
Abraham and Ishmael, his son, underwent circumcision on that very day.

家里所有的人，无论是在家里生的，是用银子从外人买的，也都一同受了割礼。
And all the men of his house, those whose birth had taken place in the house and those whom he had got for money from men of other lands, underwent circumcision with him.

耶和华在幔利橡树那里，向亚伯拉罕显现出来。那时正热，亚伯拉罕坐在帐棚门口，
Now the Lord came to him by the holy tree of Mamre, when he was seated in the doorway of his tent in the middle of the day;

举目观看，见有三个人在对面站着。他一见，就从帐棚门口跑去迎接他们，俯伏在地，
And lifting up his eyes, he saw three men before him; and seeing them, he went quickly to them from the door of the tent, and went down on his face to the earth;

说，我主，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你不要离开仆人往前去。
And said, My Lord, if now I have grace in your eyes, do not go away from your servant:

容我拿点水来，你们洗洗脚，在树下歇息歇息。
Let me get water for washing your feet, and take your rest under the tree:

我再拿一点饼来，你们可以加添心力，然后往前去。你们既到仆人这里来，理当如此。他们说，就照你说的行吧。
And let me get a bit of bread to keep up your strength, and after that you may go on your way: for this is why you have come to your servant. And they said, Let it be so.

亚伯拉罕急忙进帐棚见撒拉，说，你速速拿三细亚细面调和作饼。
Then Abraham went quickly into the tent, and said to Sarah, Get three measures of meal straight away and make cakes.

亚伯拉罕又跑到牛群里，牵了一只又嫩又好的牛犊来，交给仆人，仆人急忙预备好了。
And running to the herd, he took a young ox, soft and fat, and gave it to the servant and he quickly made it ready;

亚伯拉罕又取了奶油和奶，并预备好的牛犊来，摆在他们面前，自己在树下站在旁边，他们就吃了。
And he took butter and milk and the young ox which he had made ready and put it before them, waiting by them under the tree while they took food.

他们问亚伯拉罕说，你妻子撒拉在哪里。他说，在帐棚里。
And they said to him, Where is Sarah your wife? And he said, She is in the tent.

三人中有一位说，到明年这时候，我必要回到你这里。你的妻子撒拉必生一个儿子。撒拉在那人后边的帐棚门口也听见了这话。
And he said, I will certainly come back to you in the spring, and Sarah your wife will have a son. And his words came to the ears of Sarah who was at the back of the tent-door.

亚伯拉罕和撒拉年纪老迈，撒拉的月经已断绝了。
Now Abraham and Sarah were very old, and Sarah was past the time for giving birth.

撒拉心里暗笑，说，我既已衰败，我主也老迈，岂能有这喜事呢？
And Sarah, laughing to herself, said, Now that I am used up am I still to have pleasure, my husband himself being old?

耶和华对亚伯拉罕说，撒拉为什么暗笑，说，我既已年老，果真能生养吗？
And the Lord said, Why was Sarah laughing and saying, Is it possible for me, being old, to give birth to a child?

耶和华岂有难成的事吗？到了日期，明年这时候，我必回到你这里，撒拉必生一个儿子。
Is there any wonder which the Lord is not able to do? At the time I said, in the spring, I will come back to you, and Sarah will have a child.

撒拉就害怕，不承认，说，我没有笑。那位说，不然，你实在笑了。
Then Sarah said, I was not laughing; for she was full of fear. And he said, No, but you were laughing.

三人就从那里起行，向所多玛观看，亚伯拉罕也与他们同行，要送他们一程。
And the men went on from there in the direction of Sodom; and Abraham went with them on their way.

耶和华说，我所要作的事，岂可瞒着亚伯拉罕呢？
And the Lord said, Am I to keep back from Abraham the knowledge of what I do;

亚伯拉罕必要成为强大的国，地上的万国都必因他得福。
Seeing that Abraham will certainly become a great and strong nation, and his name will be used by all the nations of the earth as a blessing?

我眷顾他，为要叫他吩咐他的众子和他的眷属，遵守我的道，秉公行义，使我所应许亚伯拉罕的话都成就了。
For I have made him mine so that he may give orders to his children and those of his line after him, to keep the ways of the Lord, to do what is good and right: so that the Lord may do to Abraham as he has said.

耶和华说，所多玛和蛾摩拉的罪恶甚重，声闻于我。
And the Lord said, Because the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is very great, and their sin is very evil,

我现在要下去，察看他们所行的，果然尽像那达到我耳中的声音一样吗？若是不然，我也必知道。
I will go down now, and see if their acts are as bad as they seem from the outcry which has come to me; and if they are not, I will see.

二人转身离开那里，向所多玛去。但亚伯拉罕仍旧站在耶和华面前。
And the men, turning from that place, went on to Sodom: but Abraham was still waiting before the Lord.

亚伯拉罕近前来，说，无论善恶，你都要剿灭吗？
And Abraham came near, and said, Will you let destruction come on the upright with the sinners?

假若那城里有五十个义人，你还剿灭那地方吗？不为城里这五十个义人饶恕其中的人吗？
If by chance there are fifty upright men in the town, will you give the place to destruction and not have mercy on it because of the fifty upright men?

将义人与恶人同杀，将义人与恶人一样看待，这断不是你所行的。审判全地的主，岂不行公义吗？
Let such a thing be far from you, to put the upright to death with the sinner: will not the judge of all the earth do right?

耶和华说，我若在所多玛城里见有五十个义人，我就为他们的缘故饶恕那地方的众人。
And the Lord said, If there are fifty upright men in the town, I will have mercy on it because of them.

亚伯拉罕说，我虽然是灰尘，还敢对主说话。
And Abraham answering said, Truly, I who am only dust, have undertaken to put my thoughts before the Lord:

假若这五十个义人短了五个，你就因为短了五个毁灭全城吗？他说，我在那里若见有四十五个，也不毁灭那城。
If by chance there are five less than fifty upright men, will you give up all the town to destruction because of these five? And he said, I will not give it to destruction if there are forty-five.

亚伯拉罕又对他说，假若在那里见有四十个怎么样呢？他说，为这四十个的缘故，我也不作这事。
And again he said to him, By chance there may be forty there. And he said, I will not do it if there are forty.

亚伯拉罕说，求主不要动怒，容我说。假若在那里见有三十个怎么样呢？他说，我在那里若见有三十个，我也不作这事。
And he said, Let not the Lord be angry with me if I say, What if there are thirty there? And he said, I will not do it if there are thirty.

亚伯拉罕说，我还敢对主说话，假若在那里见有二十个怎么样呢？他说，为这二十个的缘故，我也不毁灭那城。
And he said, See now, I have undertaken to put my thoughts before the Lord: what if there are twenty there? And he said, I will have mercy because of the twenty.

亚伯拉罕说，求主不要动怒，我再说这一次，假若在那里见有十个呢？他说，为这十个的缘故，我也不毁灭那城。
And he said, O let not the Lord be angry and I will say only one word more: by chance there may be ten there. And he said, I will have mercy because of the ten.

耶和华与亚伯拉罕说完了话就走了。亚伯拉罕也回到自己的地方去了。
And the Lord went on his way when his talk with Abraham was ended, and Abraham went back to his place.

那两个天使晚上到了所多玛。罗得正坐在所多玛城门口，看见他们，就起来迎接，脸伏于地下拜，
And at nightfall the two angels came to Sodom; and Lot was seated at the way into the town: and when he saw them he got up and came before them, falling down on his face to the earth.

说，我主阿，请你们到仆人家里洗洗脚，住一夜，清早起来再走。他们说，不，我们要在街上过夜。
And he said, My masters, come now into your servant's house and take your rest there for the night, and let your feet be washed; and early in the morning you may go on your way. And they said, Not so, but we will take our night's rest in the street.

罗得切切地请他们，他们这才进去，到他屋里。罗得为他们预备筵席，烤无酵饼，他们就吃了。
But he made his request more strongly, so they went with him into his house; and he got food ready for them, and made unleavened bread, of which they took.

他们还没有躺下，所多玛城里各处的人，连老带少，都来围住那房子，
But before they had gone to bed, the men of the town, all the men of Sodom, came round the house, young and old, from every part of the town;

呼叫罗得说，今日晚上到你这里来的人在哪里呢？把他们带出来，任我们所为。
And crying out to Lot, they said, Where are the men who came to your house this night? Send them out to us, so that we may take our pleasure with them.

罗得出来，把门关上，到众人那里，
And Lot went out to them in the doorway, shutting the door after him.

说，众弟兄，请你们不要作这恶事。
And he said, My brothers, do not this evil.

我有两个女儿，还是处女，容我领出来，任凭你们的心愿而行。只是这两个人既然到我舍下，不要向他们作什么。
See now, I have two unmarried daughters; I will send them out to you so that you may do to them whatever seems good to you: only do nothing to these men, for this is why they have come under the shade of my roof.

众人说，退去吧。又说，这个人来寄居，还想要作官哪。现在我们要害你比害他们更甚。众人就向前拥挤罗得，要攻破房门。
And they said, Give way there. This one man, they said, came here from a strange country, and will he now be our judge? now we will do worse to you than to them; and pushing violently against Lot, they came near to get the door broken in.

只是那二人伸出手来，将罗得拉进屋去，把门关上，
But the men put out their hands and took Lot into the house to them, shutting the door again.

并且使门外的人，无论老少，眼都昏迷。他们摸来摸去，总寻不着房门。
But the men who were outside the door they made blind, all of them, small and great, so that they were tired out with looking for the door.

二人对罗得说，你这里还有什么人吗？无论是女婿是儿女，和这城中一切属你的人，你都要将他们从这地方带出去。
Then the men said to Lot, Are there any others of your family here? sons-in-law or sons or daughters, take them all out of this place;

我们要毁灭这地方。因为城内罪恶的声音在耶和华面前甚大，耶和华差我们来，要毁灭这地方。
For we are about to send destruction on this place, because a great outcry against them has come to the ears of the Lord; and the Lord has sent us to put an end to the town.

罗得就出去，告诉娶了他女儿的女婿们（娶了或作将要娶）说，你们起来离开这地方，因为耶和华要毁灭这城。他女婿们却以为他说的是戏言。
And Lot went out and said to his sons-in-law, who were married to his daughters, Come, let us go out of this place, for the Lord is about to send destruction on the town. But his sons-in-law did not take him seriously.

天明了，天使催逼罗得说，起来，带着你的妻子和你在这里的两个女儿出去，免得你因这城里的罪恶同被剿灭。
And when morning came, the angels did all in their power to make Lot go, saying, Get up quickly and take your wife and your two daughters who are here, and go, for fear that you come to destruction in the punishment of the town.

但罗得迟延不走。二人因为耶和华怜恤罗得，就拉着他的手和他妻子的手，并他两个女儿的手，把他们领出来，安置在城外。
But while he was waiting, the men took him and his wife and his daughters by the hand, for the Lord had mercy on them, and put them outside the town.

领他们出来以后，就说，逃命吧。不可回头看，也不可在平原站住。要往山上逃跑，免得你被剿灭。
And when they had put them out, he said, Go for your life, without looking back or waiting in the lowland; go quickly to the mountain or you will come to destruction.

罗得对他们说，我主阿，不要如此，
And Lot said to them, Not so, O my Lord;

你仆人已经在你眼前蒙恩。你又向我显出莫大的慈爱，救我的性命。我不能逃到山上去，恐怕这灾祸临到我，我便死了。
See now, your servant has had grace in your eyes and great is your mercy in keeping my life from destruction, but I am not able to get as far as the mountain before evil overtakes me and death;

看哪，这座城又小又近，容易逃到，这不是一个小的吗？求你容我逃到那里，我的性命就得存活。
This town, now, is near, and it is a little one: O, let me go there (is it not a little one?) so that my life may be safe.

天使对他说，这事我也应允你。我不倾覆你所说的这城。
And he said, See, I have given you your request in this one thing more: I will not send destruction on this town.

你要速速地逃到那城。因为你还没有到那里，我不能作什么。因此那城名叫琐珥（琐珥就是小的意思）。
Go there quickly, for I am not able to do anything till you have come there. For this reason, the town was named Zoar.

罗得到了琐珥，日头已经出来了。
The sun was up when Lot came to Zoar.

当时，耶和华将硫磺与火从天上耶和华那里降与所多玛和蛾摩拉，
Then the Lord sent fire and flaming smoke raining down from heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah.

把那些城和全平原，并城里所有的居民，连地上生长的，都毁灭了。
And he sent destruction on those towns, with all the lowland and all the people of those towns and every green thing in the land.

罗得的妻子在后边回头一看，就变成了一根盐柱。
But Lot's wife, looking back, became a pillar of salt.

亚伯拉罕清早起来，到了他从前站在耶和华面前的地方，
And Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he had been talking with the Lord:

向所多玛和蛾摩拉与平原的全地观看，不料，那地方烟气上腾，如同烧窑一般。
And looking in the direction of Sodom and Gomorrah and the lowland, he saw the smoke of the land going up like the smoke of an oven.

当神毁灭平原诸城的时候，他记念亚伯拉罕，正在倾覆罗得所住之城的时候，就打发罗得从倾覆之中出来。
So it came about that when God sent destruction on the towns of the lowland, he kept his word to Abraham, and sent Lot safely away when he put an end to the towns where he was living.

罗得因为怕住在琐珥，就同他两个女儿从琐珥上去，住在山里。他和两个女儿住在一个洞里。
Then Lot went up out of Zoar to the mountain, and was living there with his two daughters, for fear kept him from living in Zoar: and he and his daughters made their living-place in a hole in the rock.

大女儿对小女儿说，我们的父亲老了，地上又无人按着世上的常规进到我们这里。
And the older daughter said to her sister, Our father is old, and there is no man to be a husband to us in the natural way:

来，我们可以叫父亲喝酒，与他同寝。这样，我们好从他存留后裔。
Come, let us give our father much wine, and we will go into his bed, so that we may have offspring by our father,

于是，那夜她们叫父亲喝酒，大女儿就进去和她父亲同寝。她几时躺下，几时起来，父亲都不知道。
And that night they made their father take much wine; and the older daughter went into his bed; and he had no knowledge of when she went in or when she went away.

第二天，大女儿对小女儿说，我昨夜与父亲同寝。今夜我们再叫他喝酒，你可以进去与他同寝。这样，我们好从父亲存留后裔。
And on the day after, the older daughter said to the younger, Last night I was with my father; let us make him take much wine this night again, and do you go to him, so that we may have offspring by our father.

于是，那夜她们又叫父亲喝酒，小女儿起来与她父亲同寝。她几时躺下，几时起来，父亲都不知道。
And that night again they made their father take much wine; and the younger daughter went into his bed; and he had no knowledge of when she went in or when she went away.

这样，罗得的两个女儿都从她父亲怀了孕。
And so the two daughters of Lot were with child by their father.

大女儿生了儿子，给他起名叫摩押，就是现今摩押人的始祖。
And the older daughter had a son, and she gave him the name Moab: he is the father of the Moabites to this day.

小女儿也生了儿子，给他起名叫便亚米，就是现今亚扪人的始祖。
And the younger had a son and gave him the name Ben-ammi: from him come the children of Ammon to this day.

亚伯拉罕从那里向南地迁去，寄居在加低斯和书珥中间的基拉耳。
And Abraham went on his way from there to the land of the South, and was living between Kadesh and Shur, in Gerar.

亚伯拉罕称他的妻撒拉为妹子，基拉耳王亚比米勒差人把撒拉取了去。
And Abraham said of Sarah, his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah.

但夜间神来在梦中对亚比米勒说，你是个死人哪，因为你取了那女人来。她原是别人的妻子。
But God came to Abimelech in a dream in the night, and said to him, Truly you are a dead man because of the woman whom you have taken; for she is a man's wife.

亚比米勒却还没有亲近撒拉。他说，主阿，连有义的国，你也要毁灭吗？
Now Abimelech had not come near her; and he said, Lord, will you put to death an upright nation?

那人岂不是自己对我说，她是我的妹子吗？就是女人也自己说，他是我的哥哥。我作这事是心正手洁的。
Did he not say to me himself, She is my sister? and she herself said, He is my brother: with an upright heart and clean hands have I done this.

神在梦中对他说，我知道你作这事是心中正直。我也拦阻了你，免得你得罪我，所以我不容你沾着她。
And God said to him in the dream, I see that you have done this with an upright heart, and I have kept you from sinning against me: for this reason I did not let you come near her.

现在你把这人的妻子归还他。因为他是先知，他要为你祷告，使你存活。你若不归还他，你当知道，你和你所有的人都必要死。
So now, give the man back his wife, for he is a prophet, and let him say a prayer for you, so your life may be safe: but if you do not give her back, be certain that death will come to you and all your house.

亚比米勒清早起来，召了众臣仆来，将这些事都说给他们听，他们都甚惧怕。
So Abimelech got up early in the morning and sent for all his servants and gave them word of these things, and they were full of fear.

亚比米勒召了亚伯拉罕来，对他说，你怎么向我这样行呢？我在什么事上得罪了你，你竟使我和我国里的人陷在大罪里。你向我行不当行的事了。
Then Abimelech sent for Abraham, and said, What have you done to us? what wrong have I done you that you have put on me and on my kingdom so great a sin? You have done to me things which are not to be done.

亚比米勒又对亚伯拉罕说，你见了什么才作这事呢？
And Abimelech said to Abraham, Why did you do this thing?

亚伯拉罕说，我以为这地方的人总不惧怕神，必为我妻子的缘故杀我。
And Abraham said, Because it seemed to me that there was no fear of God in this place, and that they might put me to death because of my wife.

况且她也实在是我的妹子。她与我是同父异母，后来作了我的妻子。
And, in fact, she is my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife:

当神叫我离开父家，飘流在外的时候，我对她说，我们无论走到什么地方，你可以对人说，他是我的哥哥。这就是你待我的恩典了。
And when God sent me wandering from my father's house, I said to her, Let this be the sign of your love for me; wherever we go, say of me, He is my brother.

亚比米勒把牛，羊，仆婢赐给亚伯拉罕，又把他的妻子撒拉归还他。
Then Abimelech gave to Abraham sheep and oxen and men-servants and women-servants, and gave him back his wife Sarah.

亚比米勒又说，看哪，我的地都在你面前，你可以随意居住。
And Abimelech said, See, all my land is before you; take whatever place seems good to you.

又对撒拉说，我给你哥哥一千银子，作为你在合家人面前遮羞的（羞原文作眼），你就在众人面前没有不是了。
And he said to Sarah, See, I have given to your brother a thousand bits of silver so that your wrong may be put right; now your honour is clear in the eyes of all.

亚伯拉罕祷告神，神就医好了亚比米勒和他的妻子，并他的众女仆，她们便能生育。
Then Abraham made prayer to God, and God made Abimelech well again, and his wife and his women-servants, so that they had children.

因耶和华为亚伯拉罕的妻子撒拉的缘故，已经使亚比米勒家中的妇人不能生育。
For the Lord had kept all the women of the house of Abimelech from having children, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

耶和华按着先前的话眷顾撒拉，便照他所说的给撒拉成就。
And the Lord came to Sarah as he had said and did to her as he had undertaken.

当亚伯拉罕年老的时候，撒拉怀了孕。到神所说的日期，就给亚伯拉罕生了一个儿子。
And Sarah became with child, and gave Abraham a son when he was old, at the time named by God.

亚伯拉罕给撒拉所生的儿子起名叫以撒。
And Abraham gave to his son, to whom Sarah had given birth, the name Isaac.

以撒生下来第八日，亚伯拉罕照着神所吩咐的，给以撒行了割礼。
And when his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham made him undergo circumcision, as God had said to him.

他儿子以撒生的时候，亚伯拉罕年一百岁。
Now Abraham was a hundred years old when the birth of Isaac took place.

撒拉说，神使我喜笑，凡听见的必与我一同喜笑。
And Sarah said, God has given me cause for laughing, and everyone who has news of it will be laughing with me.

又说，谁能预先对亚伯拉罕说撒拉要乳养婴孩呢？因为在他年老的时候，我给他生了一个儿子。
And she said, Who would have said to Abraham that Sarah would have a child at her breast? for see, I have given him a son now when he is old.

孩子渐长，就断了奶。以撒断奶的日子，亚伯拉罕设摆丰盛的筵席。
And when the child was old enough to be taken from the breast, Abraham made a great feast.

当时，撒拉看见埃及人夏甲给亚伯拉罕所生的儿子戏笑，
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian playing with Isaac.

就对亚伯拉罕说，你把这使女和她儿子赶出去，因为这使女的儿子不可与我的儿子以撒一同承受产业。
So she said to Abraham, Send away that woman and her son: for the son of that woman is not to have a part in the heritage with my son Isaac.

亚伯拉罕因他儿子的缘故很忧愁。
And this was a great grief to Abraham because of his son.

神对亚伯拉罕说，你不必为这童子和你的使女忧愁。凡撒拉对你说的话，你都该听从。因为从以撒生的，才要称为你的后裔。
But God said, Let it not be a grief to you because of the boy and Hagar his mother; give ear to whatever Sarah says to you, because it is from Isaac that your seed will take its name.

至于使女的儿子，我也必使他的后裔成立一国，因为他是你所生的。
And I will make a nation of the son of your servant-woman, because he is your seed.

亚伯拉罕清早起来，拿饼和一皮袋水，给了夏甲，搭在她的肩上，又把孩子交给她打发她走。夏甲就走了，在别是巴的旷野走迷了路。
And early in the morning Abraham got up, and gave Hagar some bread and a water-skin, and put the boy on her back, and sent her away: and she went, wandering in the waste land of Beer-sheba.

皮袋的水用尽了，夏甲就把孩子撇在小树底下，
And when all the water in the skin was used up, she put the child down under a tree.

自己走开约有一箭之远，相对而坐，说，我不忍见孩子死，就相对而坐，放声大哭。
And she went some distance away, about an arrow flight, and seating herself on the earth, she gave way to bitter weeping, saying, Let me not see the death of my child.

神听见童子的声音。神的使者从天上呼叫夏甲说，夏甲，你为何这样呢？不要害怕，神已经听见童子的声音了。
And the boy's cry came to the ears of God; and the angel of God said to Hagar from heaven, Hagar, why are you weeping? have no fear, for the child's cry has come to the ears of God.

起来，把童子抱在怀中（怀原文作手），我必使他的后裔成为大国。
Come, take your child in your arms, for I will make of him a great nation.

神使夏甲的眼睛明亮，她就看见一口水井，便去将皮袋盛满了水，给童子喝。
Then God made her eyes open, and she saw a water-spring, and she got water in the skin and gave the boy a drink.

神保佑童子，他就渐长，住在旷野，成了弓箭手。
And God was with the boy, and he became tall and strong, and he became a bowman, living in the waste land.

他住在巴兰的旷野。他母亲从埃及地给他娶了一个妻子。
And while he was in the waste land of Paran, his mother got him a wife from the land of Egypt.

当那时候，亚比米勒同他军长非各对亚伯拉罕说，凡你所行的事都有神的保佑。
Now at that time, Abimelech and Phicol, the captain of his army, said to Abraham, I see that God is with you in all you do.

我愿你如今在这里指着神对我起誓，不要欺负我与我的儿子，并我的子孙。我怎样厚待了你，你也要照样厚待我与你所寄居这地的民。
Now, then, give me your oath, in the name of God, that you will not be false to me or to my sons after me, but that as I have been good to you, so you will be to me and to this land where you have been living.

亚伯拉罕说，我情愿起誓。
And Abraham said, I will give you my oath.

从前，亚比米勒的仆人霸占了一口水井，亚伯拉罕为这事指责亚比米勒。
But Abraham made a protest to Abimelech because of a water-hole which Abimelech's servants had taken by force.

亚比米勒说，谁作这事，我不知道，你也没有告诉我，今日我才听见了。
But Abimelech said, I have no idea who has done this thing; you never gave me word of it, and I had no knowledge of it till this day.

亚伯拉罕把羊和牛给了亚比米勒，二人就彼此立约。
And Abraham took sheep and oxen and gave them to Abimelech, and the two of them made an agreement together.

亚伯拉罕把七只母羊羔另放在一处。
And Abraham put seven young lambs of the flock on one side by themselves.

亚比米勒问亚伯拉罕说，你把这七只母羊羔另放在一处，是什么意思呢？
Then Abimelech said, What are these seven lambs which you have put on one side?

他说，你要从我手里受这七只母羊羔，作我挖这口井的证据。
And he said, Take these seven lambs from me as a witness that I have made this water-hole.

所以他给那地方起名叫别是巴，因为他们二人在那里起了誓。（别是巴就是盟誓的井）
So he gave that place the name Beer-sheba, because there the two of them had given their oaths.

他们在别是巴立了约，亚比米勒就同他军长非各起身回非利士地去了。
So they made an agreement at Beer-sheba, and Abimelech and Phicol, the captain of his army, went back to the land of the Philistines.

亚伯拉罕在别是巴栽上一棵垂丝柳树，又在那里求告耶和华永生神的名。
And Abraham, after planting a holy tree in Beer-sheba, gave worship to the name of the Lord, the Eternal God.

亚伯拉罕在非利士人的地寄居了多日。
And Abraham went on living in the land of the Philistines as in a strange country.

这些事以后，神要试验亚伯拉罕，就呼叫他说，亚伯拉罕，他说，我在这里。
Now after these things, God put Abraham to the test, and said to him, Abraham; and he said, Here am I.

神说，你带着你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，你所爱的以撒，往摩利亚地去，在我所要指示你的山上，把他献为燔祭。
And he said to him, Take your son, your dearly loved only son Isaac, and go to the land of Moriah and give him as a burned offering on one of the mountains of which I will give you knowledge.

亚伯拉罕清早起来，备上驴，带着两个仆人和他儿子以撒，也劈好了燔祭的柴，就起身往神所指示他的地方去了。
And Abraham got up early in the morning, and made ready his ass, and took with him two of his young men and Isaac, his son, and after the wood for the burned offering had been cut, he went on his way to the place of which God had given him word.

到了第三日，亚伯拉罕举目远远地看见那地方。
And on the third day, Abraham, lifting up his eyes, saw the place a long way off.

亚伯拉罕对他的仆人说，你们和驴在此等候，我与童子往那里去拜一拜，就回到你们这里来。
Then he said to his young men, Keep here with the ass; and I and the boy will go on and give worship and come back again to you.

亚伯拉罕把燔祭的柴放在他儿子以撒身上，自己手里拿着火与刀。于是二人同行。
And Abraham put the wood for the burned offering on his son's back, and he himself took the fire and the knife in his hand, and the two of them went on together.

以撒对他父亲亚伯拉罕说，父亲哪，亚伯拉罕说，我儿，我在这里。以撒说，请看，火与柴都有了，但燔祭的羊羔在哪里呢？
Then Isaac said to Abraham, My father; and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, We have wood and fire here, but where is the lamb for the burned offering?

亚伯拉罕说，我儿，神必自己预备作燔祭的羊羔。于是二人同行。
And Abraham said, God himself will give the lamb for the burned offering: so they went on together.

他们到了神所指示的地方，亚伯拉罕在那里筑坛，把柴摆好，捆绑他的儿子以撒，放在坛的柴上。
And they came to the place of which God had given him knowledge; and there Abraham made the altar and put the wood in place on it, and having made tight the bands round Isaac his son, he put him on the wood on the altar.

亚伯拉罕就伸手拿刀，要杀他的儿子。
And stretching out his hand, Abraham took the knife to put his son to death.

耶和华的使者从天上呼叫他说，亚伯拉罕，亚伯拉罕，他说，我在这里。
But the voice of the angel of the Lord came from heaven, saying, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

天使说，你不可在这童子身上下手。一点不可害他。现在我知道你是敬畏神的了。因为你没有将你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，留下不给我。
And he said, Let not your hand be stretched out against the boy to do anything to him; for now I am certain that the fear of God is in your heart, because you have not kept back your son, your only son, from me.

亚伯拉罕举目观看，不料，有一只公羊，两角扣在稠密的小树中，亚伯拉罕就取了那只公羊来，献为燔祭，代替他的儿子。
And lifting up his eyes, Abraham saw a sheep fixed by its horns in the brushwood: and Abraham took the sheep and made a burned offering of it in place of his son.

亚伯拉罕给那地方起名叫耶和华以勒（意思就是耶和华必预备），直到今日人还说，在耶和华的山上必有预备。
And Abraham gave that place the name Yahweh-yireh: as it is said to this day, In the mountain the Lord is seen.

耶和华的使者第二次从天上呼叫亚伯拉罕说，
And the voice of the angel of the Lord came to Abraham a second time from heaven,

耶和华说，你既行了这事，不留下你的儿子，就是你独生的儿子，我便指着自己起誓说，
Saying, I have taken an oath by my name, says the Lord, because you have done this and have not kept back from me your dearly loved only son,

论福，我必赐大福给你。论子孙，我必叫你的子孙多起来，如同天上的星，海边的沙。你子孙必得着仇敌的城门，
That I will certainly give you my blessing, and your seed will be increased like the stars of heaven and the sand by the seaside; your seed will take the land of those who are against them;

并且地上万国都必因你的后裔得福，因为你听从了我的话。
And your seed will be a blessing to all the nations of the earth, because you have done what I gave you orders to do.

于是亚伯拉罕回到他仆人那里，他们一同起身往别是巴去，亚伯拉罕就住在别是巴。
Then Abraham went back to his young men and they went together to Beer-sheba, the place where Abraham was living.

这事以后，有人告诉亚伯拉罕说，密迦给你兄弟拿鹤生了几个儿子，
After these things, Abraham had news that Milcah, the wife of his brother Nahor, had given birth to children;

长子是乌斯，他的兄弟是布斯和亚兰的父亲基母利，
Uz the oldest, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel, the father of Aram,

并基薛，哈琐，必达，益拉，彼土利（彼土利生利百加）。
And Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.

这八个人都是密迦给亚伯拉罕的兄弟拿鹤生的。
Bethuel was the father of Rebekah: these eight were the children of Milcah and Nahor, Abraham's brother.

拿鹤的妾名叫流玛，生了提八，迦含，他辖，和玛迦。
And his servant Reumah gave birth to Tebah and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.

撒拉享寿一百二十七岁，这是撒拉一生的岁数。
Now the years of Sarah's life were a hundred and twenty-seven.

撒拉死在迦南地的基列亚巴，就是希伯仑。亚伯拉罕为她哀恸哭号。
And Sarah's death took place in Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, in the land of Canaan: and Abraham went into his house, weeping and sorrowing for Sarah.

后来亚伯拉罕从死人面前起来，对赫人说，
And Abraham came from his dead and said to the children of Heth,

我在你们中间是外人，是寄居的。求你们在这里给我一块地，我好埋葬我的死人，使她不在我眼前。
I am living among you as one from a strange country: give me some land here as my property, so that I may put my dead to rest.

赫人回答亚伯拉罕说，
And in answer the children of Heth said to Abraham,

我主请听。你在我们中间是一位尊大的王子，只管在我们最好的坟地里埋葬你的死人。我们没有一人不容你在他的坟地里埋葬你的死人。
My lord, truly you are a great chief among us; take the best of our resting-places for your dead; not one of us will keep back from you a place where you may put your dead to rest.

亚伯拉罕就起来，向那地的赫人下拜，
And Abraham got up and gave honour to the children of Heth, the people of that land.

对他们说，你们若有意叫我埋葬我的死人，使她不在我眼前，就请听我的话，为我求琐辖的儿子以弗仑，
And he said to them, If you will let me put my dead to rest here, make a request for me to Ephron, the son of Zohar,

把田头上那麦比拉洞给我。他可以按着足价卖给我，作我在你们中间的坟地。
That he will give me the hollow in the rock named Machpelah, which is his property at the end of his field; let him give it to me for its full price as a resting-place for my dead among you.

当时以弗仑正坐在赫人中间。于是，赫人以弗仑在城门出入的赫人面前对亚伯拉罕说，
Now Ephron was seated among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite gave Abraham his answer in the hearing of the children of Heth, and of all those who came into his town, saying,

不然，我主请听。我送给你这块田，连田间的洞也送给你，在我同族的人面前都给你，可以埋葬你的死人。
No, my lord, I will give you the field with the hollow in the rock; before all the children of my people will I give it to you for a resting-place for your dead.

亚伯拉罕就在那地的人民面前下拜，
And Abraham went down on his face before the people of the land.

在他们面前对以弗仑说，你若应允，请听我的话。我要把田价给你，求你收下，我就在那里埋葬我的死人。
And Abraham said to Ephron, in the hearing of the people of the land, If only you will give ear to me, I will give you the price of the field; take it, and let me put my dead to rest there.

以弗仑回答亚伯拉罕说，
So Ephron said to Abraham,

我主请听。值四百舍客勒银子的一块田，在你我中间还算什么呢？只管埋葬你的死人吧。
My lord, give ear to me: the value of the land is four hundred shekels; what is that between me and you? so put your dead to rest there.

亚伯拉罕听从了以弗仑，照着他在赫人面前所说的话，把买卖通用的银子平了四百舍客勒给以弗仑。
And Abraham took note of the price fixed by Ephron in the hearing of the children of Heth, and gave him four hundred shekels in current money.

于是，麦比拉，幔利前，以弗仑的那块田和其中的洞，并田间四围的树木，
So Ephron's field at Machpelah near Mamre, with the hollow in the rock and all the trees in the field and round it,

都定准归与亚伯拉罕，乃是他在赫人面前并城门出入的人面前买妥的。
Became the property of Abraham before the eyes of the children of Heth and of all who came into the town.

此后，亚伯拉罕把他妻子撒拉埋葬在迦南地幔利前的麦比拉田间的洞里。幔利就是希伯仑。
Then Abraham put Sarah his wife to rest in the hollow rock in the field of Machpelah near Mamre, that is, Hebron in the land of Canaan.

从此，那块田和田间的洞就借着赫人定准归与亚伯拉罕作坟地。
And the field and the hollow rock were handed over to Abraham as his property by the children of Heth.

亚伯拉罕年纪老迈，向来在一切事上耶和华都赐福给他。
Now Abraham was old and far on in years: and the Lord had given him everything in full measure.

亚伯拉罕对管理他全业最老的仆人说，请你把手放在我大腿底下。
And Abraham said to his chief servant, the manager of all his property, Come now, put your hand under my leg:

我要叫你指着耶和华天地的主起誓，不要为我儿子娶这迦南地中的女子为妻。
And take an oath by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that you will not get a wife for my son Isaac from the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I am living;

你要往我本地本族去，为我的儿子以撒娶一个妻子。
But that you will go into my country and to my relations and get a wife there for my son Isaac.

仆人对他说，倘若女子不肯跟我到这地方来，我必须将你的儿子带回你原出之地吗？
And the servant said, If by chance the woman will not come with me into this land, am I to take your son back again to the land from which you came?

亚伯拉罕对他说，你要谨慎，不要带我的儿子回那里去。
And Abraham said, Take care that you do not let my son go back to that land.

耶和华天上的主曾带领我离开父家和本族的地，对我说话，向我起誓说，我要将这地赐给你的后裔。他必差遣使者在你面前，你就可以从那里为我儿子娶一个妻子。
The Lord God of heaven, who took me from my father's house and from the land of my birth, and made an oath to me, saying, To your seed I will give this land: he will send his angel before you and give you a wife for my son in that land.

倘若女子不肯跟你来，我使你起的誓就与你无干了，只是不可带我的儿子回那里去。
And if the woman will not come with you, then you are free from this oath; only do not take my son back there.

仆人就把手放在他主人亚伯拉罕的大腿底下，为这事向他起誓。
And the servant put his hand under Abraham's leg, and gave him his oath about this thing.

那仆人从他主人的骆驼里取了十匹骆驼，并带些他主人各样的财物，起身往米所波大米去，到了拿鹤的城。
And the servant took ten of his master's camels, and all sorts of good things of his master's, and went to Mesopotamia, to the town of Nahor.

天将晚，众女子出来打水的时候，他便叫骆驼跪在城外的水井那里。
And he made the camels take their rest outside the town by the water-spring in the evening, at the time when the women came to get water.

他说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神阿，求你施恩给我主人亚伯拉罕，使我今日遇见好机会。
And he said, O Lord, the God of my master Abraham, let me do well in what I have undertaken this day, and give your mercy to my master Abraham.

我现今站在井旁，城内居民的女子们正出来打水。
See, I am waiting here by the water-spring; and the daughters of the town are coming out to get water:

我向哪一个女子说，请你拿下水瓶来，给我水喝，她若说，请喝，我也给你的骆驼喝，愿那女子就作你所预定给你仆人以撒的妻。这样，我便知道你施恩给我主人了。
Now, may the girl to whom I say, Let down your vessel and give me a drink, and who says in answer, Here is a drink for you and let me give water to your camels: may she be the one marked out by you for your servant Isaac: so may I be certain that you have been good to my master Abraham.

话还没有说完，不料，利百加肩头上扛着水瓶出来。利百加是彼土利所生的。彼土利是亚伯拉罕兄弟拿鹤妻子密迦的儿子。
And even before his words were ended, Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, who was the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, came out with her water-vessel on her arm.

那女子容貌极其俊美，还是处女，也未曾有人亲近她。她下到井旁，打满了瓶，又上来。
She was a very beautiful girl, a virgin, who had never been touched by a man: and she went down to the spring to get water in her vessel.

仆人跑上前去迎着她，说，求你将瓶里的水给我一点喝。
And the servant came running to her and said, Give me a little water from your vessel.

女子说，我主请喝，就急忙拿下瓶来，托在手上给他喝。
And she said, Take a drink, my lord: and quickly letting down her vessel onto her hand, she gave him a drink.

女子给他喝了，就说，我再为你的骆驼打水，叫骆驼也喝足。
And having done so, she said, I will get water for your camels till they have had enough.

她就急忙把瓶里的水倒在槽里，又跑到井旁打水，就为所有的骆驼打上水来。
And after putting the water from her vessel into the animals' drinking-place, she went quickly back to the spring and got water for all the camels.

那人定睛看她，一句话也不说，要晓得耶和华赐他通达的道路没有。
And the man, looking at her, said nothing, waiting to see if the Lord had given his journey a good outcome.

骆驼喝足了，那人就拿一个金环，重半舍客勒，两个金镯，重十舍客勒，给了那女子，
And when the camels had had enough, the man took a gold nose-ring, half a shekel in weight, and two ornaments for her arms of ten shekels weight of gold;

说，请告诉我，你是谁的女儿，你父亲家里有我们住宿的地方没有。
And said to her, Whose daughter are you? is there room in your father's house for us?

女子说，我是密迦与拿鹤之子彼土利的女儿。
And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, Nahor's wife.

又说，我们家里足有粮草，也有住宿的地方。
And she said, We have a great store of dry grass and cattle-food, and there is room for you.

那人就低头向耶和华下拜，
And with bent head the man gave worship to the Lord;

说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神是应当称颂的，因他不断地以慈爱诚实待我主人。至于我，耶和华在路上引领我，直走到我主人的兄弟家里。
And said, Praise be to the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, who has given a sign that he is good and true to my master, by guiding me straight to the house of my master's family.

女子跑回去，照着这些话告诉她母亲和她家里的人。
So the girl went running and took the news of these things to her mother's house

利百加有一个哥哥，名叫拉班，看见金环，又看见金镯在他妹子的手上，并听见他妹子利百加的话，说那人对我如此如此说。拉班就跑出来往井旁去，到那人跟前，见他仍站在骆驼旁边的井旁那里。
Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban, and he came out quickly to the man at the water-spring.


And when he saw the nose-ring and the ornaments on his sister's hands, and when she gave him word of what the man had said to her, then he went out to the man who was waiting with the camels by the water-spring.

便对他说，你这蒙耶和华赐福的，请进来，为什么站在外边？我已经收拾了房屋，也为骆驼预备了地方。
And he said to him, Come in, you on whom is the blessing of the Lord; why are you waiting outside? for I have made the house ready for you, and a place for the camels.

那人就进了拉班的家。拉班卸了骆驼，用草料喂上，拿水给那人和跟随的人洗脚，
Then the man came into the house, and Laban took their cords off the camels and gave them dry grass and food, and he gave to him and the men who were with him water for washing their feet.

把饭摆在他面前，叫他吃，他却说，我不吃，等我说明白我的事情再吃。拉班说，请说。
And meat was put before him, but he said, I will not take food till I have made my business clear to you. And they said, Do so.

他说，我是亚伯拉罕的仆人。
And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

耶和华大大地赐福给我主人，使他昌大，又赐给他羊群，牛群，金银，仆婢，骆驼，和驴。
The Lord has given my master every blessing, and he has become great: he has given him flocks and herds and silver and gold, and men-servants and women-servants and camels and asses.

我主人的妻子撒拉年老的时候给我主人生了一个儿子。我主人也将一切所有的都给了这个儿子。
And when Sarah, my master's wife, was old, she gave birth to a son, to whom he has given all he has.

我主人叫我起誓说，你不要为我儿子娶迦南地的女子为妻。
And my master made me take an oath, saying, Do not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I am living;

你要往我父家，我本族那里去，为我的儿子娶一个妻子。
But go to my father's house and to my relations for a wife for my son.

我对我主人说，恐怕女子不肯跟我来。
And I said to my master, What if the woman will not come with me?

他就说，我所事奉的耶和华必要差遣他的使者与你同去，叫你的道路通达，你就得以在我父家，我本族那里，给我的儿子娶一个妻子。
And he said, The Lord, whom I have ever kept before me, will send his angel with you, who will make it possible for you to get a wife for my son from my relations and my father's house;

只要你到了我本族那里，我使你起的誓就与你无干。他们若不把女子交给你，我使你起的誓也与你无干。
And you will be free from your oath to me when you come to my people; and if they will not give her to you, you will be free from your oath.

我今日到了井旁，便说，耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神阿，愿你叫我所行的道路通达。
And I came today to the water-spring, and I said, O Lord, the God of my master Abraham, if it is your purpose to give a good outcome to my journey,

我如今站在井旁，对那一个出来打水的女子说，请你把你瓶里的水给我一点喝。
Let it come about that, while I am waiting here by the water-spring, if a girl comes to get water and I say to her, Give me a little water from your vessel, and she says,

她若说，你只管喝，我也为你的骆驼打水。愿那女子就作耶和华给我主人儿子所预定的妻。
Take a drink, and I will get water for your camels; let her be the woman marked out by the Lord for my master's son.

我心里的话还没有说完，利百加就出来，肩头上扛着水瓶，下到井旁打水。我便对她说，请你给我水喝。
And even while I was saying this to myself, Rebekah came out with her vessel on her arm; and she went down to the spring to get water; and I said to her, Give me a drink.

她就急忙从肩头上拿下瓶来，说，请喝，我也给你的骆驼喝。我便喝了。她又给我的骆驼喝了。
And straight away she took down her vessel from her arm, and said, Take a drink, and I will get water for your camels.

我问她说，你是谁的女儿，她说，我是密迦与拿鹤之子彼土利的女儿。我就把环子戴在她鼻子上，把镯子戴在她两手上。
And questioning her, I said, Whose daughter are you? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, and Milcah his wife. Then I put the ring on her nose and the ornaments on her hands.

随后我低头向耶和华下拜，称颂耶和华我主人亚伯拉罕的神。因为他引导我走合式的道路，使我得着我主人兄弟的孙女，给我主人的儿子为妻。
And with bent head I gave worship and praise to the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, by whom I had been guided in the right way, to get the daughter of my master's brother for his son.

现在你们若愿以慈爱诚实待我主人，就告诉我。若不然，也告诉我，使我可以或向左，或向右。
And now, say if you will do what is good and right for my master or not, in order that it may be clear to me what I have to do.

拉班和彼土利回答说，这事乃出于耶和华，我们不能向你说好说歹。
Then Laban and Bethuel said in answer, This is the Lord's doing: it is not for us to say Yes or No to you.

看哪，利百加在你面前，可以将她带去，照着耶和华所说的，给你主人的儿子为妻。
See, here is Rebekah: take her and go, and let her be your master's son's wife, as the Lord has said.

亚伯拉罕的仆人听见他们这话，就向耶和华俯伏在地。
And at these words, Abraham's servant went down on his face and gave praise to the Lord.

当下仆人拿出金器，银器，和衣服送给利百加，又将宝物送给她哥哥和她母亲。
Then he took jewels of silver and jewels of gold and fair robes and gave them to Rebekah: and he gave things of value to her mother and her brother.

仆人和跟从他的人吃了喝了，住了一夜。早晨起来，仆人就说，请打发我回我主人那里去吧。
Then he and the men who were with him had food and drink, and took their rest there that night; and in the morning he got up, and said, Let me now go back to my master.

利百加的哥哥和她母亲说，让女子同我们再住几天，至少十天，然后她可以去。
But her brother and her mother said, Let the girl be with us a week or ten days, and then she may go.

仆人说，耶和华既赐给我通达的道路，你们不要耽误我，请打发我走，回我主人那里去吧。
And he said, Do not keep me; the Lord has given a good outcome to my journey; let me now go back to my master.

他们说，我们把女子叫来问问她。
And they said, We will send for the girl, and let her make the decision.

就叫了利百加来，问她说，你和这人同去吗？利百加说，我去。
And they sent for Rebekah and said to her, Are you ready to go with this man? And she said, I am ready.

于是他们打发妹子利百加和她的乳母，同亚伯拉罕的仆人，并跟从仆人的，都走了。
So they sent their sister Rebekah and her servant with Abraham's servant and his men.

他们就给利百加祝福说，我们的妹子阿，愿你作千万人的母。愿你的后裔得着仇敌的城门。
And they gave Rebekah their blessing, saying, O sister, may you be the mother of thousands and ten thousands; and may your seed overcome all those who make war against them.

利百加和她的使女们起来，骑上骆驼，跟着那仆人，仆人就带着利百加走了。
So Rebekah and her servant-women went with the man, seated on the camels; and so the servant took Rebekah and went on his way.

那时，以撒住在南地，刚从庇耳拉海莱回来。
Now Isaac had come through the waste land to Beer-lahai-roi; for he was living in the South.

天将晚，以撒出来在田间默想，举目一看，见来了些骆驼。
And when the evening was near, he went wandering out into the fields, and lifting up his eyes he saw camels coming.

利百加举目看见以撒，就急忙下了骆驼，
And when Rebekah, looking up, saw Isaac, she got down from her camel,

问那仆人说，这田间走来迎接我们的是谁。仆人说，是我的主人。利百加就拿帕子蒙上脸。
And said to the servant, Who is that man coming to us through the field? And the servant said, It is my master: then she took her veil, covering her face with it.

仆人就将所办的一切事都告诉以撒。
Then the servant gave Isaac the story of all he had done.

以撒便领利百加进了他母亲撒拉的帐棚，娶了她为妻，并且爱她。以撒自从他母亲不在了，这才得了安慰。
And Isaac took Rebekah into his tent and she became his wife; and in his love for her, Isaac was comforted after his father's death.

亚伯拉罕又娶了一妻，名叫基土拉。
And Abraham took another wife named Keturah.

基土拉给他生了心兰，约珊，米但，米甸，伊施巴，和书亚。
She became the mother of Zimran and Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah.

约珊生了示巴和底但。底但的子孙是亚书利族，利都是族，和利乌米族。
And Jokshan became the father of Sheba and Dedan. And from Dedan came the Asshurim and Letushim and Leummim.

米甸的儿子是以法，以弗，哈诺，亚比大，和以勒大。这都是基土拉的子孙。
And from Midian came Ephah and Epher and Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these were the offspring of Keturah.

亚伯拉罕将一切所有的都给了以撒。
Now Abraham gave all his property to Isaac;

亚伯拉罕把财物分给他庶出的众子，趁着自己还在世的时候打发他们离开他的儿子以撒，往东方去。
But to the sons of his other women he gave offerings, and sent them away, while he was still living, into the east country.

亚伯拉罕一生的年日是一百七十五岁。
Now the years of Abraham's life were a hundred and seventy-five.

亚伯拉罕寿高年迈，气绝而死，归到他列祖（原文作本民）那里。
And Abraham came to his death, an old man, full of years; and he was put to rest with his people.

他两个儿子以撒，以实玛利把他埋葬在麦比拉洞里。这洞在幔利前，赫人琐辖的儿子以弗仑的田中，
And Isaac and Ishmael, his sons, put him to rest in the hollow rock of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the Hittite, near Mamre;

就是亚伯拉罕向赫人买的那块田。亚伯拉罕和他妻子撒拉都葬在那里。
The same field which Abraham got from the children of Heth: there Abraham was put to rest with Sarah, his wife.

亚伯拉罕死了以后，神赐福给他的儿子以撒。以撒靠近庇耳拉海莱居住。
Now after the death of Abraham, the blessing of God was with Isaac, his son.

撒拉的使女埃及人夏甲给亚伯拉罕所生的儿子是以实玛利。
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, the son of Abraham, whose mother was Hagar the Egyptian, the servant of Sarah:

以实玛利儿子们的名字，按着他们的家谱记在下面。以实玛利的长子是尼拜约，又有基达，亚德别，米比衫，
These are the names of the sons of Ishmael by their generations: Ishmael's first son was Nebaioth; then Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam

米施玛，度玛，玛撒，
And Mishma and Dumah and Massa,

哈大，提玛，伊突，拿非施，基底玛。
Hadad and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:

这是以实玛利众子的名字，照着他们的村庄，营寨，作了十二族的族长。
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names in their towns and their tent-circles; twelve chiefs with their peoples.

以实玛利享寿一百三十七岁，气绝而死，归到他列祖（原文作本民）那里。
And the years of Ishmael's life were a hundred and thirty-seven: and he came to his end, and was put to rest with his people.

他子孙的住处在他众弟兄东边，从哈腓拉直到埃及前的书珥，正在亚述的道上。
And their country was from Havilah to Shur which is east of Egypt: they took their place to the east of all their brothers.

亚伯拉罕的儿子以撒的后代记在下面。亚伯拉罕生以撒。
Now these are the generations of Abraham's son Isaac:

以撒娶利百加为妻的时候正四十岁。利百加是巴旦亚兰地的亚兰人彼土利的女儿，是亚兰人拉班的妹子。
Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramaean of Paddan-aram, and the sister of Laban the Aramaean, to be his wife.

以撒因他妻子不生育，就为她祈求耶和华。耶和华应允他的祈求，他的妻子利百加就怀了孕。
Isaac made prayer to the Lord for his wife because she had no children; and the Lord gave ear to his prayer, and Rebekah became with child.

孩子们在她腹中彼此相争，她就说，若是这样，我为什么活着呢？（或作我为什么如此呢？）。她就去求问耶和华。
And the children were fighting together inside her, and she said, If it is to be so, why am I like this? So she went to put her question to the Lord.

耶和华对她说，两国在你腹内。两族要从你身上出来。这族必强于那族。将来大的要服事小的。
And the Lord said to her, Two nations are in your body, and two peoples will come to birth from you: the one will be stronger than the other, and the older will be the servant of the younger.

生产的日子到了，腹中果然是双子。
And when the time came for her to give birth, there were two children in her body.

先产的身体发红，浑身有毛，如同皮衣，他们就给他起名叫以扫（以扫就是有毛的意思）。
And the first came out red from head to foot like a robe of hair, and they gave him the name of Esau.

随后又生了以扫的兄弟，手抓住以扫的脚跟，因此给他起名叫雅各（雅各就是抓住的意思）。利百加生下两个儿子的时候，以撒年正六十岁。
And after him, his brother came out, gripping Esau's foot; and he was named Jacob: Isaac was sixty years old when she gave birth to them.

两个孩子渐渐长大，以扫善于打猎，常在田野。雅各为人安静，常住在帐棚里。
And the boys came to full growth; and Esau became a man of the open country, an expert bowman; but Jacob was a quiet man, living in tents.

以撒爱以扫，因为常吃他的野味。利百加却爱雅各。
Now Isaac's love was for Esau, because Esau's meat was greatly to his taste: but Rebekah had more love for Jacob.

有一天，雅各熬汤，以扫从田野回来累昏了。
And one day Jacob was cooking some soup when Esau came in from the fields in great need of food;

以扫对雅各说，我累昏了，求你把这红汤给我喝。因此以扫又叫以东（以东就是红的意思）。
And Esau said to Jacob, Give me a full meal of that red soup, for I am overcome with need for food: for this reason he was named Edom.

雅各说，你今日把长子的名分卖给我吧。
And Jacob said, First of all give me your birthright.

以扫说，我将要死，这长子的名分于我有什么益处呢？
And Esau said, Truly, I am at the point of death: what profit is the birthright to me?

雅各说，你今日对我起誓吧。以扫就对他起了誓，把长子的名分卖给雅各。
And Jacob said, First of all give me your oath; and he gave him his oath, handing over his birthright to Jacob.

于是雅各将饼和红豆汤给了以扫，以扫吃了喝了，便起来走了。这就是以扫轻看了他长子的名分。
Then Jacob gave him bread and soup; and he took food and drink and went away, caring little for his birthright.

在亚伯拉罕的日子，那地有一次饥荒。这时又有饥荒，以撒就往基拉耳去，到非利士人的王亚比米勒那里。
Then came a time of great need in the land, like that which had been before in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Abimelech, king of the Philistines, at Gerar.

耶和华向以撒显现，说，你不要下埃及去，要住在我所指示你的地。
And the Lord came to him in a vision and said, Do not go down to Egypt; keep in the land of which I will give you knowledge:

你寄居在这地，我必与你同在，赐福给你，因为我要将这些地都赐给你和你的后裔。我必坚定我向你父亚伯拉罕所起的誓。
Keep in this land, and I will be with you and give you my blessing; for to you and to your seed will I give all these lands, giving effect to the oath which I made to your father Abraham;

我要加增你的后裔，像天上的星那样多，又要将这些地都赐给你的后裔。并且地上万国必因你的后裔得福
I will make your seed like the stars of heaven in number, and will give them all these lands, and your seed will be a blessing to all the nations of the earth;

都因亚伯拉罕听从我的话，遵守我的吩咐和我的命令，律例，法度。
Because Abraham gave ear to my voice and kept my words, my rules, my orders, and my laws.

以撒就住在基拉耳。
So Isaac went on living in Gerar;

那地方的人问到他的妻子，他便说，那是我的妹子。原来他怕说，是我的妻子。他心里想，恐怕这地方的人为利百加的缘故杀我，因为她容貌俊美。
And when he was questioned by the men of the place about his wife, he said, She is my sister; fearing to say, She is my wife; for, he said, the men of the place may put me to death on account of Rebekah; because she is very beautiful.

他在那里住了许久。有一天，非利士人的王亚比米勒从窗户里往外观看，见以撒和他的妻子利百加戏玩。
And when he had been there for some time, Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looking through a window, saw Isaac playing with Rebekah his wife.

亚比米勒召了以撒来，对他说，她实在是你的妻子，你怎么说她是你的妹子。以撒说，我心里想，恐怕我因她而死。
And he said to Isaac, It is clear that she is your wife: why then did you say, She is my sister? And Isaac said, For fear that I might be put to death because of her.

亚比米勒说，你向我们作的是什么事呢？民中险些有人和你的妻同寝，把我们陷在罪里。
Then Abimelech said, What have you done to us? one of the people might well have had connection with your wife, and the sin would have been ours.

于是亚比米勒晓谕众民说，凡沾着这个人，或是他妻子的，定要把他治死。
And Abimelech gave orders to his people that anyone touching Isaac or his wife was to be put to death.

以撒在那地耕种，那一年有百倍的收成。耶和华赐福给他，
Now Isaac, planting seed in that land, got in the same year fruit a hundred times as much, for the blessing of the Lord was on him.

他就昌大，日增月盛，成了大富户。
And his wealth became very great, increasing more and more;

他有羊群牛群，又有许多仆人，非利士人就嫉妒他。
For he had great wealth of flocks and herds and great numbers of servants; so that the Philistines were full of envy.

当他父亲亚伯拉罕在世的日子，他父亲的仆人所挖的井，非利士人全都塞住，填满了土。
Now all the water-holes, which his father's servants had made in the days of Abraham, had been stopped up with earth by the Philistines.

亚比米勒对以撒说，你离开我们去吧。因为你比我们强盛得多。
And Abimelech said to Isaac, Go away from us, for you are stronger than we are.

以撒就离开那里，在基拉耳谷支搭帐棚，住在那里。
So Isaac went away from there, and put up his tents in the valley of Gerar, making his living-place there.

当他父亲亚伯拉罕在世之日所挖的水井因非利士人在亚伯拉罕死后塞住了，以撒就重新挖出来，仍照他父亲所叫的叫那些井的名字。
And he made again the water-holes which had been made in the days of Abraham his father, and which had been stopped up by the Philistines; and he gave them the names which his father had given them.

以撒的仆人在谷中挖井，便得了一口活水井。
Now Isaac's servants made holes in the valley, and came to a spring of flowing water.

基拉耳的牧人与以撒的牧人争竞，说，这水是我们的。以撒就给那井起名叫埃色，因为他们和他相争（埃色就是相争的意思）。
But the herdmen of Gerar had a fight with Isaac's herdmen, for they said, The spring is ours: so he gave the spring the name of Esek, because there was a fight about it.

以撒的仆人又挖了一口井，他们又为这井争竞，因此以撒给这井起名叫西提拿（西提拿就是为敌的意思）。
Then they made another water-hole, and there was a fight about that, so he gave it the name of Sitnah.

以撒离开那里，又挖了一口井，他们不为这井争竞了，他就给那井起名叫利河伯（就是宽阔的意思）。他说，耶和华现在给我们宽阔之地，我们必在这地昌盛。
Then he went away from there, and made another water-hole, about which there was no fighting: so he gave it the name of Rehoboth, for he said, Now the Lord has made room for us, and we will have fruit in this land.

以撒从那里上别是巴去。
And from there he went on to Beer-sheba.

当夜耶和华向他显现，说，我是你父亲亚伯拉罕的神，不要惧怕，因为我与你同在，要赐福给你，并要为我仆人亚伯拉罕的缘故，使你的后裔繁多。
That night the Lord came to him in a vision, and said, I am the God of your father Abraham: have no fear for I am with you, blessing you, and your seed will be increased because of my servant Abraham.

以撒就在那里筑了一座坛，求告耶和华的名，并且支搭帐棚。他的仆人便在那里挖了一口井。
Then he made an altar there, and gave worship to the name of the Lord, and he put up his tents there, and there his servants made a water-hole.

亚比米勒，同他的朋友亚户撒和他的军长非各，从基拉耳来见以撒。
And Abimelech had come to him from Gerar, with Ahuzzath his friend and Phicol, the captain of his army.

以撒对他们说，你们既然恨我，打发我走了，为什么到我这里来呢？
And Isaac said to them, Why have you come to me, seeing that in your hate for me you sent me away from you?

他们说，我们明明地看见耶和华与你同在，便说，不如我们两下彼此起誓，彼此立约，
And they said, We saw clearly that the Lord was with you: so we said, Let there be an oath between us and you, and let us make an agreement with you;

使你不害我们，正如我们未曾害你，一味地厚待你，并且打发你平平安安地走。你是蒙耶和华赐福的了。
That you will do us no damage, even as we put no hand on you, and did you nothing but good, and sent you away in peace: and now the blessing of the Lord is on you.

以撒就为他们设摆筵席，他们便吃了喝了。
Then he made a feast for them, and they all had food and drink.

他们清早起来彼此起誓。以撒打发他们走，他们就平平安安地离开他走了。
And early in the morning they took an oath one to the other: then Isaac sent them away and they went on their way in peace.

那一天，以撒的仆人来，将挖井的事告诉他说，我们得了水了。
And that day Isaac's servants came to him and gave him word of the water-hole which they had made, and said to him, We have come to water.

他就给那井起名叫示巴。因此那城叫作别是巴，直到今日。
And he gave it the name of Shibah: so the name of that town is Beer-sheba to this day.

以扫四十岁的时候娶了赫人比利的女儿犹滴，与赫人以伦的女儿巴实抹为妻。
And when Esau was forty years old, he took as his wives Judith, the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath, the daughter of Elon the Hittite:

她们常使以撒和利百加心里愁烦。
And Isaac and Rebekah had grief of mind because of them.

以撒年老，眼睛昏花，不能看见，就叫了他大儿子以扫来，说，我儿，以扫说，我在这里。
Now when Isaac was old and his eyes had become clouded so that he was not able to see, he sent for Esau, his first son, and said to him, My son: and he said, Here am I.

他说，我如今老了，不知道哪一天死。
And he said, See now, I am old, and my death may take place at any time:

现在拿你的器械，就是箭囊和弓，往田野去为我打猎，
So take your arrows and your bow and go out to the field and get meat for me;

照我所爱的作成美味，拿来给我吃，使我在未死之先给你祝福。
And make me food, good to the taste, such as is pleasing to me, and put it before me, so that I may have a meal and give you my blessing before death comes to me.

以撒对他儿子以扫说话，利百加也听见了。以扫往田野去打猎，要得野味带来。
Now Isaac's words to his son were said in Rebekah's hearing. Then Esau went out to get the meat.

利百加就对她儿子雅各说，我听见你父亲对你哥哥以扫说，
And Rebekah said to Jacob, her son, Your father said to your brother Esau in my hearing,

你去把野兽带来，作成美味给我吃，我好在未死之先，在耶和华面前给你祝福。
Go and get some roe's meat and make me a good meal, so that I may be full, and give you my blessing before the Lord before my death.

现在，我儿，你要照着我所吩咐你的，听从我的话。
Now, my son, do what I say.

你到羊群里去，给我拿两只肥山羊羔来，我便照你父亲所爱的给他作成美味。
Go to the flock and get me two fat young goats; and I will make of them a meal to your father's taste:

你拿到你父亲那里给他吃，使他在未死之先给你祝福。
And you will take it to him, so that he may have a good meal and give you his blessing before his death.

雅各对他母亲利百加说，我哥哥以扫浑身是有毛的，我身上是光滑的。
And Jacob said to Rebekah, his mother, But Esau my brother is covered with hair, while I am smooth:

倘若我父亲摸着我，必以我为欺哄人的，我就招咒诅，不得祝福。
If by chance my father puts his hand on me, it will seem to him that I am tricking him, and he will put a curse on me in place of a blessing.

他母亲对他说，我儿，你招的咒诅归到我身上。你只管听我的话，去把羊羔给我拿来。
And his mother said, Let the curse be on me, my son: only do as I say, and go and get them for me.

他便去拿来，交给他母亲。他母亲就照他父亲所爱的作成美味。
So he went and got them and took them to his mother: and she made a meal to his father's taste.

利百加又把家里所存大儿子以扫上好的衣服给他小儿子雅各穿上，
And Rebekah took the fair robes of her oldest son, which were with her in the house, and put them on Jacob, her younger son:

又用山羊羔皮包在雅各的手上和颈项的光滑处，
And she put the skins of the young goats on his hands and on the smooth part of his neck:

就把所作的美味和饼交在他儿子雅各的手里。
And she gave into the hand of Jacob, her son, the meat and the bread which she had made ready.

雅各到他父亲那里说，我父亲。他说，我在这里。我儿，你是谁。
And he came to his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I: who are you, my son?

雅各对他父亲说，我是你的长子以扫。我已照你所吩咐我的行了。请起来坐着，吃我的野味，好给我祝福。
And Jacob said, I am Esau, your oldest son; I have done as you said: come now, be seated and take of my meat, so that you may give me a blessing.

以撒对他儿子说，我儿，你如何找得这么快呢？他说，因为耶和华你的神使我遇见好机会得着的。
And Isaac said, How is it that you have got it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the Lord your God made it come my way.

以撒对雅各说，我儿，你近前来，我摸摸你，知道你真是我的儿子以扫不是。
And Isaac said, Come near so that I may put my hand on you, my son, and see if you are truly my son Esau or not.

雅各就挨近他父亲以撒。以撒摸着他，说，声音是雅各的声音，手却是以扫的手。
And Jacob went near his father Isaac: and he put his hands on him; and he said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.

以撒就辨不出他来。因为他手上有毛，像他哥哥以扫的手一样，就给他祝福。
And he did not make out who he was, because his hands were covered with hair like his brother Esau's hands: so he gave him a blessing.

又说，你真是我儿子以扫吗？他说，我是。
And he said, Are you truly my son Esau? And he said, I am.

以撒说，你递给我，我好吃我儿子的野味，给你祝福。雅各就递给他，他便吃了，又拿酒给他，他也喝了。
And he said, Put it before me and I will take of my son's meat, so that I may give you a blessing. And he put it before him and he took it; and he gave him wine, and he had a drink.

他父亲以撒对他说，我儿，你上前来与我亲嘴。
And his father Isaac said to him, Come near now, my son, and give me a kiss.

他就上前与父亲亲嘴。他父亲一闻他衣服上的香气，就给他祝福，说，我儿的香气如同耶和华赐福之田地的香气一样。
And he came near and gave him a kiss; and smelling the smell of his clothing, he gave him a blessing, and said, See, the smell of my son is like the smell of a field on which the blessing of the Lord has come:

愿神赐你天上的甘露，地上的肥土，并许多五谷新酒。
May God give you the dew of heaven, and the good things of the earth, and grain and wine in full measure:

愿多民事奉你，多国跪拜你。愿你作你弟兄的主。你母亲的儿子向你跪拜。凡咒诅你的，愿他受咒诅。为你祝福的，愿他蒙福。
Let peoples be your servants, and nations go down before you: be lord over your brothers, and let your mother's sons go down before you: a curse be on everyone by whom you are cursed, and a blessing on those who give you a blessing.

以撒为雅各祝福已毕，雅各从他父亲那里才出来，他哥哥以扫正打猎回来，
And when Isaac had come to the end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob had not long gone away from Isaac his father, Esau came in from the field.

也作了美味，拿来给他父亲，说，请父亲起来，吃你儿子的野味，好给我祝福。
And he made ready a meal, good to the taste, and took it to his father, and said to him, Let my father get up and take of his son's meat, so that you may give me a blessing.

他父亲以撒对他说，你是谁？他说，我是你的长子以扫。
And Isaac his father said to him, Who are you? And he said, I am your oldest son, Esau.

以撒就大大地战兢，说，你未来之先，是谁得了野味拿来给我呢？我已经吃了，为他祝福。他将来也必蒙福。
And in great fear Isaac said, Who then is he who got meat and put it before me, and I took it all before you came, and gave him a blessing, and his it will be?

以扫听了他父亲的话，就放声痛哭，说，我父阿，求你也为我祝福。
And hearing the words of his father, Esau gave a great and bitter cry, and said to his father, Give a blessing to me, even to me, O my father!

以撒说，你兄弟已经用诡计来将你的福分夺去了。
And he said, Your brother came with deceit, and took away your blessing.

以扫说，他名雅各，岂不是正对吗？因为他欺骗了我两次。他从前夺了我长子的名分，你看，他现在又夺了我的福分。以扫又说，你没有留下为我可祝的福吗？
And he said, Is it because he is named Jacob that he has twice taken my place? for he took away my birthright, and now he has taken away my blessing. And he said, Have you not kept a blessing for me?

以撒回答以扫说，我已立他为你的主，使他的弟兄都给他作仆人，并赐他五谷新酒可以养生。我儿，现在我还能为你作什么呢？
And Isaac answering said, But I have made him your master, and have given him all his brothers for servants; I have made him strong with grain and wine: what then am I to do for you, my son?

以扫对他父亲说，父阿，你只有一样可祝的福吗？我父阿，求你也为我祝福。以扫就放声而哭。
And Esau said to his father, Is that the only blessing you have, my father? give a blessing to me, even me! And Esau was overcome with weeping.

他父亲以撒说，地上的肥土必为你所住。天上的甘露必为你所得。
Then Isaac his father made answer and said to him, Far from the fertile places of the earth, and far from the dew of heaven on high will your living-place be:

你必倚靠刀剑度日，又必事奉你的兄弟。到你强盛的时候，必从你颈项上挣开他的轭。
By your sword will you get your living and you will be your brother's servant; but when your power is increased his yoke will be broken from off your neck.

以扫因他父亲给雅各祝的福，就怨恨雅各，心里说，为我父亲居丧的日子近了，到那时候，我要杀我的兄弟雅各。
So Esau was full of hate for Jacob because of his father's blessing; and he said in his heart, The days of weeping for my father are near; then I will put my brother Jacob to death.

有人把利百加大儿子以扫的话告诉利百加，她就打发人去，叫了她小儿子雅各来，对他说，你哥哥以扫想要杀你，报仇雪恨。
Then Rebekah, hearing what Esau had said, sent for Jacob, her younger son, and said to him, It seems that your brother Esau is purposing to put you to death.

现在，我儿，你要听我的话，起来，逃往哈兰，我哥哥拉班那里去，
So now, my son, do what I say: go quickly to Haran, to my brother Laban;

同他住些日子，直等你哥哥的怒气消了。
And be there with him for a little time, till your brother's wrath is turned away;

你哥哥向你消了怒气，忘了你向他所作的事，我便打发人去把你从那里带回来。为什么一日丧你们二人呢？
Till the memory of what you have done to him is past and he is no longer angry: then I will send word for you to come back; are the two of you to be taken from me in one day?

利百加对以撒说，我因这赫人的女子连性命都厌烦了。倘若雅各也娶赫人的女子为妻，像这些一样，我活着还有什么益处呢？
Then Rebekah said to Isaac, My life is a weariness to me because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob takes a wife from among the daughters of Heth, such as these, the women of this land, of what use will my life be to me?

以撒叫了雅各来，给他祝福，并嘱咐他说，你不要娶迦南的女子为妻。
Then Isaac sent for Jacob, and blessing him, said, Do not take a wife from among the women of Canaan;

你起身往巴旦亚兰去，到你外祖彼土利家里，在你母舅拉班的女儿中娶一女为妻。
But go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel, your mother's father, and there get yourself a wife from the daughters of Laban, your mother's brother.

愿全能的神赐福给你，使你生养众多，成为多族，
And may God, the Ruler of all, give you his blessing, giving you fruit and increase, so that you may become an army of peoples.

将应许亚伯拉罕的福赐给你和你的后裔，使你承受你所寄居的地为业，就是神赐给亚伯拉罕的地。
And may God give you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your seed, so that the land of your wanderings, which God gave to Abraham, may be your heritage.

以撒打发雅各走了，他就往巴旦亚兰去，到亚兰人彼土利的儿子拉班那里。拉班是雅各，以扫的母舅。
So Isaac sent Jacob away: and he went to Paddan-aram, to Laban, son of Bethuel the Aramaean, the brother of Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.

以扫见以撒已经给雅各祝福，而且打发他往巴旦亚兰去，在那里娶妻，并见祝福的时候嘱咐他说，不要娶迦南的女子为妻，
So when Esau saw that Isaac had given Jacob his blessing, and sent him away to Paddan-aram to get a wife for himself there, blessing him and saying to him, Do not take a wife from among the women of Canaan;

又见雅各听从父母的话往巴旦亚兰去了，
And that Jacob had done as his father and mother said and had gone to Paddan-aram;

以扫就晓得他父亲以撒看不中迦南的女子，
It was clear to Esau that his father had no love for the women of Canaan,

便往以实玛利那里去，在他二妻之外又娶了玛哈拉为妻。他是亚伯拉罕儿子以实玛利的女儿，尼拜约的妹子。
So Esau went to Ishmael and took Mahalath, the daughter of Abraham's son Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife in addition to the wives he had.

雅各出了别是巴，向哈兰走去。
So Jacob went out from Beer-sheba to go to Haran.

到了一个地方，因为太阳落了，就在那里住宿，便拾起那地方的一块石头枕在头下，在那里躺卧睡了，
And coming to a certain place, he made it his resting-place for the night, for the sun had gone down; and he took one of the stones which were there, and putting it under his head he went to sleep in that place.

梦见一个梯子立在地上，梯子的头顶着天，有神的使者在梯子上，上去下来。
And he had a dream, and in his dream he saw steps stretching from earth to heaven, and the angels of God were going up and down on them.

耶和华站在梯子以上（或作站在他旁边），说，我是耶和华你祖亚伯拉罕的神，也是以撒的神。我要将你现在所躺卧之地赐给你和你的后裔。
And he saw the Lord by his side, saying, I am the Lord, the God of Abraham your father, and the God of Isaac: I will give to you and to your seed this land on which you are sleeping.

你的后裔必像地上的尘沙那样多，必向东西南北开展。地上万族必因你和你的后裔得福。
Your seed will be like the dust of the earth, covering all the land to the west and to the east, to the north and to the south: you and your seed will be a name of blessing to all the families of the earth.

我也与你同在。你无论往哪里去，我必保佑你，领你归回这地，总不离弃你，直到我成全了向你所应许的。
And truly, I will be with you, and will keep you wherever you go, guiding you back again to this land; and I will not give you up till I have done what I have said to you.

雅各睡醒了，说，耶和华真在这里，我竟不知道。
And Jacob, awaking from his sleep, said, Truly, the Lord is in this place and I was not conscious of it.

就惧怕，说，这地方何等可畏，这不是别的，乃是神的殿，也是天的门。
And fear came on him, and he said, This is a holy place; this is nothing less than the house of God and the doorway of heaven.

雅各清早起来，把所枕的石头立作柱子，浇油在上面。
And early in the morning Jacob took the stone which had been under his head, and put it up as a pillar and put oil on it.

他就给那地方起名叫伯特利（就是神殿的意思）。但那地方起先名叫路斯。
And he gave that place the name of Beth-el, but before that time the town was named Luz.

雅各许愿说，神若与我同在，在我所行的路上保佑我，又给我食物吃，衣服穿，
Then Jacob took an oath, and said, If God will be with me, and keep me safe on my journey, and give me food and clothing to put on,

使我平平安安地回到我父亲的家，我就必以耶和华为我的神。
So that I come again to my father's house in peace, then I will take the Lord to be my God,

我所立为柱子的石头也必作神的殿，凡你所赐给我的，我必将十分之一献给你。
And this stone which I have put up for a pillar will be God's house: and of all you give me, I will give a tenth part to you.

雅各起行，到了东方人之地，
Then Jacob went on his journey till he came to the land of the children of the East.

看见田间有一口井，有三群羊卧在井旁。因为人饮羊群都是用那井里的水。井口上的石头是大的。
And there he saw a water-hole in a field, and by the side of it three flocks of sheep, for there they got water for the sheep: and on the mouth of the water-hole there was a great stone.

常有羊群在那里聚集，牧人把石头转离井口饮羊，随后又把石头放在井口的原处。
And all the flocks would come together there, and when the stone had been rolled away, they would give the sheep water, and put the stone back again in its place on the mouth of the water-hole.

雅各对牧人说，弟兄们，你们是哪里来的，他们说，我们是哈兰来的。
Then Jacob said to the herdmen, My brothers, where do you come from? And they said, From Haran.

他问他们说，拿鹤的孙子拉班，你们认识吗？他们说，我们认识。
And he said to them, Have you any knowledge of Laban, the son of Nahor? And they said, We have.

雅各说，他平安吗？他们说，平安。看哪，他女儿拉结领着羊来了。
And he said to them, Is he well? And they said, He is well, and here is Rachel his daughter coming with the sheep.

雅各说，日头还高，不是羊群聚集的时候，你们不如饮羊，再去放一放。
Then Jacob said, The sun is still high and it is not time to get the cattle together: get water for the sheep and go and give them their food.

他们说，我们不能，必等羊群聚齐，人把石头转离井口才可饮羊。
And they said, We are not able to do so till all the flocks have come together and the stone has been rolled away from the mouth of the water-hole; then we will get water for the sheep.

雅各正和他们说话的时候，拉结领着她父亲的羊来了，因为那些羊是她牧放的。
While he was still talking with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she took care of them.

雅各看见母舅拉班的女儿拉结和母舅拉班的羊群，就上前把石头转离井口，饮他母舅拉班的羊群。
Then when Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, coming with Laban's sheep, he came near, and rolling the stone away from the mouth of the hole, he got water for Laban's flock.

雅各与拉结亲嘴，就放声而哭。
And weeping for joy, Jacob gave Rachel a kiss.

雅各告诉拉结，自己是她父亲的外甥，是利百加的儿子，拉结就跑去告诉她父亲。
And Rachel, hearing from Jacob that he was her father's relation and that he was the son of Rebekah, went running to give her father news of it.

拉班听见外甥雅各的信息，就跑去迎接，抱着他，与他亲嘴，领他到自己的家。雅各将一切的情由告诉拉班。
And Laban, hearing news of Jacob, his sister's son, came running, and took Jacob in his arms, and kissing him, made him come into his house. And Jacob gave him news of everything.

拉班对他说，你实在是我的骨肉。雅各就和他同住了一个月。
And Laban said to him, Truly, you are my bone and my flesh. And he kept Jacob with him for the space of a month.

拉班对雅各说，你虽是我的骨肉（原文作弟兄），岂可白白地服事我？请告诉我，你要什么为工价？
Then Laban said to Jacob, Because you are my brother are you to be my servant for nothing? say now, what is your payment to be?

拉班有两个女儿，大的名叫利亚，小的名叫拉结。
Now Laban had two daughters: the name of the older was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.

利亚的眼睛没有神气，拉结却生得美貌俊秀。
And Leah's eyes were clouded, but Rachel was fair in face and form.

雅各爱拉结，就说，我愿为你小女儿拉结服事你七年。
And Jacob was in love with Rachel; and he said, I will be your servant seven years for Rachel, your younger daughter.

拉班说，我把她给你，胜似给别人，你与我同住吧。
And Laban said, It is better for you to have her than another man: go on living here with me.

雅各就为拉结服事了七年。他因为深爱拉结，就看这七年如同几天。
And Jacob did seven years' work for Rachel; and because of his love for her it seemed to him only a very little time.

雅各对拉班说，日期已经满了，求你把我的妻子给我，我好与她同房。
Then Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife so that I may have her, for the days are ended.

拉班就摆设筵席，请齐了那地方的众人。
And Laban got together all the men of the place and gave a feast.

到晚上，拉班将女儿利亚送来给雅各，雅各就与她同房。
And in the evening he took Leah, his daughter, and gave her to him, and he went in to her.

拉班又将婢女悉帕给女儿利亚作使女。
And Laban gave Zilpah, his servant-girl, to Leah, to be her waiting-woman.

到了早晨，雅各一看是利亚，就对拉班说，你向我作的是什么事呢？我服事你，不是为拉结吗？你为什么欺哄我呢？
And in the morning Jacob saw that it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What have you done to me? was I not working for you so that I might have Rachel? why have you been false to me?

拉班说，大女儿还没有给人，先把小女儿给人，在我们这地方没有这规矩。
And Laban said, In our country we do not let the younger daughter be married before the older.

你为这个满了七日，我就把那个也给你，你再为她服事我七年。
Let the week of the bride-feast come to its end and then we will give you the other in addition, if you will be my servant for another seven years.

雅各就如此行。满了利亚的七日，拉班便将女儿拉结给雅各为妻。
And Jacob did so; and when the week was ended, Laban gave him his daughter Rachel for his wife.

拉班又将婢女辟拉给女儿拉结作使女。
And Laban gave Rachel his servant-girl Bilhah to be her waiting-woman.

雅各也与拉结同房，并且爱拉结胜似爱利亚，于是又服事了拉班七年。
Then Jacob took Rachel as his wife, and his love for her was greater than his love for Leah; and he went on working for Laban for another seven years.

耶和华见利亚失宠（原文作被恨下同），就使她生育，拉结却不生育。
Now the Lord, seeing that Leah was not loved, gave her a child; while Rachel had no children.

利亚怀孕生子，就给他起名叫流便（就是有儿子的意思），因而说，耶和华看见我的苦情，如今我的丈夫必爱我。
And Leah was with child, and gave birth to a son to whom she gave the name Reuben: for she said, The Lord has seen my sorrow; now my husband will have love for me.

她又怀孕生子，就说，耶和华因为听见我失宠，所以又赐给我这个儿子。于是给他起名叫西缅（就是听见的意思）。
Then she became with child again, and gave birth to a son; and said, Because it has come to the Lord's ears that I am not loved, he has given me this son in addition: and she gave him the name Simeon.

她又怀孕生子，起名叫利未（就是联合的意思），说，我给丈夫生了三个儿子，他必与我联合。
And she was with child again, and gave birth to a son; and said, Now at last my husband will be united to me, because I have given him three sons: so he was named Levi.

她又怀孕生子，说，这回我要赞美耶和华，因此给他起名叫犹大（就是赞美的意思）。这才停了生育。
And she was with child again, and gave birth to a son: and she said, This time I will give praise to the Lord: so he was named Judah; after this she had no more children for a time.

拉结见自己不给雅各生子，就嫉妒她姐姐，对雅各说，你给我孩子，不然我就死了。
Now Rachel, because she had no children, was full of envy of her sister; and she said to Jacob, If you do not give me children I will not go on living.

雅各向拉结生气，说，叫你不生育的是神，我岂能代替他作主呢？
But Jacob was angry with Rachel, and said, Am I in the place of God, who has kept your body from having fruit?

拉结说，有我的使女辟拉在这里，你可以与她同房，使她生子在我膝下，我便因她也得孩子（得孩子原文作被建立）。
Then she said, Here is my servant Bilhah, go in to her, so that she may have a child on my knees, and I may have a family by her.

拉结就把她的使女辟拉给丈夫为妾。雅各便与她同房，
So she gave him her servant Bilhah as a wife, and Jacob went in to her.

辟拉就怀孕，给雅各生了一个儿子。
And Bilhah became with child, and gave birth to a son.

拉结说，神伸了我的冤，也听了我的声音，赐我一个儿子，因此给他起名叫但（就是伸冤的意思）。
Then Rachel said, God has been my judge, and has given ear to my voice, and has given me a son; so he was named Dan.

拉结的使女辟拉又怀孕，给雅各生了第二个儿子。
And again Bilhah, Rachel's servant, was with child, and gave birth to a second son.

拉结说，我与我姐姐大大相争，并且得胜，于是给他起名叫拿弗他利（就是相争的意思）。
And Rachel said, I have had a great fight with my sister, and I have overcome her: and she gave the child the name Naphtali.

利亚见自己停了生育，就把使女悉帕给雅各为妾。
When it was clear to Leah that she would have no more children for a time, she gave Zilpah, her servant, to Jacob as a wife.

利亚的使女悉帕给雅各生了一个儿子。
And Zilpah, Leah's servant, gave birth to a son.

利亚说，万幸，于是给他起名叫迦得（就是万幸的意思）。
And Leah said, It has gone well for me: and she gave him the name Gad.

利亚的使女悉帕又给雅各生了第二个儿子。
And Zilpah, Leah's servant, gave birth to a second son.

利亚说，我有福阿，众女子都要称我是有福的，于是给他起名叫亚设（就是有福的意思）。
And Leah said, Happy am I! and all women will give witness to my joy: and she gave him the name Asher.

割麦子的时候，流便往田里去，寻见风茄，拿来给他母亲利亚。拉结对利亚说，请你把你儿子的风茄给我些。
Now at the time of the grain-cutting, Reuben saw some love-fruits in the field, and took them to his mother Leah. And Rachel said to her, Let me have some of your son's love-fruits.

利亚说，你夺了我的丈夫还算小事吗？你又要夺我儿子的风茄吗？拉结说，为你儿子的风茄，今夜他可以与你同寝。
But Leah said to her, Is it a small thing that you have taken my husband from me? and now would you take my son's love-fruits? Then Rachel said, You may have him tonight in exchange for your son's love-fruits.

到了晚上，雅各从田里回来，利亚出来迎接他，说，你要与我同寝，因为我实在用我儿子的风茄把你雇下了。那一夜，雅各就与她同寝。
In the evening, when Jacob came in from the field, Leah went out to him and said, Tonight you are to come to me, for I have given my son's love-fruits as a price for you. And he went in to her that night.

神应允了利亚，她就怀孕，给雅各生了第五个儿子。
And God gave ear to her and she became with child, and gave Jacob a fifth son.

利亚说，神给了我价值，因为我把使女给了我丈夫。于是给他起名叫以萨迦（就是价值的意思）。
Then Leah said, God has made payment to me for giving my servant-girl to my husband: so she gave her son the name Issachar.

利亚又怀孕，给雅各生了第六个儿子。
And again Leah became with child, and she gave Jacob a sixth son.

利亚说，神赐我厚赏。我丈夫必与我同住，因我给他生了六个儿子。于是给他起名西布伦（就是同住的意思）。
And she said, God has given me a good bride-price; now at last will I have my husband living with me, for I have given him six sons: and she gave him the name Zebulun.

后来又生了一个女儿，给她起名叫底拿。
After that she had a daughter, to whom she gave the name Dinah.

神顾念拉结，应允了她，使她能生育。
Then God gave thought to Rachel, and hearing her prayer he made her fertile.

拉结怀孕生子，说，神除去了我的羞耻。
And she was with child, and gave birth to a son: and she said, God has taken away my shame.

就给他起名叫约瑟（就是增添的意思），意思说，愿耶和华再增添我一个儿子。
And she gave him the name Joseph, saying, May the Lord give me another son.

拉结生约瑟之后，雅各对拉班说，请打发我走，叫我回到我本乡本土去。
Now after the birth of Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, Let me go away to my place and my country.

请你把我服事你所得的妻子和儿女给我，让我走。我怎样服事你，你都知道。
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have been your servant, and let me go: for you have knowledge of all the work I have done for you.

拉班对他说，我若在你眼前蒙恩，请你仍与我同住，因为我已算定，耶和华赐福与我是为你的缘故。
And Laban said, If you will let me say so, do not go away; for I have seen by the signs that the Lord has been good to me because of you.

又说，请你定你的工价，我就给你。
Say then what your payment is to be and I will give it.

雅各对他说，我怎样服事你，你的牲畜在我手里怎样，是你知道的。
Then Jacob said, You have seen what I have done for you, and how your cattle have done well under my care.

我未来之先，你所有的很少，现今却发大众多，耶和华随我的脚步赐福与你。如今，我什么时候才为自己兴家立业呢？
For before I came you had little, and it has been greatly increased; and the Lord has given you a blessing in everything I have done; but when am I to do something for my family?

拉班说，我当给你什么呢？雅各说，什么你也不必给我，只有一件事，你若应承，我便仍旧牧放你的羊群。
And Laban said, What am I to give you? And Jacob said, Do not give me anything; but I will again take up the care of your flock if you will only do this for me:

今天我要走遍你的羊群，把绵羊中凡有点的，有斑的，和黑色的，并山羊中凡有斑的，有点的，都挑出来。将来这一等的就算我的工价。
Let me go through all your flock today, taking out from among them all the sheep which are marked or coloured or black, and all the marked or coloured goats: these will be my payment.

以后你来查看我的工价，凡在我手里的山羊不是有点有斑的，绵羊不是黑色的，那就算是我偷的。这样便可证出我的公义来。
And so you will be able to put my honour to the test in time to come; if you see among my flocks any goats which are not marked or coloured, or any sheep which is not black, you may take me for a thief.

拉班说，好啊！我情愿照着你的话行。
And Laban said, Let it be as you say.

当日，拉班把有纹的，有斑的公山羊，有点的，有斑的，有杂白纹的母山羊，并黑色的绵羊，都挑出来，交在他儿子们的手下，
So that day he took all the he-goats which were banded or coloured, and all the she-goats which were marked or coloured or had white marks, and all the black sheep, and gave them into the care of his sons;

又使自己和雅各相离三天的路程。雅各就牧养拉班其余的羊。
And sent them three days' journey away: and Jacob took care of the rest of Laban's flock.

雅各拿杨树，杏树，枫树的嫩枝，将皮剥成白纹，使枝子露出白的来，
Then Jacob took young branches of trees, cutting off the skin so that the white wood was seen in bands.

将剥了皮的枝子，对着羊群，插在饮羊的水沟里和水槽里，羊来喝的时候，牝牡配合。
And he put the banded sticks in the drinking-places where the flock came to get water; and they became with young when they came to the water.

羊对着枝子配合，就生下有纹的，有点的，有斑的来。
And because of this, the flock gave birth to young which were marked with bands of colour.

雅各把羊羔分出来，使拉班的羊与这有纹和黑色的羊相对，把自己的羊另放一处，不叫他和拉班的羊混杂。
These lambs Jacob kept separate; and he put his flock in a place by themselves and not with Laban's flock.

到羊群肥壮配合的时候，雅各就把枝子插在水沟里，使羊对着枝子配合。
And whenever the stronger ones of the flock became with young, Jacob put the sticks in front of them in the drinking-places, so that they might become with young when they saw the sticks.

只是到羊瘦弱配合的时候就不插枝子。这样，瘦弱的就归拉班，肥壮的就归雅各。
But when the flocks were feeble, he did not put the sticks before them; so that the feebler flocks were Laban's and the stronger were Jacob's.

于是雅各极其发大，得了许多的羊群，仆婢，骆驼，和驴。
So Jacob's wealth was greatly increased; he had great flocks and women-servants and men-servants and camels and asses.

雅各听见拉班的儿子们有话说，雅各把我们父亲所有的都夺了去，并借着我们父亲的，得了这一切的荣耀（荣耀或作财）。
Now it came to the ears of Jacob that Laban's sons were saying, Jacob has taken away all our father's property, and in this way he has got all this wealth.

雅各见拉班的气色向他不如从前了。
And Jacob saw that Laban's feeling for him was no longer what it had been before.

耶和华对雅各说，你要回你祖，你父之地，到你亲族那里去，我必与你同在。
Then the Lord said to Jacob, Go back to the land of your fathers, and to your relations, and I will be with you.

雅各就打发人，叫拉结和利亚到田野羊群那里来，
And Jacob sent for Rachel and Leah to come to him in the field among his flock.

对她们说，我看你们父亲的气色向我不如从前了。但我父亲的神向来与我同在。
And he said to them, It is clear to me that your father's feeling is no longer what it was to me; but the God of my father has been with me

你们也知道，我尽了我的力量服事你们的父亲。
And you have seen how I have done all in my power for your father,

你们的父亲欺哄我，十次改了我的工价。然而神不容他害我。
But your father has not kept faith with me, and ten times he has made changes in my payment; but God has kept him from doing me damage.

他若说，有点的归你作工价，羊群所生的都有点。他若说，有纹的归你作工价，羊群所生的都有纹。
If he said, All those in the flock which have marks are to be yours, then all the flock gave birth to marked young; and if he said, All the banded ones are to be yours, then all the flock had banded young.

这样，神把你们父亲的牲畜夺来赐给我了。
So God has taken away your father's cattle and has given them to me.

羊配合的时候，我梦中举目一看，见跳母羊的公羊都是有纹的，有点的，有花斑的。
And at the time when the flock were with young, I saw in a dream that all the he-goats which were joined with the she-goats were banded and marked and coloured.

神的使者在那梦中呼叫我说，雅各，我说，我在这里。
And in my dream the angel of the Lord said to me, Jacob: and I said, Here am I.

他说，你举目观看，跳母羊的公羊都是有纹的，有点的，有花斑的。凡拉班向你所作的，我都看见了。
And he said, See how all the he-goats are banded and marked and coloured: for I have seen what Laban has done to you.

我是伯特利的神。你在那里用油浇过柱子，向我许过愿。现今你起来，离开这地，回你本地去吧。
I am the God of Beth-el, where you put oil on the pillar and took an oath to me: now then, come out of this land and go back to the country of your birth.

拉结和利亚回答雅各说，在我们父亲的家里还有我们可得的分吗？还有我们的产业吗？
Then Rachel and Leah said to him in answer, What part or heritage is there for us in our father's house?

我们不是被他当作外人吗？因为他卖了我们，吞了我们的价值。
Are we not as people from a strange country to him? for he took a price for us and now it is all used up.

神从我们父亲所夺出来的一切财物，那就是我们和我们孩子们的。现今凡神所吩咐你的，你只管去行吧。
For the wealth which God has taken from him is ours and our children's; so now, whatever God has said to you, do.

雅各起来，使他的儿子和妻子都骑上骆驼，
Then Jacob put his wives and his sons on camels;

又带着他在巴旦亚兰所得的一切牲畜和财物，往迦南地，他父亲以撒那里去了。
And sending on before him all his cattle and his property which he had got together in Paddan-aram, he made ready to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.

当时拉班剪羊毛去了，拉结偷了他父亲家中的神像。
Now Laban had gone to see to the cutting of the wool of his sheep; so Rachel secretly took the images of the gods of her father's house.

雅各背着亚兰人拉班偷走了，并不告诉他，
And Jacob went away secretly, without giving news of his flight to Laban the Aramaean.

就带着所有的逃跑。他起身过大河，面向基列山行去。
So he went away with all he had, and went across the River in the direction of the hill-country of Gilead.

到第三日，有人告诉拉班，雅各逃跑了。
And on the third day Laban had news of Jacob's flight.

拉班带领他的众弟兄去追赶，追了七日，在基列山就追上了。
And taking the men of his family with him, he went after him for seven days and overtook him in the hill-country of Gilead.

夜间，神到亚兰人拉班那里，在梦中对他说，你要小心，不可与雅各说好说歹。
Then God came to Laban in a dream by night, and said to him, Take care that you say nothing good or bad to Jacob.

拉班追上雅各。雅各在山上支搭帐棚。拉班和他的众弟兄也在基列山上支搭帐棚。
Now when Laban overtook him, Jacob had put up his tent in the hill-country; and Laban and his brothers put up their tents in the hill-country of Gilead.

拉班对雅各说，你作的是什么事呢？你背着我偷走了，又把我的女儿们带了去，如同用刀剑掳去的一般。
And Laban said to Jacob, Why did you go away secretly, taking my daughters away like prisoners of war?

你为什么暗暗地逃跑，偷着走，并不告诉我，叫我可以欢乐，唱歌，击鼓，弹琴地送你回去？
Why did you make a secret of your flight, not giving me word of it, so that I might have sent you away with joy and songs, with melody and music?

又不容我与外孙和女儿亲嘴。你所行的真是愚昧。
You did not even let me give a kiss to my sons and my daughters. This was a foolish thing to do.

我手中原有能力害你，只是你父亲的神昨夜对我说，你要小心，不可与雅各说好说歹。
It is in my power to do you damage: but the God of your father came to me this night, saying, Take care that you say nothing good or bad to Jacob.

现在你虽然想你父家，不得不去，为什么又偷了我的神像呢？
And now, it seems, you are going because your heart's desire is for your father's house; but why have you taken my gods?

雅各回答拉班说，恐怕你把你的女儿从我夺去，所以我逃跑。
And Jacob, in answer, said to Laban, My fear was that you might take your daughters from me by force.

至于你的神像，你在谁那里搜出来，就不容谁存活。当着我们的众弟兄，你认一认，在我这里有什么东西是你的，就拿去。原来雅各不知道拉结偷了那些神像。
As for your gods, if anyone of us has them, let him be put to death: make search before us all for what is yours, and take it. For Jacob had no knowledge that Rachel had taken them.

拉班进了雅各，利亚，并两个使女的帐棚，都没有搜出来，就从利亚的帐棚出来，进了拉结的帐棚。
So Laban went into Jacob's tent and into Leah's tent, and into the tents of the two servant-women, but they were not there; and he came out of Leah's tent and went into Rachel's.

拉结已经把神像藏在骆驼的驮篓里，便坐在上头。拉班摸遍了那帐棚，并没有摸着
Now Rachel had taken the images, and had put them in the camels' basket, and was seated on them. And Laban, searching through all the tent, did not come across them.

拉结对她父亲说，现在我身上不便，不能在你面前起来，求我主不要生气。这样，拉班搜寻神像，竟没有搜出来。
And she said to her father, Let not my lord be angry because I do not get up before you, for I am in the common condition of women. And with all his searching, he did not come across the images.

雅各就发怒斥责拉班说，我有什么过犯，有什么罪恶，你竟这样火速地追我？
Then Jacob was angry with Laban, and said, What crime or sin have I done that you have come after me with such passion?

你摸遍了我一切的家具，你搜出什么来呢？可以放在你我弟兄面前，叫他们在你我中间辨别辨别。
Now that you have made search through all my goods, what have you seen which is yours? Make it clear now before my people and your people, so that they may be judges between us.

我在你家这二十年，你的母绵羊，母山羊没有掉过胎。你群中的公羊，我没有吃过。
These twenty years I have been with you; your sheep and your goats have had young without loss, not one of your he-goats have I taken for food.

被野兽撕裂的，我没有带来给你，是我自己赔上。无论是白日，是黑夜，被偷去的，你都向我索要。
Anything which was wounded by beasts I did not take to you, but myself made up for the loss of it; you made me responsible for whatever was taken by thieves, by day or by night.

我白日受尽干热，黑夜受尽寒霜，不得合眼睡着，我常是这样。
This was my condition, wasted by heat in the day and by the bitter cold at night; and sleep went from my eyes.

我这二十年在你家里，为你的两个女儿服事你十四年，为你的羊群服事你六年，你又十次改了我的工价。
These twenty years I have been in your house; I was your servant for fourteen years because of your daughters, and for six years I kept your flock, and ten times was my payment changed.

若不是我父亲以撒所敬畏的神，就是亚伯拉罕的神与我同在，你如今必定打发我空手而去。神看见我的苦情和我的劳碌，就在昨夜责备你。
If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the Fear of Isaac, had not been with me, you would have sent me away with nothing in my hands. But God has seen my troubles and the work of my hands, and this night he kept you back.

拉班回答雅各说，这女儿是我的女儿，这些孩子是我的孩子，这些羊群也是我的羊群。凡在你眼前的都是我的。我的女儿并她们所生的孩子，我今日能向他们作什么呢？
Then Laban, answering, said, These women are my daughters and these children my children, the flocks and all you see are mine: what now may I do for my daughters and for their children?

来吧，你我二人可以立约，作你我中间的证据。
Come, let us make an agreement, you and I; and let it be for a witness between us.

雅各就拿一块石头立作柱子，
Then Jacob took a stone and put it up as a pillar.

又对众弟兄说，你们堆聚石头。他们就拿石头来堆成一堆，大家便在旁边吃喝。
And Jacob said to his people, Get stones together; and they did so; and they had a meal there by the stones.

拉班称那石堆为伊迦尔撒哈杜他，雅各却称那石堆为迦累得（都是以石堆为证的意思）。
And the name Laban gave it was Jegar-sahadutha: but Jacob gave it the name of Galeed.

拉班说，今日这石堆作你我中间的证据。因此这地方名叫迦累得，
And Laban said, These stones are a witness between you and me today. For this reason its name was Galeed,

又叫米斯巴，意思说，我们彼此离别以后，愿耶和华在你我中间鉴察。
And Mizpah, for he said, May the Lord keep watch on us when we are unable to see one another's doings.

你若苦待我的女儿，又在我的女儿以外另娶妻，虽没有人知道，却有神在你我中间作见证。
If you are cruel to my daughters, or if you take other wives in addition to my daughters, then though no man is there to see, God will be the witness between us.

拉班又说，你看我在你我中间所立的这石堆和柱子。
And Laban said, See these stones and this pillar which I have put between you and me;

这石堆作证据，这柱子也作证据。我必不过这石堆去害你。你也不可过这石堆和柱子来害我。
They will be witness that I will not go over these stones to you, and you will not go over these stones or this pillar to me, for any evil purpose.

但愿亚伯拉罕的神和拿鹤的神，就是他们父亲的神，在你我中间判断。雅各就指着他父亲以撒所敬畏的神起誓，
May the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, be our judge. Then Jacob took an oath by the Fear of his father Isaac.

又在山上献祭，请众弟兄来吃饭。他们吃了饭，便在山上住宿。
And Jacob made an offering on the mountain, and gave orders to his people to take food: so they had a meal and took their rest that night on the mountain.

拉班清早起来，与他外孙和女儿亲嘴，给他们祝福，回往自己的地方去了。
And early in the morning Laban, after kissing and blessing his daughters, went on his way back to his country.

雅各仍旧行路，神的使者遇见他。
And on his way Jacob came face to face with the angels of God.

雅各看见他们就说，这是神的军兵，于是给那地方起名叫玛哈念（就是二军兵的意思）。
And when he saw them he said, This is the army of God: so he gave that place the name of Mahanaim.

雅各打发人先往西珥地去，就是以东地，见他哥哥以扫，
Now Jacob sent servants before him to Esau, his brother, in the land of Seir, the country of Edom;

吩咐他们说，你们对我主以扫说，你的仆人雅各这样说，我在拉班那里寄居，直到如今。
And he gave them orders to say these words to Esau: Your servant Jacob says, Till now I have been living with Laban:

我有牛，驴，羊群，仆婢，现在打发人来报告我主，为要在你眼前蒙恩。
And I have oxen and asses and flocks and men-servants and women-servants: and I have sent to give my lord news of these things so that I may have grace in his eyes.

所打发的人回到雅各那里，说，我们到了你哥哥以扫那里，他带着四百人，正迎着你来。
When the servants came back they said, We have seen your brother Esau and he is coming out to you, and four hundred men with him.

雅各就甚惧怕，而且愁烦，便把那与他同在的人口和羊群，牛群，骆驼分作两队，
Then Jacob was in great fear and trouble of mind: and he put all the people and the flocks and the herds and the camels into two groups;

说，以扫若来击杀这一队，剩下的那一队还可以逃避。
And said, If Esau, meeting one group, makes an attack on them, the others will get away safely.

雅各说，耶和华我祖亚伯拉罕的神，我父亲以撒的神阿，你曾对我说，回你本地本族去，我要厚待你。
Then Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, the God of my father Isaac, the Lord who said to me, Go back to your country and your family and I will be good to you:

你向仆人所施的一切慈爱和诚实，我一点也不配得。我先前只拿着我的杖过这约旦河，如今我却成了两队了。
I am less than nothing in comparison with all your mercies and your faith to me your servant; for with only my stick in my hand I went across Jordan, and now I have become two armies.

求你救我脱离我哥哥以扫的手。因为我怕他来杀我，连妻子带儿女一同杀了。
Be my saviour from the hand of Esau, my brother: for my fear is that he will make an attack on me, putting to death mother and child.

你曾说，我必定厚待你，使你的后裔如同海边的沙，多得不可胜数。
And you said, Truly, I will be good to you, and make your seed like the sand of the sea which may not be numbered.

当夜，雅各在那里住宿，就从他所有的物中拿礼物要送给他哥哥以扫。
Then he put up his tent there for the night; and from among his goods he took, as an offering for his brother Esau,

母山羊二百只，公山羊二十只，母绵羊二百只，公绵羊二十只，
Two hundred she-goats and twenty he-goats, two hundred females and twenty males from the sheep,

奶崽子的骆驼三十只各带着崽子，母牛四十只，公牛十只，母驴二十匹，驴驹十匹。
Thirty camels with their young ones, forty cows, ten oxen, twenty asses, and ten young asses.

每样各分一群，交在仆人手下，就对仆人说，你们要在我前头过去，使群群相离，有空闲的地方。
These he gave to his servants, every herd by itself, and he said to his servants, Go on before me, and let there be a space between one herd and another.

又吩咐尽先走的说，我哥哥以扫遇见你的时候，问你说，你是哪家的人，要往哪里去，你前头这些是谁的，
And he gave orders to the first, saying, When my brother Esau comes to you and says, Whose servant are you, and where are you going, and whose are these herds?

你就说，是你仆人雅各的，是送给我主以扫的礼物。他自己也在我们后边。
Then say to him, These are your servant Jacob's; they are an offering for my lord, for Esau; and he himself is coming after us.

又吩咐第二，第三，和一切赶群畜的人说，你们遇见以扫的时候也要这样对他说。
And he gave the same orders to the second and the third and to all those who were with the herds, saying, This is what you are to say to Esau when you see him;

并且你们要说，你仆人雅各在我们后边。因雅各心里说，我借着在我前头去的礼物解他的恨，然后再见他的面，或者他容纳我。
And you are to say further, Jacob, your servant, is coming after us. For he said to himself, I will take away his wrath by the offering which I have sent on, and then I will come before him: it may be that I will have grace in his eyes.

于是礼物先过去了。那夜，雅各在队中住宿。
So the servants with the offerings went on in front, and he himself took his rest that night in the tents with his people.

他夜间起来，带着两个妻子，两个使女，并十一个儿子，都过了雅博渡口，
And in the night he got up, and taking with him his two wives and the two servant-women and his eleven children, he went over the river Jabbok.

先打发他们过河，又打发所有的都过去，
He took them and sent them over the stream with all he had.

只剩下雅各一人。有一个人来和他摔跤，直到黎明。
Then Jacob was by himself; and a man was fighting with him till dawn.

那人见自己胜不过他，就将他的大腿窝摸了一把，雅各的大腿窝正在摔跤的时候就扭了。
But when the man saw that he was not able to overcome Jacob, he gave him a blow in the hollow part of his leg, so that his leg was damaged.

那人说，天黎明了，容我去吧。雅各说，你不给我祝福，我就不容你去。
And he said to him, Let me go now, for the dawn is near. But Jacob said, I will not let you go till you have given me your blessing.

那人说，你名叫什么？他说，我名叫雅各。
Then he said, What is your name? And he said, Jacob.

那人说，你的名不要再叫雅各，要叫以色列。因为你与神与人较力，都得了胜。
And he said, Your name will no longer be Jacob, but Israel: for in your fight with God and with men you have overcome.

雅各问他说，请将你的名告诉我。那人说，何必问我的名，于是在那里给雅各祝福。
Then Jacob said, What is your name? And he said, What is my name to you? Then he gave him a blessing.

雅各便给那地方起名叫毗努伊勒（就是神之面的意思），意思说，我面对面见了神，我的性命仍得保全。
And Jacob gave that place the name of Peniel, saying, I have seen God face to face, and still I am living.

日头刚出来的时候，雅各经过毗努伊勒，他的大腿就瘸了。
And while he was going past Peniel, the sun came up. And he went with unequal steps because of his damaged leg.

故此，以色列人不吃大腿窝的筋，直到今日，因为那人摸了雅各大腿窝的筋。
For this reason the children of Israel, even today, never take that muscle in the hollow of the leg as food, because the hollow of Jacob's leg was touched.

雅各举目观看，见以扫来了，后头跟着四百人，他就把孩子们分开交给利亚，拉结，和两个使女，
Then Jacob, lifting up his eyes, saw Esau coming with his four hundred men. So he made a division of the children between Leah and Rachel and the two women-servants.

并且叫两个使女和她们的孩子在前头，利亚和她的孩子在后头，拉结和约瑟在尽后头。
He put the servants and their children in front, Leah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph at the back.

他自己在他们前头过去，一连七次俯伏在地才就近他哥哥。
And he himself, going before them, went down on his face to the earth seven times till he came near his brother.

以扫跑来迎接他，将他抱住，又搂着他的颈项，与他亲嘴，两个人就哭了。
Then Esau came running up to him, and folding him in his arms, gave him a kiss: and the two of them were overcome with weeping.

以扫举目看见妇人孩子，就说，这些和你同行的是谁呢？雅各说，这些孩子是神施恩给你的仆人的。
Then Esau, lifting up his eyes, saw the women and the children, and said, Who are these with you? And he said, The children whom God in his mercy has given to your servant.

于是两个使女和她们的孩子前来下拜。
Then the servants and their children came near, and went down on their faces.

利亚和她的孩子也前来下拜。随后约瑟和拉结也前来下拜。
And Leah came near with her children, and then Joseph and Rachel, and they did the same.

以扫说，我所遇见的这些群畜是什么意思呢？雅各说，是要在我主面前蒙恩的。
And he said, What were all those herds which I saw on the way? And Jacob said, They were an offering so that I might have grace in my lord's eyes.

以扫说，兄弟阿，我的已经够了，你的仍归你吧。
But Esau said, I have enough; keep what is yours, my brother, for yourself.

雅各说，不然，我若在你眼前蒙恩，就求你从我手里收下这礼物。因为我见了你的面，如同见了神的面，并且你容纳了我。
And Jacob said, Not so; but if I have grace in your eyes, take them as a sign of my love, for I have seen your face as one may see the face of God, and you have been pleased with me.

求你收下我带来给你的礼物。因为神恩待我，使我充足。雅各再三地求他，他才收下了。
Take my offering then, with my blessing; for God has been very good to me and I have enough: so at his strong request, he took it.

以扫说，我们可以起身前往，我在你前头走。
And he said, Let us go on our journey together, and I will go in front.

雅各对他说，我主知道孩子们年幼娇嫩，牛羊也正在乳养的时候，若是催赶一天，群畜都必死了。
But Jacob said, My lord may see that the children are only small, and there are young ones in my flocks and herds: one day's over-driving will be the destruction of all the flock.

求我主在仆人前头走，我要量着在我面前群畜和孩子的力量慢慢地前行，直走到西珥我主那里。
Do you, my lord, go on before your servant; I will come on slowly, at the rate at which the cattle and the children are able to go, till I come to my lord at Seir.

以扫说，容我把跟随我的人留几个在你这里。雅各说，何必呢？只要在我主眼前蒙恩就是了。
And Esau said, Then keep some of my men with you. And he said, What need is there for that, if my lord is pleased with me?

于是，以扫当日起行，回往西珥去了。
So Esau, turning back that day, went on his way to Seir.

雅各就往疏割去，在那里为自己盖造房屋，又为牲畜搭棚。因此那地方名叫疏割（就是棚的意思）。
And Jacob went on to Succoth, where he made a house for himself and put up tents for his cattle: for this reason the place was named Succoth.

雅各从巴旦亚兰回来的时候，平平安安地到了迦南地的示剑城，在城东支搭帐棚，
So Jacob came safely from Paddan-aram to the town of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and put up his tents near the town.

就用一百块银子向示剑的父亲，哈抹的子孙买了支帐棚的那块地，
And for a hundred bits of money he got from the children of Hamor, the builder of Shechem, the field in which he had put up his tents.

在那里筑了一座坛，起名叫伊利伊罗伊以色列（就是神，以色列神的意思）。
And there he put up an altar, naming it El, the God of Israel.

利亚给雅各所生的女儿底拿出去，要见那地的女子们。
Now Dinah, the daughter whom Leah had by Jacob, went out to see the women of that country.

那地的主希未人，哈抹的儿子示剑看见她，就拉住她，与她行淫，玷辱她。
And when Shechem, the son of Hamor the Hivite who was the chief of that land, saw her, he took her by force and had connection with her.

示剑的心系恋雅各的女儿底拿，喜爱这女子，甜言蜜语地安慰她。
Then his heart went out in love to Dinah, the daughter of Jacob, and he said comforting words to her.

示剑对他父亲哈抹说，求你为我聘这女子为妻。
And Shechem said to Hamor, his father, Get me this girl for my wife.

雅各听见示剑玷污了他的女儿底拿。那时他的儿子们正和群畜在田野，雅各就闭口不言，等他们回来。
Now Jacob had word of what Shechem had done to his daughter; but his sons were in the fields with the cattle, and Jacob said nothing till they came.

示剑的父亲哈抹出来见雅各，要和他商议。
Then Hamor, the father of Shechem, came out to have a talk with Jacob.

雅各的儿子们听见这事，就从田野回来，人人忿恨，十分恼怒。因示剑在以色列家作了丑事，与雅各的女儿行淫，这本是不该作的事。
Now the sons of Jacob came in from the fields when they had news of it, and they were wounded and very angry because of the shame he had done in Israel by having connection with Jacob's daughter; and they said, Such a thing is not to be done.

哈抹和他们商议说，我儿子示剑的心恋慕这女子，求你们将她给我的儿子为妻。
But Hamor said to them, Shechem, my son, is full of desire for your daughter: will you then give her to him for a wife?

你们与我们彼此结亲。你们可以把女儿给我们，也可以娶我们的女儿。
And let our two peoples be joined together; give your daughters to us, and take our daughters for yourselves.

你们与我们同住吧。这地都在你们面前，只管在此居住，作买卖，置产业。
Go on living with us, and the country will be open to you; do trade and get property there.

示剑对女儿的父亲和弟兄们说，但愿我在你们眼前蒙恩，你们向我要什么，我必给你们。
And Shechem said to her father and her brothers, If you will give ear to my request, whatever you say I will give to you.

任凭向我要多重的聘金和礼物，我必照你们所说的给你们。只要把女子给我为妻。
However great you make the bride-price and payment, I will give it; only let me have the girl for my wife.

雅各的儿子们因为示剑玷污了他们的妹子底拿，就用诡诈的话回答示剑和他父亲哈抹，
But the sons of Jacob gave a false answer to Shechem and Hamor his father, because of what had been done to Dinah their sister.

对他们说，我们不能把我们的妹子给没有受割礼的人为妻，因为那是我们的羞辱。
And they said, It is not possible for us to give our sister to one who is without circumcision, for that would be a cause of shame to us:

惟有一件才可以应允，若你们所有的男丁都受割礼，和我们一样，
But on this condition only will we come to an agreement with you: if every male among you becomes like us and undergoes circumcision;

我们就把女儿给你们，也娶你们的女儿。我们便与你们同住，两下成为一样的人民。
Then we will give our daughters to you and take your daughters to us and go on living with you as one people.

倘若你们不听从我们受割礼，我们就带着妹子走了。
But if you will not undergo circumcision as we say, then we will take our daughter and go.

哈抹和他的儿子示剑喜欢这话。
And their words were pleasing to Hamor and his son Shechem.

那少年人作这事并不迟延，因为他喜爱雅各的女儿。他在他父亲家中也是人最尊重的。
And without loss of time the young man did as they said, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter, and he was the noblest of his father's house.

哈抹和他儿子示剑到本城的门口，对本城的人说，
Then Hamor and Shechem, his son, went to the meeting-place of their town, and said to the men of the town,

这些人与我们和睦，不如许他们在这地居住，作买卖。这地也宽阔，足可容下他们。我们可以娶他们的女儿为妻，也可以把我们的女儿嫁给他们。
It is the desire of these men to be at peace with us; let them then go on living in this country and doing trade here, for the country is wide open before them; let us take their daughters as wives and let us give them our daughters.

惟有一件事我们必须作，他们才肯应允和我们同住，成为一样的人民，就是我们中间所有的男丁都要受割礼，和他们一样。
But these men will make an agreement with us to go on living with us and to become one people, only on the condition that every male among us undergoes circumcision as they have done.

他们的群畜，货财，和一切的牲口岂不都归我们吗？只要依从他们，他们就与我们同住。
Then will not their cattle and their goods and all their beasts be ours? so let us come to an agreement with them so that they may go on living with us.

凡从城门出入的人就都听从哈抹和他儿子示剑的话。于是凡从城门出入的男丁都受了割礼。
Then all the men of the town gave ear to the words of Hamor and Shechem his son; and every male in the town underwent circumcision.

到第三天，众人正在疼痛的时候，雅各的两个儿子，就是底拿的哥哥西缅和利未，各拿刀剑，趁着众人想不到的时候来到城中，把一切男丁都杀了，
But on the third day after, before the wounds were well, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, took their swords and came into the town by surprise and put all the males to death.

又用刀杀了哈抹和他儿子示剑，把底拿从示剑家里带出来就走了。
And Hamor and his son they put to death with the sword, and they took Dinah from Shechem's house and went away.

雅各的儿子们因为他们的妹子受了玷污，就来到被杀的人那里，掳掠那城，
And the sons of Jacob came on them when they were wounded and made waste the town because of what had been done to their sister;

夺了他们的羊群，牛群，和驴，并城里田间所有的。
They took their flocks and their herds and their asses and everything in their town and in their fields,

又把他们一切货财，孩子，妇女，并各房中所有的，都掳掠去了。
And all their wealth and all their little ones and their wives; everything in their houses they took and made them waste.

雅各对西缅和利未说，你们连累我，使我在这地的居民中，就是在迦南人和比利洗人中，有了臭名。我的人丁既然稀少，他们必聚集来击杀我，我和全家的人都必灭绝。
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, You have made trouble for me and given me a bad name among the people of this country, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and because we are small in number they will come together against me and make war on me; and it will be the end of me and all my people.

他们说，他岂可待我们的妹子如同妓女吗？
But they said, Were we to let him make use of our sister as a loose woman?

神对雅各说，起来。上伯特利去，住在那里。要在那里筑一座坛给神，就是你逃避你哥哥以扫的时候向你显现的那位。
And God said to Jacob, Go up now to Beth-el and make your living-place there: and put up an altar there to the God who came to you when you were in flight from your brother Esau.

雅各就对他家中的人并一切与他同在的人说，你们要除掉你们中间的外邦神，也要自洁，更换衣裳。
Then Jacob said to all his people, Put away the strange gods which are among you, and make yourselves clean, and put on a change of clothing:

我们要起来，上伯特利去，在那里我要筑一座坛给神，就是在我遭难的日子应允我的祷告，在我行的路上保佑我的那位。
And let us go up to Beth-el: and there I will make an altar to God, who gave me an answer in the day of my trouble, and was with me wherever I went.

他们就把外邦人的神像和他们耳朵上的环子交给雅各。雅各都藏在示剑那里的橡树底下。
Then they gave to Jacob all the strange gods which they had, and the rings which were in their ears; and Jacob put them away under the holy tree at Shechem.

他们便起行前往。神使那周围城邑的人都甚惊惧，就不追赶雅各的众子了。
So they went on their journey: and the fear of God was on the towns round about, so that they made no attack on the sons of Jacob.

于是雅各和一切与他同在的人到了迦南地的路斯，就是伯特利。
And Jacob came to Luz in the land of Canaan (which is the same as Beth-el), he and all his people.

他在那里筑了一座坛，就给那地方起名叫伊勒伯特利（就是伯特利之神的意思），因为他逃避他哥哥的时候，神在那里向他显现。
And there he made an altar, naming the place El-beth-el: because it was there he had the vision of God when he was in flight from his brother.

利百加的奶母底波拉死了，就葬在伯特利下边橡树底下。那棵树名叫亚伦巴古。
And Deborah, the servant who had taken care of Rebekah from her birth, came to her end, and was put to rest near Beth-el, under the holy tree: and they gave it the name of Allon-bacuth.

雅各从巴旦亚兰回来，神又向他显现，赐福与他，
Now when Jacob was on his way from Paddan-aram, God came to him again and, blessing him, said,

且对他说，你的名原是雅各，从今以后不要再叫雅各，要叫以色列。这样，他就改名叫以色列。
Jacob is your name, but it will be so no longer; from now your name will be Israel; so he was named Israel.

神又对他说，我是全能的神。你要生养众多，将来有一族和多国的民从你而生，又有君王从你而出。
And God said to him, I am God, the Ruler of all: be fertile, and have increase; a nation, truly a group of nations, will come from you, and kings will be your offspring;

我所赐给亚伯拉罕和以撒的地，我要赐给你与你的后裔。
And the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give to you; and to your seed after you I will give the land.

神就从那与雅各说话的地方升上去了。
Then God went up from him in the place where he had been talking with him.

雅各便在那里立了一根石柱，在柱子上奠酒，浇油。
And Jacob put up a pillar in the place where he had been talking with God, and put a drink offering on it, and oil.

雅各就给那地方起名叫伯特利。
And he gave to the place where God had been talking with him, the name of Beth-el.

他们从伯特利起行，离以法他还有一段路程，拉结临产甚是艰难。
So they went on from Beth-el; and while they were still some distance from Ephrath, the pains of birth came on Rachel and she had a hard time.

正在艰难的时候，收生婆对她说，不要怕，你又要得一个儿子了。
And when her pain was very great, the woman who was helping her said, Have no fear; for now you will have another son.

她将近于死，灵魂要走的时候，就给她儿子起名叫便俄尼。他父亲却给他起名叫便雅悯。
And in the hour when her life went from her (for death came to her), she gave the child the name Ben-oni: but his father gave him the name of Benjamin.

拉结死了，葬在以法他的路旁。以法他就是伯利恒。
So Rachel came to her end and was put to rest on the road to Ephrath (which is Beth-lehem).

雅各在她的坟上立了一统碑，就是拉结的墓碑，到今日还在。
And Jacob put up a pillar on her resting-place; which is named, The Pillar of the resting-place of Rachel, to this day.

以色列起行前往，在以得台那边支搭帐棚。
And Israel went journeying on and put up his tents on the other side of the tower of the flock.

以色列住在那地的时候，流便去与他父亲的妾辟拉同寝，以色列也听见了。雅各共有十二个儿子。
Now while they were living in that country, Reuben had connection with Bilhah, his father's servant-woman: and Israel had news of it.

利亚所生的是雅各的长子流便，还有西缅，利未，犹大，以萨迦，西布伦。
Now Jacob had twelve sons: the sons of Leah: Reuben, Jacob's first son, and Simeon and Levi and Judah and Issachar and Zebulun;

拉结所生的是约瑟，便雅悯。
The sons of Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin;

拉结的使女辟拉所生的是但，拿弗他利。
The sons of Bilhah, Rachel's servant: Dan and Naphtali;

利亚的使女悉帕所生的是迦得，亚设。这是雅各在巴旦亚兰所生的儿子。
The sons of Zilpah, Leah's servant: Gad and Asher; these are the sons whom Jacob had in Paddan-aram.

雅各来到他父亲以撒那里，到了基列亚巴的幔利，乃是亚伯拉罕和以撒寄居的地方。基列亚巴就是希伯仑。
And Jacob came to his father Isaac at Mamre, at Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac had been living.

以撒共活了一百八十岁。
And Isaac was a hundred and eighty years old.

以撒年纪老迈，日子满足，气绝而死，归到他列祖（原文作本民）那里。他两个儿子以扫，雅各把他埋葬了。
Then Isaac came to his end and was put to rest with his father's people, an old man after a long life: and Jacob and Esau, his sons, put him in his last resting-place.

以扫就是以东，他的后代记在下面。
Now these are the generations of Esau, that is to say, Edom.

以扫娶迦南的女子为妻，就是赫人以伦的女儿亚大和希未人祭便的孙女，亚拿的女儿阿何利巴玛，
Esau's wives were women of Canaan: Adah, the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,

又娶了以实玛利的女儿，尼拜约的妹子巴实抹。
And Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, the sister of Nebaioth.

亚大给以扫生了以利法。巴实抹生了流珥。
Adah had a son Eliphaz; and Basemath was the mother of Reuel;

阿何利巴玛生了耶乌施，雅兰，可拉。这都是以扫的儿子，是在迦南地生的。
Oholibamah was the mother of Jeush, Jalam, and Korah; these are the sons of Esau, whose birth took place in the land of Canaan.

以扫带着他的妻子，儿女，与家中一切的人口，并他的牛羊，牲畜，和一切货财，就是他在迦南地所得的，往别处去，离了他兄弟雅各。
Esau took his wives and his sons and his daughters, and all the people of his house, and his beasts and his cattle and all his goods which he had got together in the land of Canaan, and went into the land of Seir, away from his brother Jacob.

因为二人的财物群畜甚多，寄居的地方容不下他们，所以不能同居。
For their wealth was so great that the land was not wide enough for the two of them and all their cattle.

于是以扫住在西珥山里。以扫就是以东。
So Esau made his living-place in the hill-country of Seir (Esau is Edom).

以扫是西珥山里以东人的始祖，他的后代记在下面。
And these are the generations of Esau, the father of the Edomites in the hill-country of Seir:

以扫众子的名字如下。以扫的妻子亚大生以利法。以扫的妻子巴实抹生流珥。
These are the names of Esau's sons: Eliphaz, the son of Esau's wife Adah, and Reuel, the son of Esau's wife Basemath.

以利法的儿子是提幔，阿抹，洗玻，迦坦，基纳斯。
The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz.

亭纳是以扫儿子以利法的妾。她给以利法生了亚玛力。这是以扫的妻子亚大的子孙。
And Eliphaz, the son of Esau, had connection with a woman named Timna, who gave birth to Amalek: all these were the children of Esau's wife Adah.

流珥的儿子是拿哈，谢拉，沙玛，米撒。这是以扫妻子巴实抹的子孙。
And these are the sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: they were the children of Esau's wife Basemath.

以扫的妻子阿何利巴玛是祭便的孙女，亚拿的女儿。她给以扫生了耶乌施，雅兰，可拉。
And these are the sons of Esau's wife Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon: she was the mother of Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.

以扫子孙中作族长的记在下面。以扫的长子以利法的子孙中，有提幔族长，阿抹族长，洗玻族长，基纳斯族长，
These were the chiefs among the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz, Esau's first son: Teman, Omar, Zepho, Kenaz,

可拉族长，迦坦族长，亚玛力族长。这是在以东地从以利法所出的族长，都是亚大的子孙。
Korah, Gatam, Amalek: all these were chiefs in the land of Edom, the offspring of Eliphaz, the seed of Adah.

以扫的儿子流珥的子孙中，有拿哈族长，谢拉族长，沙玛族长，米撒族长。这是在以东地从流珥所出的族长，都是以扫妻子巴实抹的子孙。
And these are the sons of Esau's son Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, Mizzah: these were the chiefs of Reuel in the land of Edom, the children of Esau's wife Basemath.

以扫的妻子阿何利巴玛的子孙中，有耶乌施族长，雅兰族长，可拉族长。这是从以扫妻子，亚拿的女儿，阿何利巴玛子孙中所出的族长。
And these are the sons of Esau's wife Oholibamah: Jeush, Jalam, and Korah: these were the chiefs who came from Esau's wife Oholibamah, daughter of Anah.

以上的族长都是以扫的子孙。以扫就是以东。
These were the sons of Esau (that is, Edom), and these were their chiefs.

那地原有的居民何利人西珥的子孙记在下面，就是罗坍，朔巴，祭便，亚拿，
These are the sons of Seir the Horite who were living in that country; Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,

底顺，以察，底珊。这是从以东地的何利人西珥子孙中所出的族长。
Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan: these are the chiefs of the Horites, offspring of Seir in the land of Edom.

罗坍的儿子是何利，希幔。罗坍的妹子是亭纳。
The children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; Lotan's sister was Timna.

朔巴的儿子是亚勒文，玛拿辖，以巴录，示玻，阿南。
And these are the children of Shobal: Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.

祭便的儿子是亚雅，亚拿（当时在旷野放他父亲祭便的驴，遇着温泉的，就是这亚拿）。
And these are the children of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah; that same Anah who made the discovery of the water-springs in the waste land, when he was looking after the asses of his father Zibeon.

亚拿的儿子是底顺。亚拿的女儿是阿何利巴玛。
And these are the children of Anah: Dishon and Oholibamah his daughter.

底顺的儿子是欣但，伊是班，益兰，基兰。
These are the children of Dishon: Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Keran.

以察的儿子是辟罕，撒番，亚干。
These are the children of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Akan.

底珊的儿子是乌斯，亚兰。
These are the children of Dishan: Uz and Aran.

从何利人所出的族长记在下面，就是罗坍族长，朔巴族长，祭便族长，亚拿族长，
These were the Horite chiefs: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,

底顺族长，以察族长，底珊族长。这是从何利人所出的族长，都在西珥地，按着宗族作族长。
Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. Such were the Horite chiefs in their order in the land of Seir.

以色列人未有君王治理以先，在以东地作王的记在下面。
And these are the kings who were ruling in the land of Edom before there was any king over the children of Israel.

比珥的儿子比拉在以东作王，他的京城名叫亭哈巴。
Bela, son of Beor, was king in Edom, and the name of his chief town was Dinhabah.

比拉死了，波斯拉人谢拉的儿子约巴接续他作王。
At his death, Jobab, son of Zerah of Bozrah, became king in his place.

约巴死了，提幔地的人户珊接续他作王。
And at the death of Jobab, Husham, from the country of the Temanites, became king in his place.

户珊死了，比达的儿子哈达接续他作王。这哈达就是在摩押地杀败米甸人的，他的京城名叫亚未得。
And at the death of Husham, Hadad, son of Bedad, who overcame the Midianites in the field of Moab, became king; his chief town was named Avith.

哈达死了，玛士利加人桑拉接续他作王。
And at the death of Hadad, Samlah of Masrekah became king.

桑拉死了，大河边的利河伯人扫罗接续他作王。
And at the death of Samlah, Shaul of Rehoboth by the River became king in his place.

扫罗死了，亚革波的儿子巴勒哈南接续他作王。
And at the death of Shaul, Baal-hanan, son of Achbor, became king.

亚革波的儿子巴勒哈南死了，哈达接续他作王，他的京城名叫巴乌。他的妻子名叫米希他别，是米萨合的孙女，玛特列的女儿。
And at the death of Baal-hanan, Hadar became king in his place; his chief town was named Pau, and his wife's name was Mehetabel; she was the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.

从以扫所出的族长，按着他们的宗族，住处，名字记在下面，就是亭纳族长，亚勒瓦族长，耶帖族长，
These are the names of the chiefs of Esau in the order of their families and their places: Timna, Alvah, Jetheth,

阿何利巴玛族长，以拉族长，比嫩族长，
Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,

基纳斯族长，提幔族长，米比萨族长，
Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,

玛基叠族长，以兰族长。这是以东人在所得为业的地上，按着他们的住处，所有的族长都是以东人的始祖以扫的后代。
Magdiel, Iram; these are the Edomite chiefs, in their places in their heritage; this is Esau, the father of the Edomites.

雅各住在迦南地，就是他父亲寄居的地。
Now Jacob was living in the land where his father had made a place for himself, in the land of Canaan.

雅各的记略如下。约瑟十七岁与他哥哥们一同牧羊。他是个童子，与他父亲的妾辟拉，悉帕的儿子们常在一处。约瑟将他哥哥们的恶行报给他们的父亲。
These are the generations of Jacob: Joseph, a boy seventeen years old, was looking after the flock, together with his brothers, the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's wives; and Joseph gave their father a bad account of them.

以色列原来爱约瑟过于爱他的众子，因为约瑟是他年老生的。他给约瑟作了一件彩衣。
Now the love which Israel had for Joseph was greater than his love for all his other children, because he got him when he was an old man: and he had a long coat made for him.

约瑟的哥哥们见父亲爱约瑟过于爱他们，就恨约瑟，不与他说和睦的话。
And because his brothers saw that Joseph was dearer to his father than all the others, they were full of hate for him, and would not say a kind word to him.

约瑟作了一梦，告诉他哥哥们，他们就越发恨他。
Now Joseph had a dream, and he gave his brothers an account of it, which made their hate greater than ever.

约瑟对他们说，请听我所作的梦，
And he said to them, Let me give you the story of my dream.

我们在田里捆禾稼，我的捆起来站着，你们的捆来围着我的捆下拜。
We were in the field, getting the grain stems together, and my grain kept upright, and yours came round and went down on the earth before mine.

他的哥哥们回答说，难道你真要作我们的王吗？难道你真要管辖我们吗？他们就因为他的梦和他的话越发恨他。
And his brothers said to him, Are you to be our king? will you have authority over us? And because of his dream and his words, their hate for him became greater than ever.

后来他又作了一梦，也告诉他的哥哥们说，看哪，我又作了一梦，梦见太阳，月亮，与十一个星向我下拜。
Then he had another dream, and gave his brothers an account of it, saying, I have had another dream: the sun and the moon and eleven stars gave honour to me.

约瑟将这梦告诉他父亲和他哥哥们，他父亲就责备他说，你作的这是什么梦。难道我和你母亲，你弟兄果然要来俯伏在地，向你下拜吗？
And he gave word of it to his father and his brothers; but his father protesting said, What sort of a dream is this? am I and your mother and your brothers to go down on our faces to the earth before you?

他哥哥们都嫉妒他，他父亲却把这话存在心里。
And his brothers were full of envy; but his father kept his words in mind.

约瑟的哥哥们往示剑去放他们父亲的羊。
Now his brothers went to keep watch over their father's flock in Shechem.

以色列对约瑟说，你哥哥们不是在示剑放羊吗？你来，我要打发你往他们那里去。约瑟说，我在这里。
And Israel said to Joseph, Are not your brothers with the flock in Shechem? come, I will send you to them. And he said to him, Here am I.

以色列说，你去看看你哥哥们平安不平安，群羊平安不平安，就回来报信给我。于是打发他出希伯仑谷，他就往示剑去了。
And he said to him, Go now, and see if your brothers are well and how the flock is; then come back and give me word. So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.

有人遇见他在田野走迷了路，就问他说，你找什么？
And a man saw him wandering in the country, and said to him, What are you looking for?

他说，我找我的哥哥们，求你告诉我，他们在何处放羊。
And he said, I am looking for my brothers; please give me word of where they are keeping their flock.

那人说，他们已经走了，我听见他们说要往多坍去。约瑟就去追赶他哥哥们，遇见他们在多坍。
And the man said, They have gone away from here, for they said in my hearing, Let us go to Dothan. So Joseph went after them and came up with them at Dothan.

他们远远地看见他，趁他还没有走到跟前，大家就同谋要害死他，
But they saw him when he was a long way off, and before he came near them they made a secret design against him to put him to death;

彼此说，你看。那作梦的来了。
Saying to one another, See, here comes this dreamer.

来吧。我们将他杀了，丢在一个坑里，就说有恶兽把他吃了。我们且看他的梦将来怎么样。
Let us now put him to death and put his body into one of these holes, and we will say, An evil beast has put him to death: then we will see what becomes of his dreams.

流便听见了，要救他脱离他们的手，说，我们不可害他的性命。
But Reuben, hearing these words, got him out of their hands, saying, Let us not take his life.

又说，不可流他的血，可以把他丢在这野地的坑里，不可下手害他。流便的意思是要救他脱离他们的手，把他归还他的父亲。
Do not put him to a violent death, but let him be placed in one of the holes; this he said to keep him safe from their hands, with the purpose of taking him back to his father again.

约瑟到了他哥哥们那里，他们就剥了他的外衣，就是他穿的那件彩衣，
So when Joseph came to his brothers, they took off his long coat which he had on;

把他丢在坑里。那坑是空的，里头没有水。
And they took him and put him in the hole: now the hole had no water in it.

他们坐下吃饭，举目观看，见有一伙米甸的以实玛利人从基列来，用骆驼驮着香料，乳香，没药，要带下埃及去。
Then seating themselves, they took their meal: and looking up, they saw a travelling band of Ishmaelites, coming from Gilead on their way to Egypt, with spices and perfumes on their camels.

犹大对众弟兄说，我们杀我们的兄弟，藏了他的血有什么益处呢？
And Judah said to his brothers, What profit is there in putting our brother to death and covering up his blood?

我们不如将他卖给以实玛利人，不可下手害他。因为他是我们的兄弟，我们的骨肉。众弟兄就听从了他。
Let us give him to these Ishmaelites for a price, and let us not put violent hands on him, for he is our brother, our flesh. And his brothers gave ear to him.

有些米甸的商人从那里经过，哥哥们就把约瑟从坑里拉上来，讲定二十舍客勒银子，把约瑟卖给以实玛利人。他们就把约瑟带到埃及去了。
And some traders from Midian went by; so pulling Joseph up out of the hole, they gave him to the Ishmaelites for twenty bits of silver, and they took him to Egypt.

流便回到坑边，见约瑟不在坑里，就撕裂衣服，
Now when Reuben came back to the hole, Joseph was not there; and giving signs of grief,

回到兄弟们那里，说，童子没有了。我往哪里去才好呢？
He went back to his brothers, and said, The child is gone; what am I to do?

他们宰了一只公山羊，把约瑟的那件彩衣染了血，
Then they took Joseph's coat, and put on it some of the blood from a young goat which they had put to death,

打发人送到他们的父亲那里，说，我们捡了这个。请认一认是你儿子的外衣不是，
And they took the coat to their father, and said, We came across this; is it your son's coat or not?

他认得，就说，这是我儿子的外衣。有恶兽把他吃了，约瑟被撕碎了。撕碎了。
And he saw that it was, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast has put him to death; without doubt Joseph has come to a cruel end.

雅各便撕裂衣服，腰间围上麻布，为他儿子悲哀了多日。
Then Jacob, giving signs of grief, put on haircloth, and went on weeping for his son day after day.

他的儿女都起来安慰他，他却不肯受安慰，说，我必悲哀着下阴间，到我儿子那里。约瑟的父亲就为他哀哭。
And all his sons and all his daughters came to give him comfort, but he would not be comforted, saying with weeping, I will go down to the underworld to my son. So great was his father's sorrow for him.

米甸人带约瑟到埃及，把他卖给法老的内臣护卫长波提乏。
And in Egypt the men of Midian gave him for a price to Potiphar, a captain of high position in Pharaoh's house.

那时，犹大离开他弟兄下去，到一个亚杜兰人名叫希拉的家里去。
Now at that time, Judah went away from his brothers and became the friend of a man of Adullam named Hirah.

犹大在那里看见一个迦南人名叫书亚的女儿，就娶她为妻，与她同房，
And there he saw the daughter of a certain man of Canaan named Shua, and took her as his wife.

她就怀孕生了儿子，犹大给他起名叫珥。
And she gave birth to a son, and he gave him the name Er.

她又怀孕生了儿子，母亲给他起名叫俄南。
And again she gave birth to a son, and he gave him the name Onan.

她复又生了儿子，给他起名叫示拉。她生示拉的时候，犹大正在基悉。
Then she had another son, to whom she gave the name Shelah; she was at Chezib when the birth took place.

犹大为长子珥娶妻，名叫他玛。
And Judah took a wife for his first son Er, and her name was Tamar.

犹大的长子珥在耶和华眼中看为恶，耶和华就叫他死了。
Now Er, Judah's first son, did evil in the eyes of the Lord, so that he put him to death.

犹大对俄南说，你当与你哥哥的妻子同房，向她尽你为弟的本分，为你哥哥生子立后。
Then Judah said to Onan, Go in to your brother's wife and do what it is right for a husband's brother to do; make her your wife and get offspring for your brother.

俄南知道生子不归自己，所以同房的时候便遗在地，免得给他哥哥留后。
But Onan, seeing that the offspring would not be his, went in to his brother's wife, but let his seed go on to the earth, so that he might not get offspring for his brother.

俄南所作的在耶和华眼中看为恶，耶和华也就叫他死了。
And what he did was evil in the eyes of the Lord, so that he put him to death, like his brother.

犹大心里说，恐怕示拉也死，像他两个哥哥一样，就对他儿妇他玛说，你去，在你父亲家里守寡，等我儿子示拉长大。他玛就回去，住在她父亲家里。
Then Judah said to Tamar, his daughter-in-law, Go back to your father's house and keep yourself as a widow till my son Shelah becomes a man: for he had in his mind the thought that death might come to him as it had come to his brothers. So Tamar went back to her father's house.

过了许久，犹大的妻子书亚的女儿死了。犹大得了安慰，就和他朋友亚杜兰人希拉上亭拿去，到他剪羊毛的人那里。
And after a time, Bath-shua, Judah's wife, came to her end; and after Judah was comforted for her loss, he went to Timnah, where they were cutting the wool of his sheep, and his friend Hirah of Adullam went with him.

有人告诉他玛说，你的公公上亭拿剪羊毛去了。
And when Tamar had news that her father-in-law was going up to Timnah to the wool-cutting,

他玛见示拉已经长大，还没有娶她为妻，就脱了她作寡妇的衣裳，用帕子蒙着脸，又遮住身体，坐在亭拿路上的伊拿印城门口。
She took off her widow's clothing, and covering herself with her veil, she took her seat near Enaim on the road to Timnah; for she saw that Shelah was now a man, but she had not been made his wife.

犹大看见她，以为是妓女，因为她蒙着脸。
When Judah saw her he took her to be a loose woman of the town, because her face was covered.

犹大就转到她那里去，说，来吧。让我与你同寝。他原不知道是他的儿妇。他玛说，你要与我同寝，把什么给我呢？
And turning to her by the roadside, he said to her, Let me come in to you; for he had no idea that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What will you give me as my price?

犹大说，我从羊群里取一只山羊羔，打发人送来给你。他玛说，在未送以先，你愿意给我一个当头吗？
And he said, I will give you a young goat from the flock. And she said, What will you give me as a sign till you send it?

他说，我给你什么当头呢？他玛说，你的印，你的带子，和你手里的杖。犹大就给了她，与她同寝，她就从犹大怀了孕。
And he said, What would you have? And she said, Your ring and its cord and the stick in your hand. So he gave them to her and went in to her, and she became with child by him.

他玛起来走了，除去帕子，仍旧穿上作寡妇的衣裳。
Then she got up and went away and took off her veil and put on her widow's clothing.

犹大托他朋友亚杜兰人送一只山羊羔去，要从那女人手里取回当头来，却找不着她。
Then Judah sent his friend Hirah with the young goat, to get back the things which he had given as a sign to the woman: but she was not there.

就问那地方的人说，伊拿印路旁的妓女在哪里，他们说，这里并没有妓女。
And he put questions to the men of the place, saying, Where is the loose woman who was in Enaim by the wayside? And they said, There was no such woman there.

他回去见犹大说，我没有找着她，并且那地方的人说，这里没有妓女。
So he went back to Judah, and said, I have not seen her, and the men of the place say that there is no such woman there.

犹大说，我把这山羊羔送去了，你竟找不着她。任凭她拿去吧，免得我们被羞辱。
And Judah said, Let her keep the things, so that we may not be shamed; I sent the young goat, but you did not see the woman.

约过了三个月，有人告诉犹大说，你的儿妇他玛作了妓女，且因行淫有了身孕。犹大说，拉出她来，把她烧了。
Now about three months after this, word came to Judah that Tamar, his daughter-in-law, had been acting like a loose woman and was with child. And Judah said, Take her out and let her be burned.

他玛被拉出来的时候便打发人去见她公公，对他说，这些东西是谁的，我就是从谁怀的孕。请你认一认，这印和带子并杖都是谁的，
And while she was being taken out, she sent word to her father-in-law, saying, The man whose property these things are, is the father of my child: say then, whose are this ring and this cord and this stick?

犹大承认说，她比我更有义，因为我没有将她给我的儿子示拉。从此犹大不再与她同寝了。
Then Judah said openly that they were his, and said, She is more upright than I am, for I did not give her to Shelah my son. And he had no more connection with her.

他玛将要生产，不料她腹里是一对双生。
And when the time came for her to give birth, it was clear that there were two children in her body.

到生产的时候，一个孩子伸出一只手来。收生婆拿红线拴在他手上，说，这是头生的。
And while she was in the act of giving birth, one of them put out his hand; and the woman who was with her put a red thread round his hand, saying, This one came out first.

随后这孩子把手收回去，他哥哥生出来了。收生婆说，你为什么抢着来呢？因此给他起名叫法勒斯。
But then he took his hand back again, and his brother came first to birth: and the woman said, What an opening you have made for yourself! So he was named Perez.

后来，他兄弟那手上有红线的也生出来，就给他起名叫谢拉。
And then his brother came out, with the red thread round his hand, and he was named Zerah.

约瑟被带下埃及去。有一个埃及人，是法老的内臣，护卫长波提乏，从那些带下他来的以实玛利人手下买了他去。
Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt; and Potiphar the Egyptian, a captain of high position in Pharaoh's house, got him for a price from the Ishmaelites who had taken him there.

约瑟住在他主人埃及人的家中，耶和华与他同在，他就百事顺利。
And the Lord was with Joseph, and he did well; and he was living in the house of his master the Egyptian.

他主人见耶和华与他同在，又见耶和华使他手里所办的尽都顺利，
And his master saw that the Lord was with him, making everything he did go well.

约瑟就在主人眼前蒙恩，伺候他主人，并且主人派他管理家务，把一切所有的都交在他手里。
And having a high opinion of Joseph as his servant, he made him the overseer of his house and gave him control over all he had.

自从主人派约瑟管理家务和他一切所有的，耶和华就因约瑟的缘故赐福与那埃及人的家。凡家里和田间一切所有的都蒙耶和华赐福。
And from the time when he made him overseer and gave him control of all his property, the blessing of the Lord was with the Egyptian, because of Joseph; the blessing of the Lord was on all he had, in the house and in the field.

波提乏将一切所有的都交在约瑟的手中，除了自己所吃的饭，别的事一概不知。约瑟原来秀雅俊美。
And he gave Joseph control of all his property, keeping no account of anything, but only the food which was put before him. Now Joseph was very beautiful in form and face.

这事以后，约瑟主人的妻以目送情给约瑟，说，你与我同寝吧。
And after a time, his master's wife, looking on Joseph with desire, said to him, Be my lover.

约瑟不从，对他主人的妻说，看哪，一切家务，我主人都不知道。他把所有的都交在我手里。
But he would not, and said to her, You see that my master keeps no account of what I do in his house, and has put all his property in my control;

在这家里没有比我大的。并且他没有留下一样不交给我，只留下了你，因为你是他的妻子。我怎能作这大恶，得罪神呢？
So that no one has more authority in this house than I have; he has kept nothing back from me but you, because you are his wife; how then may I do this great wrong, sinning against God?

后来她天天和约瑟说，约瑟却不听从她，不与她同寝，也不和她在一处。
And day after day she went on requesting Joseph to come to her and be her lover, but he would not give ear to her.

有一天，约瑟进屋里去办事，家中人没有一个在那屋里，
Now one day he went into the house to do his work; and not one of the men of the house was inside.

妇人就拉住他的衣裳，说，你与我同寝吧。约瑟把衣裳丢在妇人手里，跑到外边去了。
And pulling at his coat, she said, Come to my bed; but slipping out of his coat, he went running away.

妇人看见约瑟把衣裳丢在她手里跑出去了，
And when she saw that he had got away, letting her keep his coat,

就叫了家里的人来，对他们说，你们看。他带了一个希伯来人进入我们家里，要戏弄我们。他到我这里来，要与我同寝，我就大声喊叫。
She sent for the men of her house and said to them, See, he has let a Hebrew come here and make sport of us; he came to my bed, and I gave a loud cry;

他听见我放声喊起来，就把衣裳丢在我这里，跑到外边去了。
And hearing it he went running out without his coat.

妇人把约瑟的衣裳放在自己那里，等着他主人回家，
And she kept his coat by her, till his master came back.

就对他如此如此说，你所带到我们这里的那希伯来仆人进来要戏弄我，
Then she gave him the same story, saying, The Hebrew servant whom you have taken into our house came in to make sport of me;

我放声喊起来，他就把衣裳丢在我这里，跑出去了。
And when I gave a loud cry he went running out without his coat.

约瑟的主人听见他妻子对他所说的话，说，你的仆人如此如此待我，他就生气，
And hearing his wife's account of what his servant had done, he became very angry.

把约瑟下在监里，就是王的囚犯被囚的地方。于是约瑟在那里坐监。
And Joseph's master took him and put him in prison, in the place where the king's prisoners were kept in chains, and he was there in the prison-house.

但耶和华与约瑟同在，向他施恩，使他在司狱的眼前蒙恩。
But the Lord was with Joseph, and was good to him, and made the keeper of the prison his friend.

司狱就把监里所有的囚犯都交在约瑟手下。他们在那里所办的事都是经他的手。
And the keeper of the prison put all the prisoners under Joseph's control, and he was responsible for whatever was done there.

凡在约瑟手下的事，司狱一概不察，因为耶和华与约瑟同在。耶和华使他所作的尽都顺利。
And the keeper of the prison gave no attention to anything which was under his care, because the Lord was with him; and the Lord made everything he did go well.

这事以后，埃及王的酒政和膳长得罪了他们的主埃及王，
Now after these things the chief servant who had the care of the wine, and the chief bread-maker in Pharaoh's house, did something against Pharaoh's orders;

法老就恼怒酒政和膳长这二臣，
And Pharaoh was angry with his two servants, with the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker;

把他们下在护卫长府内的监里，就是约瑟被囚的地方。
And he put them in prison under the care of the captain of the army, in the same prison where Joseph himself was shut up.

护卫长把他们交给约瑟，约瑟便伺候他们。他们有些日子在监里。
And the captain put them in Joseph's care, and he did what was needed for them; and they were kept in prison for some time.

被囚在监之埃及王的酒政和膳长二人同夜各作一梦，各梦都有讲解。
And these two had a dream on the same night; the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker of the king of Egypt, who were in prison, the two of them had dreams with a special sense.

到了早晨，约瑟进到他们那里，见他们有愁闷的样子。
And in the morning when Joseph came to them he saw that they were looking sad.

他便问法老的二臣，就是与他同囚在他主人府里的，说，他们今日为什么面带愁容呢？
And he said to the servants of Pharaoh who were in prison with him, Why are you looking so sad?

他们对他说，我们各人作了一梦，没有人能解。约瑟说，解梦不是出于神吗？请你们将梦告诉我。
Then they said to him, We have had a dream, and no one is able to give us the sense. And Joseph said, Does not the sense of dreams come from God? what was your dream?

酒政便将他的梦告诉约瑟说，我梦见在我面前有一棵葡萄树，
Then the chief wine-servant gave Joseph an account of his dream, and said, In my dream I saw a vine before me;

树上有三根枝子，好像发了芽，开了花，上头的葡萄都成熟了。
And on the vine were three branches; and it seemed as if it put out buds and flowers, and from them came grapes ready for cutting.

法老的杯在我手中，我就拿葡萄挤在法老的杯里，将杯递在他手中。
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes and crushing them into Pharaoh's cup, gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

约瑟对他说，他所作的梦是这样解，三根枝子就是三天。
Then Joseph said, This is the sense of your dream: the three branches are three days;

三天之内，法老必提你出监，叫你官复原职，你仍要递杯在法老的手中，和先前作他的酒政一样。
After three days Pharaoh will give you honour, and put you back into your place, and you will give him his cup as you did before, when you were his wine-servant.

但你得好处的时候，求你记念我，施恩与我，在法老面前提说我，救我出这监牢。
But keep me in mind when things go well for you, and be good to me and say a good word for me to Pharaoh and get me out of this prison:

我实在是从希伯来人之地被拐来的。我在这里也没有作过什么，叫他们把我下在监里。
For truly I was taken by force from the land of the Hebrews; and I have done nothing for which I might be put in prison.

膳长见梦解得好，就对约瑟说，我在梦中见我头上顶着三筐白饼。
Now when the chief bread-maker saw that the first dream had a good sense, he said to Joseph, I had a dream; and in my dream there were three baskets of white bread on my head;

极上的筐子里有为法老烤的各样食物，有飞鸟来吃我头上筐子里的食物。
And in the top basket were all sorts of cooked meats for Pharaoh; and the birds were taking them out of the baskets on my head.

约瑟说，你的梦是这样解，三个筐子就是三天。
Then Joseph said, This is the sense of your dream: the three baskets are three days;

三天之内，法老必斩断你的头，把你挂在木头上，必有飞鸟来吃你身上的肉。
After three days Pharaoh will take you out of prison, hanging you on a tree, so that your flesh will be food for birds.

到了第三天，是法老的生日，他为众臣仆设摆筵席，把酒政和膳长提出监来，
Now the third day was Pharaoh's birthday, and he gave a feast for all his servants; and he gave honour to the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker among the others.

使酒政官复原职，他仍旧递杯在法老手中。
And he put the chief wine-servant back in his old place; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

但把膳长挂起来，正如约瑟向他们所解的话。
But the chief bread-maker was put to death by hanging, as Joseph had said.

酒政却不记念约瑟，竟忘了他。
But the wine-servant did not keep Joseph in mind or give a thought to him.

过了两年，法老作梦，梦见自己站在河边，
Now after two years had gone by, Pharaoh had a dream; and in his dream he was by the side of the Nile;

有七只母牛从河里上来，又美好又肥壮，在芦荻中吃草。
And out of the Nile came seven cows, good-looking and fat, and their food was the river-grass.

随后又有七只母牛从河里上来，又丑陋又干瘦，与那七只母牛一同站在河边。
And after them seven other cows came out of the Nile, poor-looking and thin; and they were by the side of the other cows.

这又丑陋又干瘦的七只母牛吃尽了那又美好又肥壮的七只母牛。法老就醒了。
And the seven thin cows made a meal of the seven fat cows. Then Pharaoh came out of his sleep.

他又睡着，第二回作梦，梦见一棵麦子长了七个穗子，又肥大又佳美，
But he went to sleep again and had a second dream, in which he saw seven heads of grain, full and good, all on one stem.

随后又长了七个穗子，又细弱又被东风吹焦了。
And after them came up seven other heads, thin and wasted by the east wind.

这细弱的穗子吞了那七个又肥大又饱满的穗子。法老醒了，不料是个梦。
And the seven thin heads made a meal of the good heads. And when Pharaoh was awake he saw it was a dream.

到了早晨，法老心里不安，就差人召了埃及所有的术士和博士来。法老就把所作的梦告诉他们，却没有人能给法老圆解。
And in the morning his spirit was troubled; and he sent for all the wise men of Egypt and all the holy men, and put his dream before them, but no one was able to give him the sense of it.

那时酒政对法老说，我今日想起我的罪来。
Then the chief wine-servant said to Pharaoh, The memory of my sin comes back to me now;

从前法老恼怒臣仆，把我和膳长下在护卫长府布的监里。
Pharaoh had been angry with his servants, and had put me in prison in the house of the captain of the army, together with the chief bread-maker;

我们二人同夜各作一梦，各梦都有讲解。
And we had a dream on the same night, the two of us, and the dreams had a special sense.

在那里同着我们有一个希伯来的少年人，是护卫长的仆人，我们告诉他，他就把我们的梦圆解，是按着各人的梦圆解的。
And there was with us a young Hebrew, the captain's servant, and when we put our dreams before him, he gave us the sense of them.

后来正如他给我们圆解的成就了。我官复原职，膳长被挂起来了。
And it came about as he said: I was put back in my place, and the bread-maker was put to death by hanging.

法老遂即差人去召约瑟，他们便急忙带他出监，他就剃头，刮脸，换衣裳，进到法老面前。
Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph, and they took him quickly out of prison; and when his hair had been cut and his dress changed, he came before Pharaoh.

法老对约瑟说，我作了一梦，没有人能解。我听见人说，你听了梦就能解。
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have had a dream, and no one is able to give me the sense of it; now it has come to my ears that you are able to give the sense of a dream when it is put before you.

约瑟回答法老说，这不在乎我，神必将平安的话回答法老。
Then Joseph said, Without God there will be no answer of peace for Pharaoh.

法老对约瑟说，我梦见我站在河边，
Then Pharaoh said, In my dream I was by the side of the Nile:

有七只母牛从河里上来，又肥壮又美好，在芦荻中吃草。
And out of the Nile came seven cows, fat and good-looking, and their food was the river-grass;

随后又有七只母牛上来，又软弱又丑陋又干瘦，在埃及遍地，我没有见过这样不好的。
Then after them came seven other cows, very thin and poor-looking, worse than any I ever saw in the land of Egypt;

这又干瘦又丑陋的母牛吃尽了那以先的七只肥母牛，
And the thin cows made a meal of the seven fat cows who came up first;

吃了以后却看不出是吃了，那丑陋的样子仍旧和先前一样。我就醒了。
And even with the fat cows inside them they seemed as bad as before. And so I came out of my sleep.

我又梦见一棵麦子，长了七个穗子，又饱满又佳美，
And again in a dream I saw seven heads of grain, full and good, coming up on one stem:

随后又长了七个穗子，枯槁细弱，被东风吹焦了。
And then I saw seven other heads, dry, thin, and wasted by the east wind, coming up after them:

这些细弱的穗子吞了那七个佳美的穗子。我将这梦告诉了术士，却没有人能给我解说。
And the seven thin heads made a meal of the seven good heads; and I put this dream before the wise men, but not one of them was able to give me the sense of it.

约瑟对法老说，法老的梦乃是一个。神已将所要作的事指示法老了。
Then Joseph said, These two dreams have the same sense: God has made clear to Pharaoh what he is about to do.

七只好母牛是七年，七个好穗子也是七年。这梦乃是一个。
The seven fat cows are seven years, and the seven good heads of grain are seven years: the two have the same sense.

那随后上来的七只又干瘦又丑陋的母牛是七年，那七个虚空，被东风吹焦的穗子也是七年，都是七个荒年。
The seven thin and poor-looking cows who came up after them are seven years; and the seven heads of grain, dry and wasted by the east wind, are seven years when there will be no food.

这就是我对法老所说，神已将所要作的事显明给法老了。
As I said to Pharaoh before, God has made clear to him what he is about to do.

埃及遍地必来七个大丰年，
Seven years are coming in which there will be great wealth of grain in Egypt;

随后又要来七个荒年，甚至埃及地都忘了先前的丰收，全地必被饥荒所灭。
And after that will come seven years when there will not be enough food; and the memory of the good years will go from men's minds; and the land will be made waste by the bad years;

因那以后的饥荒甚大，便不觉得先前的丰收了。
And men will have no memory of the good time because of the need which will come after, for it will be very bitter.

至于法老两回作梦，是因神命定这事，而且必速速成就。
And this dream came to Pharaoh twice, because this thing is certain, and God will quickly make it come about.

所以，法老当拣选一个有聪明有智慧的人，派他治理埃及地。
And now let Pharaoh make search for a man of wisdom and good sense, and put him in authority over the land of Egypt.

法老当这样行，又派官员管理这地。当七个丰年的时候，征收埃及地的五分之一，
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him put overseers over the land of Egypt to put in store a fifth part of the produce of the land in the good years.

叫他们把将来丰年一切的粮食聚敛起来，积蓄五谷，收存在各城里作食物，归于法老的手下。
And let them get together all the food in those good years and make a store of grain under Pharaoh's control for the use of the towns, and let them keep it.

所积蓄的粮食可以防备埃及地将来的七个荒年，免得这地被饥荒所灭。
And let that food be kept in store for the land till the seven bad years which are to come in Egypt; so that the land may not come to destruction through need of food.

法老和他一切臣仆都以这事为妙。
And this seemed good to Pharaoh and to all his servants.

法老对臣仆说，像这样的人，有神的灵在他里头，我们岂能找得着呢？
Then Pharaoh said to his servants, Where may we get such a man as this, a man in whom is the spirit of God?

法老对约瑟说，神既将这事都指示你，可见没有人象你这样有聪明有智慧。
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Seeing that God has made all this clear to you, there is no other man of such wisdom and good sense as you:

你可以掌管我的家。我的民都必听从你的话。惟独在宝座上我比你大。
You, then, are to be over my house, and all my people will be ruled by your word: only as king will I be greater than you.

法老又对约瑟说，我派你治理埃及全地。
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have put you over all the land of Egypt.

法老就摘下手上打印的戒指，戴在约瑟的手上，给他穿上细麻衣，把金链戴在他的颈项上，
Then Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand and put it on Joseph's hand, and he had him clothed with the best linen, and put a chain of gold round his neck;

又叫约瑟坐他的副车，喝道的在前呼叫说，跪下。这样，法老派他治理埃及全地。
And he made him take his seat in the second of his carriages; and they went before him crying, Make way! So he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.

法老对约瑟说，我是法老，在埃及全地，若没有你的命令，不许人擅自办事（原文作动手动脚）。
Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, I am Pharaoh; and without your order no man may do anything in all the land of Egypt.

法老赐名给约瑟，叫撒发那忒巴内亚，又将安城的祭司波提非拉的女儿亚西纳给他为妻。约瑟就出去巡行埃及地。
And Pharaoh gave Joseph the name of Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera, the priest of On, to be his wife. So Joseph went through all the land of Egypt.

约瑟见埃及王法老的时候年三十岁。他从法老面前出去，遍行埃及全地。
Now Joseph was thirty years old when he came before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from before the face of Pharaoh and went through all the land of Egypt.

七个丰年之内，地的出产极丰极盛（原文作一把一把的），
Now in the seven good years the earth gave fruit in masses.

约瑟聚敛埃及地七个丰年一切的粮食，把粮食积存在各城里。各城周围田地的粮食都积存在本城里。
And Joseph got together all the food of those seven years, and made a store of food in the towns: the produce of the fields round every town was stored up in the town.

约瑟积蓄五谷甚多，如同海边的沙，无法计算，因为谷不可胜数。
So he got together a store of grain like the sand of the sea; so great a store that after a time he gave up measuring it, for it might not be measured.

荒年未到以前，安城的祭司波提非拉的女儿亚西纳给约瑟生了两个儿子。
And before the time of need, Joseph had two sons, to whom Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera, priest of On, gave birth.

约瑟给长子起名叫玛拿西（就是使之忘了的意思），因为他说，神使我忘了一切的困苦和我父的全家。
And to the first he gave the name Manasseh, for he said, God has taken away from me all memory of my hard life and of my father's house.

他给次子起名叫以法莲（就是使之昌盛的意思），因为他说，神使我在受苦的地方昌盛。
And to the second he gave the name Ephraim, for he said, God has given me fruit in the land of my sorrow.

埃及地的七个丰年一完，
And so the seven good years in Egypt came to an end.

七个荒年就来了。正如约瑟所说的，各地都有饥荒。惟独埃及全地有粮食。
Then came the first of the seven years of need as Joseph had said: and in every other land they were short of food; but in the land of Egypt there was bread.

及至埃及全地有了饥荒，众民向法老哀求粮食，法老对他们说，你们往约瑟那里去，凡他所说的，你们都要作。
And when all the land of Egypt was in need of food, the people came crying to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh said to the people, Go to Joseph, and whatever he says to you, do it.

当时饥荒遍满天下，约瑟开了各处的仓，粜粮给埃及人。在埃及地饥荒甚大。
And everywhere on the earth they were short of food; then Joseph, opening all his store-houses, gave the people of Egypt grain for money; so great was the need of food in the land of Egypt.

各地的人都往埃及去，到约瑟那里籴粮，因为天下的饥荒甚大。
And all lands sent to Egypt, to Joseph, to get grain, for the need was great over all the earth.

雅各见埃及有粮，就对儿子们说，你们为什么彼此观望呢？
Now Jacob, hearing that there was grain in Egypt, said to his sons, Why are you looking at one another?

我听见埃及有粮，你们可以下去，从那里为我们籴些来，使我们可以存活，不至于死。
And he said, I have had news that there is grain in Egypt: go down there and get grain for us, so that life and not death may be ours.

于是，约瑟的十个哥哥都下埃及籴粮去了。
So Joseph's ten brothers went down to get grain from Egypt.

但约瑟的兄弟便雅悯，雅各没有打发他和哥哥们同去，因为雅各说，恐怕他遭害。
But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, with them, for fear, as he said, that some evil might come to him.

来籴粮的人中有以色列的儿子们，因为迦南地也有饥荒。
And the sons of Israel came with all the others to get grain: for they were very short of food in the land of Canaan.

当时治理埃及地的是约瑟。粜粮给那地众民的就是他。约瑟的哥哥们来了，脸伏于地，向他下拜。
Now Joseph was ruler over all the land, and it was he who gave out the grain to all the people of the land; and Joseph's brothers came before him and went down on their faces to the earth.

约瑟看见他哥哥们，就认得他们，却装作生人，向他们说些严厉话，问他们说，你们从哪里来。他们说，我们从迦南地来籴粮。
And when Joseph saw his brothers, it was clear to him who they were, but he made himself strange to them, and talking roughly to them, said, Where do you come from? And they said, From the land of Canaan, to get food.

约瑟认得他哥哥们，他们却不认得他。
Now though Joseph saw that these were his brothers, they had no idea who he was.

约瑟想起从前所作的那两个梦，就对他们说，你们是奸细，来窥探这地的虚实。
Then the memory of his dreams about them came back to Joseph, and he said to them, You have come secretly to see how poor the land is.

他们对他说，我主阿，不是的。仆人们是籴粮来的。
And they said to him, Not so, my lord: your servants have come with money to get food.

我们都是一个人的儿子，是诚实人。仆人们并不是奸细。
We are all one man's sons, we are true men; we have not come with any secret purpose.

约瑟说，不然，你们必是窥探这地的虚实来的。
And he said to them, No, but you have come to see how poor the land is.

他们说，仆人们本是弟兄十二人，是迦南地一个人的儿子，顶小的现今在我们的父亲那里，有一个没有了。
Then they said, We your servants are twelve brothers, sons of one man in the land of Canaan; the youngest of us is now with our father, and one is dead.

约瑟说，我才说你们是奸细，这话实在不错。
And Joseph said, It is as I said; you have come with some secret purpose;

我指着法老的性命起誓，若是你们的小兄弟不到这里来，你们就不得出这地方，从此就可以把你们证验出来了。
But in this way will you be put to the test: by the life of Pharaoh, you will not go away from this place till your youngest brother comes here.

须要打发你们中间一个人去，把你们的兄弟带来。至于你们，都要囚在这里，好证验你们的话真不真，若不真，我指着法老的性命起誓，你们一定是奸细。
Send one of your number to get your brother, and the rest of you will be kept in prison, so that your words may be tested to see if you are true; if not, by the life of Pharaoh, your purpose is certainly secret.

于是约瑟把他们都下在监里三天。
So he put them in prison for three days.

到了第三天，约瑟对他们说，我是敬畏神的。你们照我的话行就可以存活。
And on the third day Joseph said to them, Do this, if you would keep your lives: for I am a god-fearing man:

你们如果是诚实人，可以留你们中间的一个人囚在监里，但你们可以带着粮食回去，救你们家里的饥荒。
If you are true men, let one of you be kept in prison, while you go and take grain for the needs of your families;

把你们的小兄弟带到我这里来，如此，你们的话便有证据，你们也不至于死。他们就照样而行。
And come back to me with your youngest brother, so that your words may be seen to be true, and you will not be put to death. This is what you are to do.

他们彼此说，我们在兄弟身上实在有罪。他哀求我们的时候，我们见他心里的愁苦，却不肯听，所以这场苦难临到我们身上。
And they said to one another, Truly, we did wrong to our brother, for we saw his grief of mind, and we did not give ear to his prayers; that is why this trouble has come on us.

流便说，我岂不是对你们说过，不可伤害那孩子吗？只是你们不肯听，所以流他血的罪向我们追讨。
And Reuben said to them, Did I not say to you, Do the child no wrong? but you gave no attention; so now, punishment has come on us for his blood.

他们不知道约瑟听得出来，因为在他们中间用通事传话。
They were not conscious that the sense of their words was clear to Joseph, for he had been talking to them through one who had knowledge of their language.

约瑟转身退去，哭了一场，又回来对他们说话，就从他们中间挑出西缅来，在他们眼前把他捆绑。
And turning away from them, he was overcome with weeping; then he went on talking to them again and took Simeon and put chains on him before their eyes.

约瑟吩咐人把粮食装满他们的器具，把各人的银子归还在各人的口袋里，又给他们路上用的食物，人就照他的话办了。
Then Joseph gave orders for their bags to be made full of grain, and for every man's money to be put back into his bag, and for food to be given them for the journey: which was done.

他们就把粮食驮在驴上，离开那里去了。
Then they put the bags of grain on their asses and went away.

到了住宿的地方，他们中间有一个人打开口袋，要拿料喂驴，才看见自己的银子仍在口袋里，
Now at their night's resting-place one of them, opening his bag to give his ass some food, saw his money in the mouth of the bag.

就对弟兄们说，我的银子归还了，看哪，仍在我口袋里。他们就提心吊胆，战战兢兢地彼此说，这是神向我们作什么呢？
And he said to his brothers, My money has been given back: it is in my bag; then their hearts became full of fear, and turning to one another they said, What is this which God has done to us?

他们来到迦南地，他们的父亲雅各那里，将所遭遇的事都告诉他，说，
So when they came to Jacob their father, in the land of Canaan, they gave him an account of all their experiences, saying,

那地的主对我们说严厉的话，把我们当作窥探那地的奸细。
The man who is the ruler of the country was rough with us and put us in prison, saying that we had come with a secret evil purpose.

我们对他说，我们是诚实人，并不是奸细。
And we said to him, We are true men, we have no evil designs;

我们本是弟兄十二人，都是一个父亲的儿子，有一个没有了，顶小的如今同我们的父亲在迦南地。
We are twelve brothers, sons of our father; one is dead, and the youngest is now with our father in the land of Canaan.

那地的主对我们说，若要我知道你们是诚实人，可以留下你们中间的一个人在我这里，你们可以带着粮食回去，救你们家里的饥荒。
And the ruler of the land said, In this way I may be certain that you are true men; let one of you be kept here with me, while you go and take grain for the needs of your families;

把你们的小兄弟带到我这里来，我便知道你们不是奸细，乃是诚实人。这样，我就把你们的弟兄交给你们，你们也可以在这地作买卖。
And come back to me with your youngest brother: then I will be certain that you are true men, and I will give your brother back to you and let you do trade in the land.

后来他们倒口袋，不料，各人的银包都在口袋里。他们和父亲看见银包就都害怕。
And when they took the grain out of their bags, it was seen that every man's parcel of money was in his bag; and when they and their father saw the money, they were full of fear.

他们的父亲雅各对他们说，你们使我丧失我的儿子，约瑟没有了，西缅也没有了，你们又要将便雅悯带去。这些事都归到我身上了。
And Jacob their father said to them, You have taken my children from me: Joseph is gone and Simeon is gone, and now you would take Benjamin away; all these things have come on me.

流便对他父亲说，我若不带他回来交给你，你可以杀我的两个儿子。只管把他交在我手里，我必带他回来交给你。
And Reuben said, Put my two sons to death if I do not come back to you with him; let him be in my care and I will give him safely back to you.

雅各说，我的儿子不可与你们一同下去。他哥哥死了，只剩下他，他若在你们所行的路上遭害，那便是你们使我白发苍苍，悲悲惨惨地下阴间去了。
And he said, I will not let my son go down with you; for his brother is dead and he is all I have: if evil overtakes him on the journey, then through you will my grey head go down to the underworld in sorrow.

那地的饥荒甚大。
Now the land was in bitter need of food.

他们从埃及带来的粮食吃尽了，他们的父亲就对他们说，你们再去给我籴些粮来。
And when the grain which they had got in Egypt was all used up, their father said to them, Go again and get us a little food.

犹大对他说，那人谆谆地告诫我们说，你们的兄弟若不与你们同来，你们就不得见我的面。
And Judah said to him, The man said to us with an oath, You are not to come before me again without your brother.

你若打发我们的兄弟与我们同去，我们就下去给你籴粮。
If you will let our brother go with us, we will go down and get food:

你若不打发他去，我们就不下去，因为那人对我们说，你们的兄弟若不与你们同来，你们就不得见我的面。
But if you will not send him, we will not go down: for the man said to us, You are not to come before me if your brother is not with you.

以色列说，你们为什么这样害我，告诉那人你们还有兄弟呢？
And Israel said, Why were you so cruel to me as to say to him that you had a brother?

他们回答说，那人详细问到我们和我们的亲属，说，你们的父亲还在吗？你们还有兄弟吗？我们就按着他所问的告诉他，焉能知道他要说，必须把你们的兄弟带下来呢？
And they said, The man put a number of questions to us about ourselves and our family, saying, Is your father still living? have you another brother? And we had to give him answers; how were we to have any idea that he would say, Come back with your brother?

犹大又对他父亲以色列说，你打发童子与我同去，我们就起身下去，好叫我们和你，并我们的妇人孩子，都得存活，不至于死。
Then Judah said to Israel, his father, Send the boy with me, and let us be up and going, so that we and you and our little ones may not come to destruction.

我为他作保。你可以从我手中追讨，我若不带他回来交在你面前，我情愿永远担罪。
Put him into my care and make me responsible for him: if I do not give him safely back to you, let mine be the sin for ever.

我们若没有耽搁，如今第二次都回来了。
Truly, if we had not let the time go by, we might have come back again by now.

他们的父亲以色列说，若必须如此，你们就当这样行，可以将这地土产中最好的乳香，蜂蜜，香料，没药，榧子，杏仁都取一点，收在器具里，带下去送给那人作礼物，
Then their father Israel said to them, If it has to be so, then do this: take of the best fruits of the land in your vessels to give the man, perfumes and honey and spices and nuts:

又要手里加倍地带银子，并将归还在你们口袋内的银子仍带在手里。那或者是错了。
And take twice as much money with you; that is to say, take back the money which was put in your bags, for it may have been an error;

也带着你们的兄弟，起身去见那人。
And take your brother and go back to the man:

但愿全能的神使你们在那人面前蒙怜悯，释放你们的那弟兄和便雅悯回来。我若丧了儿子，就丧了吧。
And may God, the Ruler of all, give you mercy before the man, so that he may give you back your other brother and Benjamin. If my children are to be taken from me; there is no help for it.

于是，他们拿着那礼物，又手里加倍地带银子，并且带着便雅悯，起身下到埃及，站在约瑟面前。
So they took what their father said for the man, and twice as much money in their hands, and Benjamin, and went on their journey to Egypt, and came before Joseph.

约瑟见便雅悯和他们同来，就对家宰说，将这些人领到屋里。要宰杀牲畜，预备筵席，因为晌午这些人同我吃饭。
And when Joseph saw Benjamin, he said to his chief servant, Take these men into my house, and make ready a meal, for they will take food with me in the middle of the day.

家宰就遵着约瑟的命去行，领他们进约瑟的屋里。
And the servant did as Joseph said, and took the men into Joseph's house.

他们因为被领到约瑟的屋里，就害怕，说，领我们到这里来，必是因为头次归还在我们口袋里的银子，找我们的错缝，下手害我们，强取我们为奴仆，抢夺我们的驴。
Now the men were full of fear because they had been taken into Joseph's house and they said, It is because of the money which was put back in our bags the first time; he is looking for something against us, so that he may come down on us and take us and our asses for his use.

他们就挨进约瑟的家宰，在屋门口和他说话，
So they went up to Joseph's chief servant at the door of the house,

说，我主阿，我们头次下来实在是要籴粮。
And said, O my lord, we only came down the first time to get food;

后来到了住宿的地方，我们打开口袋，不料，各人的银子，分量足数，仍在各人的口袋内，现在我们手里又带回来了。
And when we came to our night's resting-place, on opening our bags we saw that every man's money was in the mouth of his bag, all our money in full weight: and we have it with us to give it back;

另外又带下银子来籴粮。不知道先前谁把银子放在我们的口袋里。
As well as more money, with which to get food: we have no idea who put our money in our bags.

家宰说，你们可以放心，不要害怕，是你们的神和你们父亲的神赐给你们财宝在你们的口袋里。你们的银子，我早已收了。他就把西缅带出来，交给他们。
Then the servant said, Peace be with you: have no fear: your God, even the God of your father, has put wealth in your bags for you: I had your money. Then he let Simeon come out to them.

家宰就领他们进约瑟的屋里，给他们水洗脚，又给他们草料喂驴。
And the servant took them into Joseph's house, and gave them water for washing their feet; and he gave their asses food.

他们就预备那礼物，等候约瑟晌午来，因为他们听见要在那里吃饭。
And they got ready the things for Joseph before he came in the middle of the day: for word was given to them that they were to have a meal there.

约瑟来到家里，他们就把手中的礼物拿进屋去给他，又俯伏在地，向他下拜。
And when Joseph came in, they gave him the things which they had for him, and went down to the earth before him.

约瑟问他们好，又问，你们的父亲就是你们所说的那老人家平安吗？他还在吗？
And he said, How are you? is your father well, the old man of whom you were talking to me? is he still living?

他们回答说，你仆人我们的父亲平安。他还在。于是他们低头下拜。
And they said, Your servant, our father, is well, he is still living. And they went down on their faces before him.

约瑟举目看见他同母的兄弟便雅悯，就说，你们向我所说那顶小的兄弟就是这位吗？又说，小儿阿，愿神赐恩给你。
Then, lifting up his eyes, he saw Benjamin, his brother, his mother's son, and he said, Is this your youngest brother of whom you gave me word? And he said, God be good to you, my son.

约瑟爱弟之情发动，就急忙寻找可哭之地，进入自己的屋里，哭了一场。
Then Joseph's heart went out to his brother, and he went quickly into his room, for he was overcome with weeping.

他洗了脸出来，勉强隐忍，吩咐人摆饭。
Then, after washing his face, he came out, and controlling his feelings said, Put food before us.

他们就为约瑟单摆了一席，为那些人又摆了一席，也为和约瑟同吃饭的埃及人另摆了一席，因为埃及人不可和希伯来人一同吃饭。那原是埃及人所厌恶的。
And they put a meal ready for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians who were with him by themselves; because the Egyptians may not take food with the Hebrews, for that would make them unclean.

约瑟使众弟兄在他面前排列坐席，都按着长幼的次序，众弟兄就彼此诧异。
And they were all given their seats before him in order of birth, from the oldest to the youngest: so that they were looking at one another in wonder.

约瑟把他面前的食物分出来，送给他们。但便雅悯所得的比别人多五倍。他们就饮酒，和约瑟一同宴乐。
And Joseph sent food to them from his table, but he sent five times as much to Benjamin as to any of the others. And they took wine freely with him.

约瑟吩咐家宰说，把粮食装满这些人的口袋，尽着他们的驴所能驮的，又把各人的银子放在各人的口袋里，
Then he gave orders to the servant who was over his house, saying, Put as much food into the men's bags as will go into them, and put every man's money in the mouth of his bag;

并将我的银杯和那少年人籴粮的银子一同装在他的口袋里。家宰就照约瑟所说的话行了。
And put my cup, my silver cup, in the youngest one's bag, with his money. So he did as Joseph said.

天一亮就打发那些人带着驴走了。
And at dawn the men, with their asses, were sent away.

他们出城走了不远，约瑟对家宰说，起来，追那些人去，追上了就对他们说，你们为什么以恶报善呢？
And when they had gone only a little way out of the town, Joseph said to the servant who was over his house, Go after them; and when you overtake them, say to them, Why have you done evil in reward for good?

这不是我主人饮酒的杯吗？岂不是他占卜用的吗？你们这样行是作恶了。
Is not this the cup from which my lord takes wine and by which he gets knowledge of the future? Truly, you have done evil.

家宰追上他们，将这些话对他们说了。
So he overtook them and said these words to them.

他们回答说，我主为什么说这样的话呢？你仆人断不能作这样的事。
And they said to him, Why does my lord say such words as these? far be it from your servants to do such a thing:

你看，我们从前在口袋里所见的银子，尚且从迦南地带来还你，我们怎能从你主人家里偷窃金银呢？
See, the money which was in the mouth of our bags we gave back to you when we came again from Canaan: how then might we take silver or gold from your lord's house?

你仆人中无论在谁那里搜出来，就叫他死，我们也作我主的奴仆。
If it comes to light that any of your servants has done this, let him be put to death, and we will be your lord's servants.

家宰说，现在就照你们的话行吧。在谁那里搜出来，谁就作我的奴仆。其余的都没有罪。
And he said, Let it be as you say: he in whose bag it is seen will become my servant; and you will not be responsible.

于是他们各人急忙把口袋卸在地下，各人打开口袋。
Then every man quickly got his bag down and undid it.

家宰就搜查，从年长的起到年幼的为止，那杯竟在便雅悯的口袋里搜出来。
And he made a search, starting with the oldest and ending with the youngest; and the cup was in Benjamin's bag.

他们就撕裂衣服，各人把驮子抬在驴上，回城去了。
Then in bitter grief they put the bags on the asses again and went back to the town.

犹大和他弟兄们来到约瑟的屋中，约瑟还在那里，他们就在他面前俯伏于地。
So Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house; and he was still there: and they went down on their faces before him.

约瑟对他们说，你们作的是什么事呢？你们岂不知像我这样的人必能占卜吗？
And Joseph said, What is this thing which you have done? had you no thought that such a man as I would have power to see what is secret?

犹大说，我们对我主说什么呢？还有什么话可说呢？我们怎能自己表白出来呢？神已经查出仆人的罪孽了。我们与那在他手中搜出杯来的都是我主的奴仆。
And Judah said, What are we to say to my lord? how may we put ourselves right in his eyes? God has made clear the sin of your servants: now we are in your hands, we and the man in whose bag your cup was seen.

约瑟说，我断不能这样行。在谁的手中搜出杯来，谁就作我的奴仆。至于你们，可以平平安安地上你们父亲那里去。
Then he said, Far be it from me to do so: but the man who had my cup will be my servant; and you may go back to your father in peace.

犹大挨近他，说，我主阿，求你容仆人说一句话给我主听，不要向仆人发烈怒，因为你如同法老一样。
Then Judah came near him, and said, Let your servant say a word in my lord's ears, and let not your wrath be burning against your servant: for you are in the place of Pharaoh to us.

我主曾问仆人们说，你们有父亲有兄弟没有。
My lord said to his servants, Have you a father or a brother?

我们对我主说，我们有父亲，已经年老，还有他老年所生的一个小孩子。他哥哥死了，他母亲只撇下他一人，他父亲疼爱他。
And we said to my lord, We have an old father and a young child, whom he had when he was old; his brother is dead and he is the only son of his mother, and is very dear to his father.

你对仆人说，把他带到我这里来，叫我亲眼看看他。
And you said to your servants, Let him come down to me with you, so that I may see him.

我们对我主说，童子不能离开他父亲，若是离开，他父亲必死。
And we said to my lord, His father will not let him go; for if he went away his father would come to his death.

你对仆人说，你们的小兄弟若不与你们一同下来，你们就不得再见我的面。
But you said to your servants, If your youngest brother does not come with you, you will not see my face again.

我们上到你仆人我们父亲那里，就把我主的话告诉了他。
And when we went back to your servant, our father, we gave him an account of my lord's words.

我们的父亲说，你们再去给我籴些粮来。
And our father said, Go again and get us a little food.

我们就说，我们不能下去。我们的小兄弟若和我们同往，我们就可以下去。因为，小兄弟若不与我们同往，我们必不得见那人的面。
And we said, Only if our youngest brother goes with us will we go down; for we may not see the man's face again if our youngest brother is not with us.

你仆人我父亲对我们说，你们知道我的妻子给我生了两个儿子。
And our father said to us, You have knowledge that my wife gave me two sons;

一个离开我出去了。我说他必是被撕碎了，直到如今我也没有见他。
The one went away from me, and I said, Truly he has come to a violent death; and from that time I have not seen him,

现在你们又要把这个带去离开我，倘若他遭害，那便是你们使我白发苍苍，悲悲惨惨地下阴间去了。
If now you take this one from me, and some evil comes to him, you will make my grey head go down in sorrow to the underworld.

我父亲的命与这童子的命相连。如今我回到你仆人我父亲那里，若没有童子与我们同在，
If then I go back to your servant, my father, without the boy, because his life and the boy's life are one,

我们的父亲见没有童子，他就必死。这便是我们使你仆人我们的父亲白发苍苍，悲悲惨惨地下阴间去了。
When he sees that the boy is not with us, he will come to his death, and our father's grey head will go down in sorrow to the underworld.

因为仆人曾向我父亲为这童子作保，说，我若不带他回来交给父亲，我便在父亲面前永远担罪。
For I made myself responsible for the boy to my father, saying, If I do not give him safely back to you, let mine be the sin for ever.

现在求你容仆人住下，替这童子作我主的奴仆，叫童子和他哥哥们一同上去。
So now let me be my lord's servant here in place of the boy, and let him go back with his brothers.

若童子不和我同去，我怎能上去见我父亲呢？恐怕我看见灾祸临到我父亲身上。
For how may I go back to my father without the boy, and see the evil which will come on my father?

约瑟在左右站着的人面前情不自禁，吩咐一声说，人都要离开我出去。约瑟和弟兄相认的时候并没有一人站在他面前。
Then Joseph, unable to keep back his feelings before those who were with him, gave orders for everyone to be sent away, and no one was present when he made clear to his brothers who he was.

他就放声大哭，埃及人和法老家中的人都听见了。
And so loud was his weeping, that it came to the ears of the Egyptians and all Pharaoh's house.

约瑟对他弟兄们说，我是约瑟。我的父亲还在吗？他弟兄不能回答，因为在他面前都惊惶。
And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph: is my father still living? But his brothers were not able to give him an answer for they were troubled before him.

约瑟又对他弟兄们说，请你们近前来。他们就近前来。他说，我是你们的兄弟约瑟，就是你们所卖到埃及的。
Then Joseph said to his brothers, Come near to me. And they came near, And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom you sent into Egypt.

现在，不要因为把我卖到这里自忧自恨。这是神差我在你们以先来，为要保全生命。
Now do not be troubled or angry with yourselves for sending me away, because God sent me before you to be the saviour of your lives.

现在这地的饥荒已经二年了，还有五年不能耕种，不能收成。
For these two years have been years of need, and there are still five more years to come in which there will be no ploughing or cutting of grain.

神差我在你们以先来，为要给你们存留余种在世上，又要大施拯救，保全你们的生命。
God sent me before you to keep you and yours living on earth so that you might become a great nation.

这样看来，差我到这里来的不是你们，乃是神。他又使我如法老的父，作他全家的主，并埃及全地的宰相。
So now it was not you who sent me here, but God: and he has made me as a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.

你们要赶紧上到我父亲那里。对他说，你儿子约瑟这样说，神使我作全埃及的主，请你下到我这里来，不要耽延。
Now go quickly to my father, and say to him, Your son Joseph says, God has made me ruler over all the land of Egypt: come down to me straight away:

你和你我儿子孙子，连牛群羊群，并一切所有的，都可以住在歌珊地，与我相近。
The land of Goshen will be your living-place, and you will be near me; you and your children and your children's children, and your flocks and herds and all you have:

我要在那里奉养你。因为还有五年的饥荒，免得你和你的眷属，并一切所有的，都败落了。
And there I will take care of you, so that you and your family may not be in need, for there are still five bad years to come.

况且你们的眼和我兄弟便雅悯的眼都看见是我亲口对你们说话。
Now truly, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin see, that it is my mouth which says these things to you.

你们也要将我在埃及一切的荣耀和你们所看见的事都告诉我父亲，又要赶紧地将我父亲搬到我这里来。
Give my father word of all my glory in Egypt and of all you have seen; and come back quickly with my father.

于是约瑟伏在他兄弟便雅悯的颈项上哭，便雅悯也在他的颈项上哭。
Then, weeping, he took Benjamin in his arms, and Benjamin himself was weeping on Joseph's neck.

他又与众弟兄亲嘴，抱着他们哭，随后他弟兄就和他说话。
Then he gave a kiss to all his brothers, weeping over them; and after that his brothers had no fear of talking to him.

这风声传到法老的宫里，说，约瑟的弟兄们来了。法老和他的臣仆都很喜欢。
And news of these things went through Pharaoh's house, and it was said that Joseph's brothers were come; and it seemed good to Pharaoh and his servants.

法老对约瑟说，你吩咐你的弟兄们说，你们要这样行，把驮子抬在牲口上，起身往迦南地去。
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Say to your brothers, Put your goods on your beasts and go back to the land of Canaan;

将你们的父亲和你们的眷属都搬到我这里来，我要把埃及地的美物赐给你们，你们也要吃这地肥美的出产。
And get your father and your families and come back to me: and I will give you all the good things of Egypt, and the fat of the land will be your food.

现在我吩咐你们要这样行，从埃及地带着车辆去，把你们的孩子和妻子，并你们的父亲都搬来。
And say to them, This you are to do: take carts from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your wives, and get your father and come back.

你们眼中不要爱惜你们的家具，因为埃及全地的美物都是你们的。
And take no thought for your goods, for the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.

以色列的儿子们就如此行。约瑟照着法老的吩咐给他们车辆和路上用的食物，
And the children of Israel did as he said; and Joseph gave them carts as had been ordered by Pharaoh, and food for their journey.

又给他们各人一套衣服，惟独给便雅悯三百银子，五套衣服。
To every one of them he gave three changes of clothing; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred bits of silver and five changes of clothing.

送给他父亲公驴十匹，驮着埃及的美物，母驴十匹，驮着粮食与饼和菜，为他父亲路上用。
And to his father he sent ten asses with good things from Egypt on their backs, and ten she-asses with grain and bread and food for his father on the journey.

于是约瑟打发他弟兄们回去，又对他们说，你们不要在路上相争。
And he sent his brothers on their way, and said to them, See that you have no argument on the road.

他们从埃及上去，来到迦南地，他们的父亲雅各那里，
So they went up from Egypt and came to the land of Canaan, to their father Jacob.

告诉他说，约瑟还在，并且作埃及全地的宰相。雅各心里冰凉，因为不信他们。
And they said to him, Joseph is living, and is ruler over all the land of Egypt. And at this word Jacob was quite overcome, for he had no faith in it.

他们便将约瑟对他们说的一切话都告诉了他。他们父亲雅各又看见约瑟打发来接他的车辆，心就苏醒了。
And they gave him an account of everything Joseph had said to them; and when he saw the carts which Joseph had sent for them, his spirit came back to him:

以色列说，罢了。罢了。我的儿子约瑟还在，趁我未死以先，我要去见他一面。
And Israel said, It is enough: Joseph my son is still living; I will go and see him before my death.

以色列带着一切所有的，起身来到别是巴，就献祭给他父亲以撒的神。
And Israel went on his journey with all he had, and came to Beer-sheba, where he made offerings to the God of his father Isaac.

夜间，神在异象中对以色列说，雅各。雅各。他说，我在这里。
And God said to Israel in a night-vision, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

神说，我是神，就是你父亲的神。你下埃及去不要害怕，因为我必使你在那里成为大族。
And he said, I am God, the God of your father: go down to Egypt without fear, for I will make a great nation of you there:

我要和你同下埃及去，也必定带你上来。约瑟必给你送终（原文作将手按在你的眼睛上）。
I will go down with you to Egypt, and I will see that you come back again, and at your death Joseph will put his hands on your eyes.

雅各就从别是巴起行。以色列的儿子们使他们的父亲雅各和他们的妻子，儿女都坐在法老为雅各送来的车上。
Then Jacob went on from Beer-sheba; and the sons of Jacob took their father and their little ones and their wives in the carts which Pharaoh had sent for them.

他们又带着迦南地所得的牲畜，货财来到埃及。雅各和他的一切子孙都一同来了，
And they took their cattle and all the goods which they had got in the land of Canaan, and came to Egypt, even Jacob and all his seed:

雅各把他的儿子，孙子，女儿，孙女，并他的子子孙孙，一同带到埃及。
His sons and his sons' sons, his daughters and his daughters' sons and all his family he took with him into Egypt.

来到埃及的以色列人名字记在下面。雅各和他的儿孙，雅各的长子是流便。
And these are the names of the children of Israel who came into Egypt, even Jacob and all his sons: Reuben, Jacob's oldest son;

流便的儿子是哈诺，法路，希斯伦，迦米。
And the sons of Reuben: Hanoch and Pallu and Hezron and Carmi;

西缅的儿子是耶母利，雅悯，阿辖，雅斤，琐辖，还有迦南女子所生的扫罗。
And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel and Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul, the son of a woman of Canaan;

利未的儿子是革顺，哥辖，米拉利。
And the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari;

犹大的儿子是珥，俄南，示拉，法勒斯，谢拉。惟有珥与俄南死在迦南地。法勒斯的儿子是希斯伦，哈母勒。
And the sons of Judah: Er and Onan and Shelah and Perez and Zerah: but Er and Onan had come to their death in the land of Canaan; and the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.

以萨迦的儿子是陀拉，普瓦，约伯，伸仑。
And the sons of Issachar: Tola and Puah and Job and Shimron;

西布伦的儿子是西烈，以伦，雅利。
And the sons of Zebulun: Sered and Elon and Jahleel;

这是利亚在巴旦亚兰给雅各所生的儿子，还有女儿底拿。儿孙共三十三人。
All these, together with his daughter Dinah, were the children of Leah, whom Jacob had by her in Paddan-aram; they were thirty-three in number.

迦得的儿子是洗非芸，哈基，书尼，以斯本，以利，亚罗底，亚列利。
And the sons of Gad: Ziphion and Haggi, Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli;

亚设的儿子是音拿，亦施瓦，亦施韦，比利亚，还有他们的妹子西拉。比利亚的儿子是希别，玛结。
And the sons of Asher: Jimnah and Ishvah and Ishvi and Beriah, and Sarah, their sister; and the sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.

这是拉班给他女儿利亚的婢女悉帕从雅各所生的儿孙，共有十六人。
These are the children of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Leah, and Jacob had these sixteen children by her.

雅各之妻拉结的儿子是约瑟和便雅悯。
The sons of Jacob's wife Rachel: Joseph and Benjamin.

约瑟在埃及地生了玛拿西和以法莲，就是安城的祭司波提非拉的女儿亚西纳给约瑟生的。
And Joseph had Manasseh and Ephraim in the land of Egypt, by Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera, priest of On.

便雅悯的儿子是比拉，比结，亚实别，基拉，乃幔，以希，罗实，母平，户平，亚勒。
And the sons of Benjamin were Belah and Becher and Ashbel, Gera and Naaman, Ehi and Rosh, Muppim and Huppim and Ard.

这是拉结给雅各所生的儿孙，共有十四人。
All these were the children of Rachel whom Jacob had by her, fourteen persons.

但的儿子是户伸。
And the son of Dan was Hushim.

拿弗他利的儿子是雅薛，沽尼，耶色，示冷。
And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel and Guni and Jezer and Shillem.

这是拉班给他女儿拉结的婢女辟拉从雅各所生的儿孙，共有七人。
These were the children of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to his daughter Rachel, seven persons.

那与雅各同到埃及的，除了他儿妇之外，凡从他所生的，共有六十六人。
All the persons who came with Jacob into Egypt, the offspring of his body, were sixty-six, without taking into account the wives of Jacob's sons.

还有约瑟在埃及所生的两个儿子。雅各家来到埃及的共有七十人。
And the sons of Joseph whom he had in Egypt were two. Seventy persons of the family of Jacob came into Egypt.

雅各打发犹大先去见约瑟，请派人引路往歌珊去。于是他们来到歌珊地。
Now he had sent Judah before him to Goshen, to get word from Joseph; and so they came to the land of Goshen.

约瑟套车往歌珊去，迎接他父亲以色列，及至见了面，就伏在父亲的颈项上，哭了许久。
And Joseph got his carriage ready and went to Goshen for the meeting with his father; and when he came before him, he put his arms round his neck, weeping.

以色列对约瑟说，我既得见你的面，知道你还在，就是死我也甘心。
And Israel said to Joseph, Now that I have seen you living again, I am ready for death.

约瑟对他的弟兄和他父的全家说，我要上去告诉法老，对他说，我的弟兄和我父的全家从前在迦南地，现今都到我这里来了。
And Joseph said to his brothers and to his father's people, I will go and give the news to Pharaoh, and say to him, My brothers and my father's people, from the land of Canaan, have come to me;

他们本是牧羊的人，以养牲畜为业。他们把羊群牛群和一切所有的都带来了。
And these men are keepers of sheep and owners of cattle, and have with them their flocks and their herds and all they have.

等法老召你们的时候，问你们说，你们以何事为业。
Now when Pharaoh sends for you and says, What is your business?

你们要说，你的仆人，从幼年直到如今，都以养牲畜为业，连我们的祖宗也都以此为业。这样，你们可以住在歌珊地，因为凡牧羊的都被埃及人所厌恶。
You are to say, Your servants have been keepers of cattle from our early days up to now, like our fathers; in this way you will be able to have the land of Goshen for yourselves; because keepers of sheep are unclean in the eyes of the Egyptians.

约瑟进去告诉法老说，我的父亲和我的弟兄带着羊群牛群，并一切所有的，从迦南地来了，如今在歌珊地。
Then Joseph went to Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brothers with their flocks and their herds and all they have, are come from Canaan, and are now in the land of Goshen.

约瑟从他弟兄中挑出五个人来，引他们去见法老。
And he took five of his brothers to Pharaoh.

法老问约瑟的弟兄说，你们以可事为业，他们对法老说，你仆人是牧羊的，连我们的祖宗也是牧羊的。
And Pharaoh said to them, What is your business? And they said, Your servants are keepers of sheep, as our fathers were before us.

他们又对法老说，迦南地的饥荒甚大，仆人的羊群没有草吃，所以我们来到这地寄居。现在求你容仆人住在歌珊地。
And they said to Pharaoh, We have come to make a living in this land, because we have no grass for our flocks in the land of Canaan; so now let your servants make a place for themselves in the land of Goshen.

法老对约瑟说，你父亲和你弟兄到你这里来了，
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Let them have the land of Goshen; and if there are any able men among them, put them over my cattle.

埃及地都在你面前，只管叫你父亲和你弟兄住在国中最好的地。他们可以住在歌珊地。你若知道他们中间有什么能人，就派他们看管我的牲畜。
And Jacob and his sons came to Joseph in Egypt, and when word of it came to the ears of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, he said to Joseph, Your father and brothers have come to you; all the land of Egypt is before you; let your father and your brothers have the best of the land for their resting-place.

约瑟领他父亲雅各进到法老面前，雅各就给法老祝福。
Then Joseph made his father Jacob come before Pharaoh, and Jacob gave him his blessing.

法老问雅各说，你平生的年日是多少呢？
And Pharaoh said to him, How old are you?

雅各对法老说，我寄居在世的年日是一百三十岁，我平生的年日又少又苦，不及我列祖早在世寄居的年日。
And Jacob said, The years of my wanderings have been a hundred and thirty; small in number and full of sorrow have been the years of my life, and less than the years of the wanderings of my fathers.

雅各又给法老祝福，就从法老面前出去了。
And Jacob gave Pharaoh his blessing, and went out from before him.

约瑟遵着法老的命，把埃及国最好的地，就是兰塞境内的地，给他父亲和弟兄居住，作为产业。
And Joseph made a place for his father and his brothers, and gave them a heritage in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had given orders.

约瑟用粮食奉养他父亲和他弟兄，并他父亲全家的眷属，都是照各家的人口奉养他们。
And Joseph took care of his father and his brothers and all his father's people, giving them food for the needs of their families.

饥荒甚大，全地都绝了粮，甚至埃及地和迦南地的人因那饥荒的缘故都饿昏了。
Now there was no food to be had in all the land, so that all Egypt and Canaan were wasted from need of food.

约瑟收聚了埃及地和迦南地所有的银子，就是众人籴粮的银子，约瑟就把那银子带到法老的宫里。
And all the money in Egypt and in the land of Canaan which had been given for grain, came into the hands of Joseph: and he put it in Pharaoh's house.

埃及地和迦南地的银子都花尽了，埃及众人都来见约瑟，说，我们的银子都用尽了，求你给我们粮食，我们为什么死在你面前呢？
And when all the money in Egypt and Canaan was gone, the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said, Give us bread; would you have us come to destruction before your eyes? for we have no more money.

约瑟说，若是银子用尽了，可以把你们的牲畜给我，我就为你们的牲畜给你们粮食。
And Joseph said, Give me your cattle; I will give you grain in exchange for your cattle if your money is all gone.

于是他们把牲畜赶到约瑟那里，约瑟就拿粮食换了他们的牛，羊，驴，马。那一年因换他们一切的牲畜，就用粮食养活他们。
So they took their cattle to Joseph and he gave them bread in exchange for their horses and flocks and herds and asses, so all that year he gave them food in exchange for their cattle.

那一年过去，第二年他们又来见约瑟，说，我们不瞒我主，我们的银子都花尽了，牲畜也都归了我主。我们在我主眼前，除了我们的身体和田地之外，一无所剩。
And when that year was ended, they came to him in the second year, and said, We may not keep it from our lord's knowledge that all our money is gone, and all the herds of cattle are my lord's; there is nothing more to give my lord but our bodies and our land;

你何忍见我们人死地荒呢？求你用粮食买我们的我们的地，我们和我们的地就要给法老效力。又求你给我们种子，使我们得以存活，不至死亡，地土也不至荒凉。
Are we to come to destruction before your eyes, we and our land? take us and our land and give us bread; and we and our land will be servants to Pharaoh; and give us seed so that we may have life and the land may not become waste.

于是，约瑟为法老买了埃及所有的地，埃及人因被饥荒所迫，各都卖了自己的田地。那地就都归了法老。
So Joseph got all the land in Egypt for Pharaoh; for every Egyptian gave up his land in exchange for food, because of their great need; so all the land became Pharaoh's.

至于百姓，约瑟叫他们，从埃及这边直到埃及那边，都各归各城。
And as for the people, he made servants of them, town by town, from one end of Egypt to the other.

惟有祭司的地，约瑟没有买，因为祭司有从法老所得的常俸。他们吃法老所给的常俸，所以他们不卖自己的地。
Only he did not take the land of the priests, for the priests had their food given them by Pharaoh, and having what Pharaoh gave them, they had no need to give up their land.

约瑟对百姓说，我今日为法老买了你们和你们的地，看哪，这里有种子给你们，你们可以种地。
Then Joseph said to the people, I have made you and your land this day the property of Pharaoh; here is seed for you to put in your fields.

后来打粮食的时候，你们要把五分之一纳给法老，四分可以归你们作地里的种子，也作你们和你们家口孩童的食物。
And when the grain is cut, you are to give a fifth part to Pharaoh, and four parts will be yours for seed and food, and for your families and your little ones.

他们说，你救了我们的性命。但愿我们在我主眼前蒙恩，我们就作法老的仆人。
And they said to him, Truly you have kept us from death; may we have grace in your eyes, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.

于是约瑟为埃及地定下常例，直到今日，法老必得五分之一，惟独祭司的地不归法老。
Then Joseph made a law which is in force to this day, that Pharaoh was to have the fifth part; only the land of the priests did not become his.

以色列人住在埃及的歌珊地。他们在那里置了产业，并且生育甚多。
And so Israel was living among the Egyptians in the land of Goshen; and they got property there, and became very great in numbers and in wealth.

雅各住在埃及地十七年，雅各平生的年日是一百四十七岁。
And Jacob was living in the land of Goshen for seventeen years; so the years of his life were a hundred and forty-seven.

以色列的死期临近了，他就叫了他儿子约瑟来，说，我若在你眼前蒙恩，请你把手放在我大腿底下，用慈爱和诚实待我，请你不要将我葬在埃及。
And the time of his death came near, and he sent for his son Joseph and said to him, If now I am dear to you, put your hand under my leg and take an oath that you will not put me to rest in Egypt;

我与我祖我父同睡的时候，你要将我带出埃及，葬在他们所葬的地方。约瑟说，我必遵着你的命而行。
But when I go to my fathers, you are to take me out of Egypt and put me to rest in their last resting-place. And he said, I will do so.

雅各说，你要向我起誓。约瑟就向他起了誓，于是以色列在床头上（或作扶着杖头）敬拜神。
And he said, Take an oath to me; and he took an oath to him: and Israel gave worship on the bed's head.

这事以后，有人告诉约瑟说，你的父亲病了。他就带着两个儿子玛拿西和以法莲同去。
Now after these things, word came to Joseph that his father was ill: and he took with him his sons Manasseh and Ephraim.

有人告诉雅各说，请看，你儿子约瑟到你这里来了。以色列就勉强在床上坐起来。
And when they said to Jacob, Your son Joseph is coming to see you: then Israel, getting all his strength together, had himself lifted up in his bed.

雅各对约瑟说，全能的神曾在迦南地的路斯向我显现，赐福与我，
And Jacob said to Joseph, God, the Ruler of all, came to me in a vision at Luz in the land of Canaan, and gave me his blessing,

对我说，我必使你生养众多，成为多民，又要把这地赐给你的后裔，永远为业。
And said to me, Truly, I will make you fertile and give you increase and will make of you a great family of nations: and I will give this land to your seed after you to be their heritage for ever.

我未到埃及见你之先，你在埃及地所生的以法莲和玛拿西这两个儿子是我的，正如流便和西缅是我的一样。
And now your two sons who came to birth in Egypt before I came to you here, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh will be mine, in the same way as Reuben and Simeon are.

你在他们以后所生的就是你的，他们可以归于他们弟兄的名下得产业。
And any other offspring which you have after them, will be yours, and will be named after their brothers in their heritage.

至于我，我从巴旦来的时候，拉结死在我眼前，在迦南地的路上，离以法他还有一段路程，我就把她葬在以法他的路上。以法他就是伯利恒。
And as for me, when I came from Paddan, death overtook Rachel on the way, when we were still some distance from Ephrath; and I put her to rest there on the road to Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem.

以色列看见约瑟的两个儿子，就说，这是谁？
Then Israel, looking at Joseph's sons, said, Who are these?

约瑟对他父亲说，这是神在这里赐给我的儿子。以色列说，请你领他们到我跟前，我要给他们祝福。
And Joseph said to his father, They are my sons, whom God has given me in this land. And he said, Let them come near me, and I will give them a blessing.

以色列年纪老迈，眼睛昏花，不能看见。约瑟领他们到他跟前，他就和他们亲嘴，抱着他们。
Now because Israel was old, his eyes were no longer clear, and he was not able to see. So he made them come near to him, and he gave them a kiss, folding them in his arms.

以色列对约瑟说，我想不到得见你的面，不料，神又使我得见你的儿子。
And Israel said to Joseph, I had no hope of seeing your face again, but God in his mercy has let me see you and your children.

约瑟把两个儿子从以色列两膝中领出来，自己就脸伏于地下拜。
Then Joseph took them from between his knees, and went down on his face to the earth.

随后，约瑟又拉着他们两个，以法莲在他的右手里，对着以色列的左手，玛拿西在他的左手里，对着以色列的右手，领他们到以色列的跟前。
Then taking Ephraim with his right hand, Joseph put him at Israel's left side, and with his left hand he put Manasseh at Israel's right side, placing them near him.

以色列伸出右手来，按在以法莲的头上，以法莲乃是次子。又剪搭过左手来，按在玛拿西的头上，玛拿西原是长子。
And Israel, stretching out his right hand, put it on the head of Ephraim, the younger, and his left hand on the head of Manasseh, crossing his hands on purpose, for Manasseh was the older.

他就给约瑟祝福说，愿我祖亚伯拉罕和我父以撒所事奉的神，就是一生牧养我直到今日的神，
And he gave Joseph a blessing, saying, May the God to whom my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, gave worship, the God who has taken care of me all my life till this day,

救赎我脱离一切患难的那使者，赐福与这两个童子。愿他们归在我的名下和我祖亚伯拉罕，我父以撒的名下。又愿他们在世界中生养众多。
The angel who has been my saviour from all evil, send his blessing on these children: and let my name and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, be given to them; and let them become a great nation in the earth.

约瑟见他父亲把右手按在以法莲的头上，就不喜悦，便提起他父亲的手，要从以法莲的头上挪到玛拿西的头上。
Now when Joseph saw that his father had put his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it did not seem right to him; and lifting his father's hand he would have put it on the head of Manasseh.

约瑟对他父亲说，我父，不是这样。这本是长子，求你把右手按在他的头上。
And Joseph said to his father, Not so, my father, for this is the older; put your right hand on his head.

他父亲不从，说，我知道，我儿，我知道。他也必成为一族，也必昌大。只是他的兄弟将来比他还大。他兄弟的后裔要成为多族。
But his father would not, saying, I am doing it on purpose, my son; he will certainly become a nation and a great one; but his younger brother will be greater than he, and his seed will become a great family of nations.

当日就给他们祝福说，以色列人要指着你们祝福说，愿神使你如以法莲，玛拿西一样。于是立以法莲在玛拿西以上。
So he gave them his blessing that day, saying, You will be the sign of blessing in Israel, for they will say, May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh; and he put Ephraim before Manasseh.

以色列又对约瑟说，我要死了，但神必与你们同在，领你们回到你们列祖之地。
Then Israel said to Joseph, Now my death is near; but God will be with you, guiding you back to the land of your fathers.

并且我从前用弓用刀从亚摩利人手下夺的那块地，我都赐给你，使你比众弟兄多得一分。
And I have given you more than your brothers, even Shechem as your heritage, which I took from the Amorites with my sword and my bow.

雅各叫了他的儿子们来，说，你们都来聚集，我好把你们日后必遇的事告诉你们。
And Jacob sent for his sons, and said, Come together, all of you, so that I may give you news of your fate in future times.

雅各的儿子们，你们要聚集而听，要听你们父亲以色列的话。
Come near, O sons of Jacob, and give ear to the words of Israel your father.

流便哪，你是我的长子，是我力量强壮的时候生的，本当大有尊荣，权力超众。
Reuben, you are my oldest son, the first-fruit of my strength, first in pride and first in power:

但你放纵情欲，滚沸如水，必不得居首位。因为你上了你父亲的床，污秽了我的榻。
But because you were uncontrolled, the first place will not be yours; for you went up to your father's bed, even his bride-bed, and made it unclean.

西缅和利未是弟兄。他们的刀剑是残忍的器具。
Simeon and Levi are brothers; deceit and force are their secret designs.

我的灵阿，不要与他们同谋。我的心哪，不要与他们联络。因为他们趁怒杀害人命，任意砍断牛腿大筋。
Take no part in their secrets, O my soul; keep far away, O my heart, from their meetings; for in their wrath they put men to death, and for their pleasure even oxen were wounded.

他们的怒气暴烈可咒。他们的忿恨残忍可诅。我要使他们分居在雅各家里，散住在以色列地中。
A curse on their passion for it was bitter; and on their wrath for it was cruel. I will let their heritage in Jacob be broken up, driving them from their places in Israel.

犹大阿，你弟兄们必赞美你。你手必掐住仇敌的颈项。你父亲的儿子们必向你下拜。
To you, Judah, will your brothers give praise: your hand will be on the neck of your haters; your father's sons will go down to the earth before you.

犹大是个小狮子。我儿阿，你抓了食便上去。你屈下身去，卧如公狮，蹲如母狮，谁敢惹你。
Judah is a young lion; like a lion full of meat you have become great, my son; now he takes his rest like a lion stretched out and like an old lion; by whom will his sleep be broken?

圭必不离犹大，杖必不离他两脚之间，直等细罗（就是赐平安者）来到，万民都必归顺。
The rod of authority will not be taken from Judah, and he will not be without a law-giver, till he comes who has the right to it, and the peoples will put themselves under his rule.

犹大把小驴拴在葡萄树上，把驴驹拴在美好的葡萄树上。他在葡萄酒中洗了衣服，在葡萄汁中洗了袍褂。
Knotting his ass's cord to the vine, and his young ass to the best vine; washing his robe in wine, and his clothing in the blood of grapes:

他的眼睛必因酒红润。他的牙齿必因奶白亮。
His eyes will be dark with wine, and his teeth white with milk.

西布伦必住在海口，必成为停船的海口。他的境界必延到西顿。
The resting-place of Zebulun will be by the sea, and he will be a harbour for ships; the edge of his land will be by Zidon.

以萨迦是个强壮的驴，卧在羊圈之中。
Issachar is a strong ass stretched out among the flocks:

他以安静为佳，以肥地为美，便低肩背重，成为服苦的仆人。
And he saw that rest was good and the land was pleasing; so he let them put weights on his back and became a servant.

但必判断他的民，作以色列支派之一。
Dan will be the judge of his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.

但必作道上的蛇，路中的虺，咬伤马蹄，使骑马的坠落于后。
May Dan be a snake in the way, a horned snake by the road, biting the horse's foot so that the horseman has a fall.

耶和华阿，我向来等候你的救恩。
I have been waiting for your salvation, O Lord.

迦得必被敌军追逼，他却要追逼他们的脚跟。
Gad, an army will come against him, but he will come down on them in their flight.

亚设之地必出肥美的粮食，且出君王的美味。
Asher's bread is fat; he gives delicate food for kings.

拿弗他利是被释放的母鹿。他出嘉美的言语。
Naphtali is a roe let loose, giving fair young ones.

约瑟是多结果子的树枝，是泉旁多结果的枝子。他的枝条探出墙外。
Joseph is a young ox, whose steps are turned to the fountain;

弓箭手将他苦害，向他射箭，逼迫他。
He was troubled by the archers; they sent out their arrows against him, cruelly wounding him:

但他的弓仍旧坚硬。他的手健壮敏捷。这是因以色列的牧者，以色列的磐石就是雅各的大能者。
But their bows were broken by a strong one, and the cords of their arms were cut by the Strength of Jacob, by the name of the Stone of Israel:

你父亲的神必帮助你。那全能者必将天上所有的福，地里所藏的福，以及生产乳养的福，都赐给你。
Even by the God of your father, who will be your help, and by the Ruler of all, who will make you full with blessings from heaven on high, blessings of the deep stretched out under the earth, blessings of the breasts and of the fertile body:

你父亲所祝的福，胜过我祖先所祝的福，如永世的山岭，至极的边界。这些福必降在约瑟的头上，临列那与弟兄迥别之人的顶上。
Blessings of sons, old and young, to the father: blessings of the oldest mountains and the fruit of the eternal hills: let them come on the head of Joseph, on the crown of him who was separate from his brothers.

便雅悯是个撕掠的狼，早晨要吃他所抓的，晚上要分他所夺的。
Benjamin is a wolf, searching for meat: in the morning he takes his food, and in the evening he makes division of what he has taken.

这一切是以色列的十二支派。这也是他们的父亲对他们所说的话，为他们所祝的福，都是按着各人的福分为他们祝福。
These are the twelve tribes of Israel: and these are the words their father said to them, blessing them; to every one he gave his blessing.

他又嘱咐他们说，我将要归到我列祖（原文作本民）那里，你们要将我葬在赫人以弗仑田间的洞里，与我祖我父在一处，
And he gave orders to them, saying, Put me to rest with my people and with my fathers, in the hollow of the rock in the field of Ephron the Hittite,

就是在迦南地幔利前，麦比拉田间的洞。那洞和田是亚伯拉罕向赫人以弗仑买来为业，作坟地的。
In the rock in the field of Machpelah, near Mamre in the land of Canaan, which Abraham got from Ephron the Hittite, to be his resting-place.

他们在那里葬了亚伯拉罕和他妻子撒拉，又在那里葬了以撒和他妻子利百加。我也在那里葬了利亚。
There Abraham and Sarah his wife were put to rest, and there they put Isaac and Rebekah his wife, and there I put Leah to rest.

那块田和田间的洞原是向赫人买的。
In the rock in the field which was got for a price from the people of Heth.

雅各嘱咐众子已毕，就把脚收在床上，气绝而死，归到列祖（原文作本民）那里去了。
And when Jacob had come to the end of these words to his sons, stretching himself on his bed, he gave up his spirit, and went the way of his people.

约瑟伏在他父亲的面上哀哭，与他亲嘴。
And Joseph put his head down on his father's face, weeping and kissing him.

约瑟吩咐伺候他的医生用香料薰他父亲，医生就用香料薰了以色列。
And Joseph gave orders to his servants who had the necessary knowledge, to make his father's body ready, folding it in linen with spices, and they did so.

薰尸的常例是四十天。那四十天满了，埃及人为他哀哭了七十天。
And the forty days needed for making the body ready went by: and there was weeping for him among the Egyptians for seventy days.

为他哀哭的日子过了，约瑟对法老家中的人说，我若在你们眼前蒙恩，请你们报告法老说，
And when the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph said to the servants of Pharaoh, If now you have love for me, say these words to Pharaoh:

我父亲要死的时候叫我起誓说，你要将我葬在迦南地，在我为自己所掘的坟墓里。现在求你让我上去葬我父亲，以后我必回来。
My father made me take an oath, saying, When I am dead, put me to rest in the place I have made ready for myself in the land of Canaan. So now let me go and put my father in his last resting-place, and I will come back again.

法老说，你可以上去，照着你父亲叫你起的誓，将他葬埋。
And Pharaoh said, Go up and put your father to rest, as you gave your oath to him.

于是约瑟上去葬他父亲。与他一同上去的，有法老的臣仆和法老家中的长老，并埃及国的长老，
So Joseph went up to put his father in his last resting-place; and with him went all the servants of Pharaoh, and the chief men of his house and all the chiefs of the land of Egypt,

还有约瑟的全家和他的弟兄们，并他父亲的眷属。只有他们的妇人孩子，和羊群牛群，都留在歌珊地。
And all the family of Joseph, and his brothers and his father's people: only their little ones and their flocks and herds they did not take with them from the land of Goshen.

又有车辆马兵，和他一同上去。那一帮人甚多。
And carriages went up with him and horsemen, a great army.

他们到了约但河外，亚达的禾场，就在那里大大地号啕痛哭。约瑟为他父亲哀哭了七天。
And they came to the grain-floor of Atad on the other side of Jordan, and there they gave the last honours to Jacob, with great and bitter sorrow, weeping for their father for seven days.

迦南的居民见亚达禾场上的哀哭，就说，这是埃及人一场大的哀哭。因此那地方名叫亚伯麦西，是在约但河东。
And when the people of the land, the people of Canaan, at the grain-floor of Atad, saw their grief, they said, Great is the grief of the Egyptians: so the place was named Abel-mizraim, on the other side of Jordan.

雅各的儿子们就遵着他父亲所吩咐的办了，
So his sons did as he had given them orders to do:

把他搬到迦南地，葬在幔利前，麦比拉田间的洞里。那洞和田是亚伯拉罕向赫人以弗仑买来为业，作坟地的。
For they took him into the land of Canaan and put him to rest in the hollow rock in the field of Machpelah, which Abraham got with the field, for a resting-place, from Ephron the Hittite at Mamre.

约瑟葬了他父亲以后，就和众弟兄，并一切同他上去葬他父亲的人，都回埃及去了。
And when his father had been put to rest, Joseph and his brothers and all who had gone with him, went back to Egypt.

约瑟的哥哥们见父亲死了，就说，或者约瑟怀恨我们，照着我们从前待他一切的恶足足地报复我们。
Now after the death of their father, Joseph's brothers said to themselves, It may be that Joseph's heart will be turned against us, and he will give us punishment for all the evil which we did to him.

他们就打发人去见约瑟，说，你父亲未死以先吩咐说，
So they sent word to Joseph, saying, Your father, before his death, gave us orders, saying,

你们要对约瑟这样说，从前你哥哥们恶待你，求你饶恕他们的过犯和罪恶。如今求你饶恕你父亲神之仆人的过犯。他们对约瑟说这话，约瑟就哭了。
You are to say to Joseph, Let the wrongdoing of your brothers be overlooked, and the evil they did to you: now, if it is your pleasure, let the sin of the servants of your father's God have forgiveness. And at these words, Joseph was overcome with weeping.

他的哥哥们又来俯伏在他面前，说，我们是你的仆人。
Then his brothers went, and falling at his feet, said, Truly, we are your servants.

约瑟对他们说，不要害怕，我岂能代替神呢？
And Joseph said, Have no fear: am I in the place of God?

从前你们的意思是要害我，但神的意思原是好的，要保全许多人的性命，成就今日的光景。
As for you, it was in your mind to do me evil, but God has given a happy outcome, the salvation of numbers of people, as you see today.

现在你们不要害怕，我必养活你们和你们的妇人孩子。于是约瑟用亲爱的话安慰他们。
So now, have no fear: for I will take care of you and your little ones. So he gave them comfort with kind words.

约瑟和他父亲的眷属都住在埃及。约瑟活了一百一十岁。
Now Joseph and all his father's family went on living in Egypt: and the years of Joseph's life were a hundred and ten.

约瑟得见以法莲第三代的子孙。玛拿西的孙子，玛吉的儿子也养在约瑟的膝上。
And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: and the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh, came to birth on Joseph's knees.

约瑟对他弟兄们说，我要死了，但神必定看顾你们，领你们从这地上去，到他起誓所应许给亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各之地。
Then Joseph said to his brothers, The time of my death has come; but God will keep you in mind and take you out of this land into the land which he gave by his oath to Abraham and Isaac and Jacob.

约瑟叫以色列的子孙起誓说，神必定看顾你们。你们要把我的骸骨从这里搬上去。
Then Joseph made the children of Israel take an oath, saying, God will certainly give effect to his word, and you are to take my bones away from here.

约瑟死了，正一百一十岁。人用香料将他薰了，把他收殓在棺材里，停在埃及。
So Joseph came to his death, being a hundred and ten years old: and they made his body ready, and he was put in a chest in Egypt.

