利未记 Leviticus


耶和华从会幕中呼叫摩西，对他说，
And the voice of the Lord came to Moses out of the Tent of meeting, saying,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们中间若有人献供物给耶和华，要从牛群羊群中献牲畜为供物。
Give these orders to the children of Israel: When anyone of you makes an offering to the Lord, you are to take it from the cattle, from the herd or from the flock.

他的供物若以牛为燔祭，就要在会幕门口献一只没有残疾的公牛，可以在耶和华面前蒙悦纳。
If the offering is a burned offering of the herd, let him give a male without a mark: he is to give it at the door of the Tent of meeting so that he may be pleasing to the Lord.

他要按手在燔祭牲的头上，燔祭便蒙悦纳，为他赎罪。
And he is to put his hand on the head of the burned offering and it will be taken for him, to take away his sin.

他要在耶和华面前宰公牛，亚伦子孙作祭司的，要奉上血，把血洒在会幕门口，坛的周围。
And the ox is to be put to death before the Lord: then Aaron's sons, the priests, are to take the blood and put some of it on and round the altar which is at the door of the Tent of meeting.

那人要剥去燔祭牲的皮，把燔祭牲切成块子。
And the burned offering is to be skinned and cut up into its parts.

祭司亚伦的子孙要把火放在坛上，把柴摆在火上。
And Aaron's sons, the priests, are to put fire on the altar and put the wood in order on the fire:

亚伦子孙作祭司的，要把肉块和头并脂油摆在坛上火的柴上。
And Aaron's sons, the priests, are to put the parts, the head and the fat, in order on the wood which is on the fire on the altar:

但燔祭的脏腑与腿要用水洗。祭司就要把一切全烧在坛上，当作燔祭，献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
But its inside parts and its legs are to be washed with water, and it will all be burned on the altar by the priest for a burned offering, an offering made by fire, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

人的供物若以绵羊或山羊为燔祭，就要献上没有残疾的公羊。
And if his offering is of the flock, a burned offering of sheep or goats, let him give a male without a mark.

要把羊宰于坛的北边，在耶和华面前，亚伦子孙作祭司的，要把羊血洒在坛的周围。
And he is to put it to death on the north side of the altar before the Lord: and Aaron's sons, the priests, are to put some of the blood on and round the altar.

要把燔祭牲切成块子，连头和脂油，祭司就要摆在坛上火的柴上。
And the offering is to be cut into its parts, with its head and its fat; and the priest is to put them in order on the wood which is on the fire on the altar:

但脏腑与腿要用水洗，祭司就要全然奉献，烧在坛上。这是燔祭，是献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
But the inside parts and the legs are to be washed with water; and the priest will make an offering of all of it, burning it on the altar: it is a burned offering, an offering made by fire, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

人奉给耶和华的供物，若以鸟为燔祭，就要献斑鸠或是雏鸽为供物。
And if his offering to the Lord is a burned offering of birds, then he is to make his offering of doves or of young pigeons.

祭司要把鸟拿到坛前，揪下头来，把鸟烧在坛上，鸟的血要流在坛的旁边。
And the priest is to take it to the altar, and after its head has been twisted off, it is to be burned on the altar, and its blood drained out on the side of the altar:

又要把鸟的嗉子和脏物除掉（脏物或作翎毛），丢在坛的东边倒灰的地方。
And he is to take away its stomach, with its feathers, and put it down by the east side of the altar, where the burned waste is put:

要拿着鸟的两个翅膀，把鸟撕开，只是不可撕断，祭司要在坛上，在火的柴上焚烧。这是燔祭，是献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
And let it be broken open at the wings, but not cut in two; and let it be burned on the altar by the priest on the wood which is on the fire; it is a burned offering; an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

若有人献素祭为供物给耶和华，要用细面浇上油，加上乳香，
And when anyone makes a meal offering to the Lord, let his offering be of the best meal, with oil on it and perfume:

带到亚伦子孙作祭司的那里，祭司就要从细面中取出一把来，并取些油和所有的乳香，然后要把所取的这些作为纪念，烧在坛上，是献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
And let him take it to Aaron's sons, the priests; and having taken in his hand some of the meal and of the oil, with all the perfume, let him give it to the priest to be burned on the altar, as a sign, an offering made by fire, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

素祭所剩的要归给亚伦和他的子孙，这是献与耶和华的火祭中为至圣的。
And the rest of the meal offering will be for Aaron and his sons; it is most holy among the Lord's fire offerings.

若用炉中烤的物为素祭，就要用调油的无酵细面饼，或是抹油的无酵薄饼。
And when you give a meal offering cooked in the oven, let it be of unleavened cakes of the best meal mixed with oil, or thin unleavened cakes covered with oil.

若用铁鏊上作的物为素祭，就要用调油的无酵细面，
And if you give a meal offering cooked on a flat plate, let it be of the best meal, unleavened and mixed with oil.

分成块子，浇上油，这是素祭。
Let it be broken into bits, and put oil on it; it is a meal offering.

若用煎盘作的物为素祭，就要用油与细面作成。
And if your offering is of meal cooked in fat over the fire, let it be made of the best meal mixed with oil.

要把这些东西作的素祭带到耶和华面前，并奉给祭司，带到坛前。
And you are to give the meal offering made of these things to the Lord, and let the priest take it to the altar.

祭司要从素祭中取出作为纪念的，烧在坛上，是献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
And he is to take from the meal offering a part, for a sign, burning it on the altar; an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

素祭所剩的要归给亚伦和他的子孙。这是献与耶和华的火祭中为至圣的。
And the rest of the meal offering will be for Aaron and his sons; it is most holy among the Lord's fire offerings.

凡献给耶和华的素祭都不可有酵，因为你们不可烧一点酵，一点蜜当作火祭献给耶和华。
No meal offering which you give to the Lord is to be made with leaven; no leaven or honey is to be burned as an offering made by fire to the Lord.

这些物要献给耶和华作为初熟的供物，只是不可在坛上献为馨香的祭。
You may give them as an offering of first-fruits to the Lord, but they are not to go up as a sweet smell on the altar.

凡献为素祭的供物都要用盐调和，在素祭上不可缺了你神立约的盐。一切的供物都要配盐而献。
And every meal offering is to be salted with salt; your meal offering is not to be without the salt of the agreement of your God: with all your offerings give salt.

若向耶和华献初熟之物为素祭，要献上烘了的禾穗子，就是轧了的新穗子，当作初熟之物的素祭。
And if you give a meal offering of first-fruits to the Lord, give, as your offering of first-fruits, new grain, made dry with fire, crushed new grain.

并要抹上油，加上乳香，这是素祭。
And put oil on it and perfume: it is a meal offering.

祭司要把其中作为纪念的，就是一些轧了的禾穗子和一些油，并所有的乳香，都焚烧，是向耶和华献的火祭。
And part of the meal of the offering and part of the oil and all the perfume is to be burned for a sign by the priest: it is an offering made by fire to the Lord.

人献供物为平安祭（平安或作酬恩下同），若是从牛群中献，无论是公的是母的，必用没有残疾的献在耶和华面前。
And if his offering is given for a peace-offering; if he gives of the herd, male or female, let him give it without any mark on it, before the Lord.

他要按手在供物的头上，宰于会幕门口。亚伦子孙作祭司的，要把血洒在坛的周围。
And he is to put his hand on the head of his offering and put it to death at the door of the Tent of meeting; and Aaron's sons, the priests, are to put some of the blood on and round the altar.

从平安祭中，将火祭献给耶和华，也要把盖脏的脂油和脏上所有的脂油，
And he is to give of the peace-offering, as an offering made by fire to the Lord; the fat covering the inside parts and all the fat on the inside parts,

并两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，就是靠腰两旁的脂油，与肝上的网子和腰子，一概取下。
And the two kidneys, and the fat on them, which is by the top part of the legs, and the fat joining the liver and the kidneys, he is to take away;

亚伦的子孙要把这些烧在坛的燔祭上，就是在火的柴上，是献与耶和华为馨香的火祭。
That it may be burned by Aaron's sons on the altar, on the burned offering which is on the wood on the fire: it is an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord.

人向耶和华献供物为平安祭，若是从羊群中献，无论是公的是母的，必用没有残疾的。
And if what he gives for a peace-offering to the Lord is of the flock, let him give a male or female, without any mark on it.

若献一只羊羔为供物，必在耶和华面前献上，
If his offering is a lamb, then let it be placed before the Lord:

并要按手在供物的头上，宰于会幕前。亚伦的子孙要把血洒在坛的周围。
And he is to put his hand on the head of his offering and put it to death before the Tent of meeting; and Aaron's sons are to put some of its blood on and round the altar.

从平安祭中，将火祭献给耶和华，其中的脂油和整肥尾巴都要在靠近脊骨处取下，并要把盖脏的脂油和脏上所有的脂油，
And of the peace-offering, let him give an offering made by fire to the Lord; the fat of it, all the fat tail, he is to take away near the backbone; and the fat covering the inside parts and all the fat on the inside parts,

两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，就是靠腰两旁的脂油，并肝上的网子和腰子，一概取下。
And the two kidneys, with the fat on them, which is by the top part of the legs, and the fat joining the liver and the kidneys, he is to take away;

祭司要在坛上焚烧，是献给耶和华为食物的火祭。
That it may be burned by the priest on the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire to the Lord.

人的供物若是山羊，必在耶和华面前献上。
And if his offering is a goat, then let it be placed before the Lord,

要按手在山羊头上，宰于会幕前。亚伦的子孙要把血洒在坛的周围，
And let him put his hand on the head of it and put it to death before the Tent of meeting; and the sons of Aaron are to put some of its blood on and round the altar.

又把盖脏的脂油和脏上所有的脂油，两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，就是靠腰两旁的脂油，并肝上的网子和腰子，一概取下，献给耶和华为火祭。
And of it let him make his offering, an offering made by fire to the Lord; the fat covering the inside parts and all the fat on the inside parts,


And the two kidneys, with the fat on them, which is by the top part of the legs, and the fat joining the liver and the kidneys, let him take away;

祭司要在坛上焚烧，作为馨香火祭的食物。脂油都是耶和华的。
That it may be burned by the priest on the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet smell: all the fat is the Lord's.

在你们一切的住处，脂油和血都不可吃，这要成为你们世世代代永远的定例。
Let it be an order for ever, through all your generations, in all your houses, that you are not to take fat or blood for food.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，若有人在耶和华所吩咐不可行的什么事上误犯了一件，
Say to the children of Israel: These are the offerings of anyone who does wrong through error, doing any of the things which by the Lord's order are not to be done:

或是受膏的祭司犯罪，使百姓陷在罪里，就当为他所犯的罪把没有残疾的公牛犊献给耶和华为赎罪祭。
If the chief priest by doing wrong becomes a cause of sin to the people, then let him give to the Lord for the sin which he has done, an ox, without any mark, for a sin-offering.

他要牵公牛到会幕门口，在耶和华面前按手在牛的头上，把牛宰于耶和华面前。
And he is to take the ox to the door of the Tent of meeting before the Lord; and put his hand on its head and put it to death before the Lord.

受膏的祭司要取些公牛的血带到会幕，
And the chief priest is to take some of its blood and take it to the Tent of meeting;

把指头蘸于血中，在耶和华面前对着圣所的幔子弹血七次，
And the priest is to put his finger in the blood, shaking drops of it before the Lord seven times, in front of the veil of the holy place.

又要把些血抹在会幕内，耶和华面前香坛的四角上，再把公牛所有的血倒在会幕门口，燔祭坛的脚那里。
And the priest is to put some of the blood on the horns of the altar on which perfume is burned before the Lord in the Tent of meeting, draining out all the rest of the blood of the ox at the base of the altar of burned offering which is at the door of the Tent of meeting.

要把赎罪祭公牛所有的脂油，乃是盖脏的脂油和脏上所有的脂油，
And he is to take away all the fat of the ox of the sin-offering; the fat covering the inside parts and all the fat of the inside parts,

并两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，就是靠腰两旁的脂油，与肝上的网子和腰子，一概取下，
And the two kidneys, with the fat on them, which is by the top part of the legs, and the fat joining the liver and the kidneys, he is to take away,

与平安祭公牛上所取的一样，祭司要把这些烧在燔祭的坛上。
As it is taken from the ox of the peace-offering; and it is to be burned by the priest on the altar of burned offerings.

公牛的皮和所有的肉，并头，腿，脏，腑，粪，
And the skin of the ox and all its flesh, with its head and its legs and its inside parts and its waste,

就是全公牛，要搬到营外洁净之地，倒灰之所，用火烧在柴上。
All the ox, he is to take away outside the circle of the tents into a clean place where the burned waste is put, and there it is to be burned on wood with fire.

以色列全会众若行了耶和华所吩咐不可行的什么事，误犯了罪，是隐而未现，会众看不出来的，
And if all the people of Israel do wrong, without anyone's knowledge; if they have done any of the things which by the Lord's order are not to be done, causing sin to come on them;

会众一知道所犯的罪就要献一只公牛犊为赎罪祭，牵到会幕前。
When the sin which they have done comes to light, then let all the people give an ox for a sin-offering, and take it before the Tent of meeting.

会中的长老就要在耶和华面前按手在牛的头上，将牛在耶和华面前宰了。
And let the chiefs of the people put their hands on its head before the Lord, and put the ox to death before the Lord.

受膏的祭司要取些公牛的血带到会幕，
And the priest is to take some of its blood to the Tent of meeting;

把指头蘸于血中，在耶和华面前对着幔子弹血七次，
And put his finger in the blood, shaking drops of the blood seven times before the Lord in front of the veil.

又要把些血抹在会幕内，耶和华面前坛的四角上，再把所有的血倒在会幕门口，燔祭坛的脚那里。
And he is to put some of the blood on the horns of the altar which is before the Lord in the Tent of meeting; and all the rest of the blood is to be drained out at the base of the altar of burned offering at the door of the Tent of meeting.

把牛所有的脂油都取下，烧在坛上。
And he is to take off all its fat, burning it on the altar.

收拾这牛，与那赎罪祭的牛一样。祭司要为他们赎罪，他们必蒙赦免。
Let him do with the ox as he did with the ox of the sin-offering; and the priest will take away their sin and they will have forgiveness.

他要把牛搬到营外烧了，像烧头一个牛一样，这是会众的赎罪祭。
Then let the ox be taken away outside the tent-circle, that it may be burned as the other ox was burned; it is the sin-offering for all the people.

官长若行了耶和华他神所吩咐不可行的什么事，误犯了罪，
If a ruler does wrong, and in error does any of the things which, by the order of the Lord his God, are not to be done, causing sin to come on him;

所犯的罪自己知道了，就要牵一只没有残疾的公山羊为供物，
When the sin which he has done is made clear to him, let him give for his offering a goat, a male without any mark.

按手在羊的头上，宰于耶和华面前，宰燔祭牲的地方，这是赎罪祭。
And he is to put his hand on the head of the goat and put it to death in the place where they put to death the burned offering before the Lord: it is a sin-offering.

祭司要用指头蘸些赎罪祭牲的血，抹在燔祭坛的四角上，把血倒在燔祭坛的脚那里。
And the priest is to take some of the blood of the offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burned offering, draining out the rest of the blood at the base of the altar of burned offering.

所有的脂油，祭司都要烧在坛上，正如平安祭的脂油一样。至于他的罪，祭司要为他赎了，他必蒙赦免。
And all the fat of it is to be burned on the altar like the fat of the peace-offering; and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness.

民中若有人行了耶和华所吩咐不可行的什么事，误犯了罪，
And if any one of the common people does wrong in error, doing any of the things which the Lord has given orders are not to be done, causing sin to come on him;

所犯的罪自己知道了，就要为所犯的罪牵一只没有残疾的母山羊为供物，
When the sin which he has done is made clear to him, then he is to give for his offering a goat, a female without any mark, for the sin which he has done.

按手在赎罪祭牲的头上，在那宰燔祭牲的地方宰了。
And he is to put his hand on the head of the sin-offering and put it to death in the place where they put to death the burned offering.

祭司要用指头蘸些羊的血，抹在燔祭坛的四角上，所有的血都要倒在坛的脚那里。
And the priest is to take some of the blood with his finger, and put it on the horns of the altar of burned offering, and all the rest of its blood is to be drained out at the base of the altar.

又要把羊所有的脂油都取下，正如取平安祭牲的脂油一样。祭司要在坛上焚烧，在耶和华面前作为馨香的祭，为他赎罪，他必蒙赦免。
And let all its fat be taken away, as the fat is taken away from the peace-offerings, and let it be burned on the altar by the priest for a sweet smell to the Lord; and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness.

人若牵一只绵羊羔为赎罪祭的供物，必要牵一只没有残疾的母羊，
And if he gives a lamb as his sin-offering, let it be a female without any mark;

按手在赎罪祭牲的头上，在那宰燔祭牲的地方宰了作赎罪祭。
And he is to put his hand on the head of the offering and put it to death for a sin-offering in the place where they put to death the burned offering.

祭司要用指头蘸些赎罪祭牲的血，抹在燔祭坛的四角上，所有的血都要倒在坛的脚那里，
And the priest is to take some of the blood of the offering with his finger and put it on the horns of the altar of burned offering, and all the rest of the blood is to be drained out at the base of the altar;

又要把所有的脂油都取下，正如取平安祭羊羔的脂油一样。祭司要按献给耶和华火祭的条例，烧在坛上。至于所犯的罪，祭司要为他赎了，他必蒙赦免。
And let him take away all its fat, as the fat is taken away from the lamb of the peace-offerings; and let it be burned by the priest on the altar among the offerings made by fire to the Lord: and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness.

若有人听见发誓的声音（或作若有人听见叫人发誓的声音），他本是见证，却不把所看见的，所知道的说出来，这就是罪，他要担当他的罪孽。
And if anyone does wrong by saying nothing when he is put under oath as a witness of something he has seen or had knowledge of, then he will be responsible:

或是有人摸了不洁的物，无论是不洁的死兽，是不洁的死畜，是不洁的死虫，他却不知道，因此成了不洁，就有了罪。
If anyone becomes unclean through touching unconsciously some unclean thing, such as the dead body of an unclean beast or of unclean cattle or of any unclean animal which goes flat on the earth, he will be responsible:

或是他摸了别人的污秽，无论是染了什么污秽，他却不知道，一知道了就有了罪。
Or if he becomes unclean through touching unconsciously any unclean thing of man, whatever it may be, when it is made clear to him he will be responsible:

或是有人嘴里冒失发誓，要行恶，要行善，无论人在什么事上冒失发誓，他却不知道，一知道了就要在这其中的一件上有了罪。
Or if anyone, without thought, takes an oath to do evil or to do good, whatever he says without thought, with an oath, having no knowledge of what he is doing; when it becomes clear to him, he will be responsible for any of these things.

他有了罪的时候，就要承认所犯的罪，
And whoever is responsible for any such sin, let him make a statement openly of his wrongdoing;

并要因所犯的罪，把他的赎愆祭牲就是羊群中的母羊，或是一只羊羔，或是一只山羊牵到耶和华面前为赎罪祭。至于他的罪，祭司要为他赎了。
And take to the Lord the offering for the wrong which he has done, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin-offering, and the priest will take away his sin.

他的力量若不够献一只羊羔，就要因所犯的罪，把两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽带到耶和华面前为赎愆祭，一只作赎罪祭，一只作燔祭。
And if he has not money enough for a lamb, then let him give, for his offering to the Lord, two doves or two young pigeons; one for a sin-offering and one for a burned offering.

把这些带到祭司那里，祭司就要先把那赎罪祭献上，从鸟的颈项上揪下头来，只是不可把鸟撕断，
And let him take them to the priest, who will first give the sin-offering, twisting off its head from its neck, but not cutting it in two;

也把些赎罪祭牲的血弹在坛的旁边，剩下的血要流在坛的脚那里，这是赎罪祭。
And he is to put drops of the blood of the offering on the side of the altar, and the rest of the blood is to be drained out at the base of the altar; it is a sin-offering.

他要照例献第二只为燔祭。至于他所犯的罪，祭司要为他赎了，他必蒙赦免。
And the second is for a burned offering, in agreement with the law; and the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness.

他的力量若不够献两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽，就要因所犯的罪带供物来，就是细面伊法十分之一为赎罪祭，不可加上油，也不可加上乳香，因为是赎罪祭。
But if he has not enough money for two doves or two young pigeons, then let him give, for the sin he has done, the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal, for a sin-offering; let him put no oil on it, and no perfume, for it is a sin-offering.

他要把供物带到祭司那里，祭司要取出自己的一把来作为纪念，按献给耶和华火祭的条例烧在坛上，这是赎罪祭。
And let him come to the priest with it, and the priest will take some of it in his hand, to be burned on the altar as a sign, among the offerings of the Lord made by fire: it is a sin-offering.

至于他在这几件事中所犯的罪，祭司要为他赎了，他必蒙赦免。剩下的面都归与祭司，和素祭一样。
And the priest will take away his sin and he will have forgiveness: and the rest of the offering will be the priest's, in the same way as the meal offering.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

人若在耶和华的圣物上误犯了罪，有了过犯，就要照你所估的，按圣所的舍客勒拿银子，将赎愆祭牲就是羊群中一只没有残疾的公绵羊牵到耶和华面前为赎愆祭。
If anyone is untrue, sinning in error in connection with the holy things of the Lord, let him take his offering to the Lord, a male sheep from the flock, without any mark, of the value fixed by you in silver by shekels, by the scale of the holy place.

并且他因在圣物上的差错要偿还，另外加五分之一，都给祭司。祭司要用赎愆祭的公绵羊为他赎罪，他必蒙赦免。
And he is to make payment to the priest for what he has done wrong in relation to the holy thing, together with a fifth part of its value in addition; and the priest will take away his sin by the sheep of his offering, and he will have forgiveness.

若有人犯罪，行了耶和华所吩咐不可行的什么事，他虽然不知道，还是有了罪，就要担当他的罪孽。
And if anyone does wrong, and does any of the things which the Lord has given orders are not to be done, though he has no knowledge of it, still he is in the wrong and he is responsible.

也要照你所估定的价，从羊群中牵一只没有残疾的公绵羊来，给祭司作赎愆祭。至于他误行的那错事，祭司要为他赎罪，他必蒙赦免。
Let him come to the priest with a sheep, a male without any mark out of the flock, of the value fixed by you, as an offering for his error; and the priest will take away the sin which he did in error, and he will have forgiveness.

这是赎愆祭，因他在耶和华面前实在有了罪。
It is an offering for his error: he is certainly responsible before the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

若有人犯罪，干犯耶和华，在邻舍交付他的物上，或是在交易上行了诡诈，或是抢夺人的财物，或是欺压邻舍，
If anyone does wrong, and is untrue to the Lord, acting falsely to his neighbour in connection with something put in his care, or something given for a debt, or has taken away anything by force, or has been cruel to his neighbour,

或是在捡了遗失的物上行了诡诈，说谎起誓，在这一切的事上犯了什么罪。
Or has taken a false oath about the loss of something which he has come across by chance; if a man has done any of these evil things,

他既犯了罪，有了过犯，就要归还他所抢夺的，或是因欺压所得的，或是人交付他的，或是人遗失他所捡的物，
Causing sin to come on him, then he will have to give back the thing he took by force or got by cruel acts, or the goods which were put in his care or the thing he came on by chance,

或是他因什么物起了假誓，就要如数归还，另外加上五分之一，在查出他有罪的日子要交还本主。
Or anything about which he took a false oath; he will have to give it all back, with the addition of a fifth of its value, to him whose property it is, when he has been judged to be in the wrong.

也要照你所估定的价，把赎愆祭牲就是羊群中一只没有残疾的公绵羊牵到耶和华面前，给祭司为赎愆祭。
Then let him take to the Lord the offering for his wrongdoing; giving to the priest for his offering, a male sheep from the flock, without any mark, of the value fixed by you:

祭司要在耶和华面前为他赎罪，他无论行了什么事，使他有了罪，都必蒙赦免。
And the priest will take away his sin from before the Lord, and he will have forgiveness for whatever crime he has done

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要吩咐亚伦和他的子孙说，燔祭的条例乃是这样，燔祭要放在坛的柴上，从晚上到天亮，坛上的火要常常烧着。
Give orders to Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law for the burned offering: the offering is to be on the fire-wood on the altar all night till the morning; and the fire of the altar is to be kept burning.

祭司要穿上细麻布衣服，又要把细麻布裤子穿在身上，把坛上所烧的燔祭灰收起来，倒在坛的旁边。
And the priest is to put on his linen robes and his linen trousers, and take up what is over of the offering after it has been burned on the altar, and put it by the side of the altar.

随后要脱去这衣服，穿上别的衣服，把灰拿到营外洁净之处。
Then having taken off his linen robes and put on other clothing, he is to take it away into a clean place, outside the tent-circle.

坛上的火要在其上常常烧着，不可熄灭。祭司要每日早晨在上面烧柴，并要把燔祭摆在坛上，在其上烧平安祭牲的脂油。
The fire on the altar is to be kept burning; it is never to go out; every morning the priest is to put wood on it, placing the burned offering in order on it, and there the fat of the peace-offering is to be burned.

在坛上必有常常烧着的火，不可熄灭。
Let the fire be kept burning on the altar at all times; it is never to go out.

素祭的条例乃是这样，亚伦的子孙要在坛前把这祭献在耶和华面前。
And this is the law for the meal offering: it is to be offered to the Lord before the altar by the sons of Aaron.

祭司要从其中就是从素祭的细面中取出自己的一把，又要取些油和素祭上所有的乳香，烧在坛上，奉给耶和华为馨香素祭的纪念。
The priest is to take in his hand some of the meal of the meal offering and of the oil of it, and all the perfume on it, burning it on the altar as a sign, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

所剩下的，亚伦和他子孙要吃，必在圣处不带酵而吃，要在会幕的院子里吃。
And whatever is over Aaron and his sons may have for their food, taking it without leaven in a holy place; in the open space of the Tent of meeting they may take a meal of it.

烤的时候不可搀酵。这是从所献给我的火祭中赐给他们的分，是至圣的，和赎罪祭并赎愆祭一样。
It is not to be cooked with leaven. I have given it to them as their part of the offerings made by fire to me; it is most holy, as are the sin-offerings and the offerings for error.

凡献给耶和华的火祭，亚伦子孙中的男丁都要吃这一分，直到万代，作他们永得的分。摸这些祭物的，都要成为圣。
Every male among the children of Aaron may have it for food; it is their right for ever through all your generations, from the offerings made by fire to the Lord: anyone touching them will be holy.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

当亚伦受膏的日子，他和他子孙所要献给耶和华的供物，就是细面伊法十分之一，为常献的素祭，早晨一半，晚上一半。
This is the offering which Aaron and his sons are to make to the Lord on the day when he is made a priest: the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal for a meal offering for ever; half of it in the morning and half in the evening.

要在铁鏊上用油调和作成，调匀了，你就拿进来，烤好了分成块子，献给耶和华为馨香的素祭。
Let it be made with oil on a flat plate; when it is well mixed and cooked, let it be broken and taken in as a meal offering, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

亚伦的子孙中，接续他为受膏的祭司，要把这素祭献上，要全烧给耶和华。这是永远的定例。
And the same offering is to be given by that one of his sons who takes his place as priest; by an order for ever, all of it is to be burned before the Lord.

祭司的素祭都要烧了，却不可吃。
Every meal offering offered for the priest is to be completely burned: nothing of it is to be taken for food.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你对亚伦和他的子孙说，赎罪祭的条例乃是这样，要在耶和华面前，宰燔祭牲的地方宰赎罪祭牲，这是至圣的。
Say to Aaron and his sons, This is the law for the sin-offering: the sin-offering is to be put to death before the Lord in the same place as the burned offering; it is most holy.

为赎罪献这祭的祭司要吃，要在圣处，就是在会幕的院子里吃。
The priest by whom it is offered for sin, is to take it for his food in a holy place, in the open space of the Tent of meeting.

凡摸这祭肉的要成为圣，这祭牲的血若弹在什么衣服上，所弹的那一件要在圣处洗净。
Anyone touching the flesh of it will be holy: and if any of the blood is dropped on any clothing, the thing on which the blood has been dropped is to be washed in a holy place.

惟有煮祭物的瓦器要打碎，若是煮在铜器里，这铜器要擦磨，在水中涮净。
But the vessel of earth in which the flesh was cooked is to be broken; or if a brass vessel was used, it is to be rubbed clean and washed out with water.

凡祭司中的男丁都可以吃，这是至圣的。
Every male among the priests may take it for his food: it is most holy.

凡赎罪祭，若将血带进会幕在圣所赎罪，那肉都不可吃，必用火焚烧。
No sin-offering, the blood of which is taken into the Tent of meeting, to take away sin in the holy place, may be used for food: it is to be burned with fire.

赎愆祭的条例乃是如此，这祭是至圣的。
And this is the law of the offering for wrongdoing: it is most holy.

人在哪里宰燔祭牲，也要在哪里宰赎愆祭牲，其血，祭司要洒在坛的周围。
They are to put to death the offering for wrongdoing in the same place as the burned offering; and the priest is to put the blood on and round the altar.

又要将肥尾巴和盖脏的脂油，
And all the fat of it, the fat tail and the fat covering the inside parts, is to be given as an offering.

两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，就是靠腰两旁的脂油，并肝上的网子和腰子，一概取下。
And the two kidneys, and the fat on them, which is by the top of the legs, and the fat joining the liver and the kidneys, he is to take away:

祭司要在坛上焚烧，为献给耶和华的火祭，是赎愆祭。
They are to be burned by the priest on the altar for an offering made by fire to the Lord: it is an offering for wrongdoing.

祭司中的男丁都可以吃这祭物，要在圣处吃，是至圣的。
Every male among the priests may have it as food in a holy place: it is most holy.

赎罪祭怎样，赎愆祭也是怎样，两个祭是一个条例。献赎愆祭赎罪的祭司要得这祭物。
As is the sin-offering, so is the offering for wrongdoing; there is one law for them: the priest who makes the offering to take away sin, he is to have it.

献燔祭的祭司，无论为谁奉献，要亲自得他所献那燔祭牲的皮。
And the priest offering any man's burned offering for him, may have the skin of the burned offering which is offered by him.

凡在炉中烤的素祭和煎盘中作的，并铁鏊上作的，都要归那献祭的祭司。
And every meal offering which is cooked in the oven and everything made in a cooking pot or on a flat plate, is for the priest by whom it is offered.

凡素祭，无论是油调和的，是干的，都要归亚伦的子孙，大家均分。
And every meal offering, mixed with oil or dry, is for all the sons of Aaron in equal measure.

人献与耶和华平安祭的条例乃是这样，
And this is the law for the peace-offerings offered to the Lord.

他若为感谢献上，就要用调油的无酵饼和抹油的无酵薄饼，并用油调匀细面作的饼，与感谢祭一同献上。
If any man gives his offering as a praise-offering, then let him give with the offering, unleavened cakes mixed with oil and thin unleavened cakes covered with oil and cakes of the best meal well mixed with oil.

要用有酵的饼和为感谢献的平安祭，与供物一同献上。
With his peace-offering let him give cakes of leavened bread, as a praise-offering.

从各样的供物中，他要把一个饼献给耶和华为举祭，是要归给洒平安祭牲血的祭司。
And let him give one out of every offering to be lifted up before the Lord; that it may be for the priest who puts the blood of the peace-offering on the altar.

为感谢献平安祭牲的肉，要在献的日子吃，一点不可留到早晨。
And the flesh of the praise-offering is to be taken as food on the day when it is offered; no part of it may be kept till the morning.

若所献的是为还愿，或是甘心献的，必在献祭的日子吃，所剩下的第二天也可以吃。
But if his offering is made because of an oath or given freely, it may be taken as food on the day when it is offered; and the rest may be used up on the day after:

但所剩下的祭肉，到第三天要用火焚烧。
But if any of the flesh of the offering is still unused on the third day, it is to be burned with fire.

第三天若吃了平安祭的肉，这祭必不蒙悦纳，人所献的也不算为祭，反为可憎嫌的，吃这祭肉的，就必担当他的罪孽。
And if any of the flesh of the peace-offering is taken as food on the third day, it will not be pleasing to God and will not be put to the account of him who gives it; it will be unclean and a cause of sin to him who takes it as food.

挨了污秽物的肉就不可吃，要用火焚烧。至于平安祭的肉，凡洁净的人都要吃。
And flesh touched by any unclean thing may not be taken for food: it is to be burned with fire; and as for the flesh of the peace-offerings, everyone who is clean may take it as food:

只是献与耶和华平安祭的肉，人若不洁净而吃了，这人必从民中剪除。
But he who is unclean when he takes as food the flesh of the peace-offerings, which are the Lord's, will be cut off from his people.

有人摸了什么不洁净的物，或是人的不洁净，或是不洁净的牲畜，或是不洁可憎之物，吃了献与耶和华平安祭的肉，这人必从民中剪除。
And anyone who, after touching any unclean thing of man or an unclean beast or any unclean and disgusting thing, takes as food the flesh of the peace-offerings, which are the Lord's, will be cut off from his people.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，牛的脂油，绵羊的脂油，山羊的脂油，你们都不可吃。
Say to the children of Israel: You are not to take any fat, of ox or sheep or goat, for food.

自死的和被野兽撕裂的，那脂油可以作别的使用，只是你们万不可吃。
And the fat of that which comes to a natural death, and the fat of that which is attacked by beasts, may be used for other purposes, but not in any way for food.

无论何人吃了献给耶和华当火祭牲畜的脂油，那人必从民中剪除。
For anyone who takes as food the fat of any beast of which men make an offering by fire to the Lord, will be cut off from his people.

在你们一切的住处，无论是雀鸟的血是野兽的血，你们都不可吃。
And you are not to take for food any blood, of bird or of beast, in any of your houses.

无论是谁吃血，那人必从民中剪除。
Whoever takes any blood for food will be cut off from his people.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，献平安祭给耶和华的，要从平安祭中取些来奉给耶和华。
Say to the children of Israel: He who makes a peace-offering to the Lord, is to give an offering to the Lord out of his peace-offering:

他亲手献给耶和华的火祭，就是脂油和胸，要带来，好把胸在耶和华面前作摇祭，摇一摇。
He himself is to take to the Lord the offering made by fire, even the fat with the breast, so that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before the Lord.

祭司要把脂油在坛上焚烧，但胸要归亚伦和他的子孙。
And the fat is to be burned by the priest on the altar, but the breast is for Aaron and his sons.

你们要从平安祭中把右腿作举祭，奉给祭司。
And the right leg you are to give to the priest for an offering to be lifted up out of what is given for your peace-offerings.

亚伦子孙中，献平安祭牲血和脂油的，要得这右腿为分。
That man, among the sons of Aaron, by whom the blood of the peace-offering and the fat are offered, is to have the right leg for his part.

因为我从以色列人的平安祭中，取了这摇的胸和举的腿给祭司亚伦和他子孙，作他们从以色列人中所永得的分。
For the breast which is waved and the right leg which is lifted up on high I have taken from the children of Israel, from their peace-offerings, and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as their right for ever from the children of Israel.

这是从耶和华火祭中，作亚伦受膏的分和他子孙受膏的分，正在摩西（原文作他）叫他们前来给耶和华供祭司职分的日子，
This is the holy part given to Aaron and to his sons, out of the offerings made to the Lord by fire, on the day when they were made priests before the Lord;

就是在摩西（原文作他）膏他们的日子，耶和华吩咐以色列人给他们的。这是他们世世代代永得的分。
Which the Lord said the children of Israel were to give them, on the day when he made them his priests. It is their right for ever from generation to generation.

这就是燔祭，素祭，赎罪祭，赎愆祭，和平安祭的条例，并承接圣职的礼，
These are the laws for the burned offering, the meal offering, and the offering for wrongdoing; and for the making of priests, and for the giving of peace-offerings;

都是耶和华在西乃山所吩咐摩西的，就是他在西乃旷野吩咐以色列人献供物给耶和华之日所说的。
As they were given by the Lord to Moses on Mount Sinai, on the day when the Lord gave orders to the children of Israel to make their offerings to the Lord, in the waste land of Sinai.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你将亚伦和他儿子一同带来，并将圣衣，膏油，与赎罪祭的一只公牛，两只公绵羊，一筐无酵饼都带来，
Take Aaron, and his sons with him, and the robes and the holy oil and the ox of the sin-offering and the two male sheep and the basket of unleavened bread;

又招聚会众到会幕门口。
And let all the people come together at the door of the Tent of meeting.

摩西就照耶和华所吩咐的行了，于是会众聚集在会幕门口。
And Moses did as the Lord said, and all the people came together at the door of the Tent of meeting.

摩西告诉会众说，这就是耶和华所吩咐当行的事。
And Moses said to the people, This is what the Lord has given orders to be done.

摩西带了亚伦和他儿子来，用水洗了他们。
Then Moses took Aaron and his sons; and after washing them with water,

给亚伦穿上内袍，束上腰带，穿上外袍，又加上以弗得，用其上巧工织的带子把以弗得系在他身上，
He put the coat on him, making it tight with its band, and then the robe, and over it the ephod, with its band of needlework to keep it in place.

又给他戴上胸牌，把乌陵和土明放在胸牌内，
And he put the priest's bag on him, and in the bag he put the Urim and Thummim.

把冠冕戴在他头上，在冠冕的前面钉上金牌，就是圣冠，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And on his head he put the head-dress, and in front of the head-dress the plate of gold, the holy crown, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

摩西用膏油抹帐幕和其中所有的，使它成圣。
And Moses took the holy oil and put it on the House and on all the things in it, to make them holy.

又用膏油在坛上弹了七次，又抹了坛和坛的一切器皿，并洗濯盆和盆座，使它成圣。
Seven times he put oil on the altar and on all its vessels, and on the washing-basin and its base, to make them holy.

又把膏油倒在亚伦的头上膏他，使他成圣。
And some of the oil he put on Aaron's head, to make him holy.

摩西带了亚伦的儿子来，给他们穿上内袍，束上腰带，包上裹头巾，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
Then he took Aaron's sons, clothing them with the coats, and putting the bands round them, and the head-dresses on their heads, as the Lord had given him orders.

他牵了赎罪祭的公牛来，亚伦和他儿子按手在赎罪祭公牛的头上，
And he took the ox of the sin-offering: and Aaron and his sons put their hands on the head of the ox,

就宰了公牛。摩西用指头蘸血，抹在坛上四角的周围，使坛洁净，把血倒在坛的脚那里，使坛成圣，坛就洁净了。
And he put it to death; and Moses took the blood and put it on the horns of the altar and round it with his finger, and made the altar clean, draining out the blood at the base of the altar; so he made it holy, taking away what was unclean.

又取脏上所有的脂油和肝上的网子，并两个腰子与腰子上的脂油，都烧在坛上。
And he took all the fat on the inside parts, and the fat on the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat, to be burned on the altar;

惟有公牛，连皮带肉并粪，用火烧在营外，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
But the ox, with its skin and its flesh and its waste, was burned with fire outside the tent-circle, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

他奉上燔祭的公绵羊，亚伦和他儿子按手在羊的头上，
And he put the male sheep of the burned offering before the Lord, and Aaron and his sons put their hands on its head,

就宰了公羊。摩西把血洒在坛的周围，
And he put it to death; and Moses put some of the blood on and round the altar.

把羊切成块子，把头和肉块并脂油都烧了。
And when the sheep had been cut into parts, the head and the parts and the fat were burned by Moses.

用水洗了脏腑和腿，就把全羊烧在坛上为馨香的燔祭，是献给耶和华的火祭，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And the inside parts and the legs were washed with water and all the sheep was burned by Moses on the altar; it was a burned offering for a sweet smell: it was an offering made by fire to the Lord, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

他又奉上第二只公绵羊，就是承接圣职之礼的羊，亚伦和他儿子按手在羊的头上，
And he put the other sheep before the Lord, the sheep with which they were made priests; and Aaron and his sons put their hands on the head of the sheep,

就宰了羊。摩西把些血抹在亚伦的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上，
And he put it to death; and Moses took some of the blood and put it on the point of Aaron's right ear and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot.

又带了亚伦的儿子来，把些血抹在他们的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上，又把血洒在坛的周围。
Then he took Aaron's sons, and Moses put some of the blood on the point of their right ears and on the thumbs of their right hands and on the great toes of their right feet: and Moses put the blood on and round the altar.

取脂油和肥尾巴，并脏上一切的脂油与肝上的网子，两个腰子和腰子上的脂油，并右腿，
And he took the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat on the inside parts, and the fat on the liver, and the two kidneys with their fat, and the right leg;

再从耶和华面前，盛无酵饼的筐子里取出一个无酵饼，一个油饼，一个薄饼，都放在脂油和右腿上，
And out of the basket of unleavened bread which was before the Lord he took one unleavened cake, and one cake of bread with oil on it, and one thin cake, and put them on the fat and on the right leg:

把这一切放在亚伦的手上和他儿子的手上作摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇。
And he put them all on the hands of Aaron and on the hands of his sons, waving them for a wave offering before the Lord.

摩西从他们的手上拿下来，烧在坛上的燔祭上，都是为承接圣职献给耶和华馨香的火祭。
And Moses took them from their hands, and they were burned on the altar on the burned offering, as a priest's offering for a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

摩西拿羊的胸作为摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，是承接圣职之礼，归摩西的分，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And Moses took the breast, waving it for a wave offering before the Lord; it was Moses' part of the sheep of the priest's offering, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

摩西取点膏油和坛上的血，弹在亚伦和他的衣服上，并他儿子和他儿子的衣服上，使他和他们的衣服一同成圣。
And Moses took some of the holy oil and of the blood which was on the altar and put it on Aaron and on his robes, and on his sons and on his sons' robes; and made Aaron holy, and his robes and his sons and his sons' robes with him.

摩西对亚伦和他儿子说，把肉煮在会幕门口，在那里吃，又吃承接圣职筐子里的饼，按我所吩咐的说（或作按所吩咐我的说），这是亚伦和他儿子要吃的。
And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, The flesh is to be cooked in water at the door of the Tent of meeting, and there you are to take it as food, together with the bread in the basket, as I have given orders, saying, It is the food of Aaron and his sons.

剩下的肉和饼，你们要用火焚烧。
And that which is over of the flesh and of the bread is to be burned with fire.

你们七天不可出会幕的门，等到你们承接圣职的日子满了，因为主叫你们七天承接圣职。
And you are not to go out from the door of the Tent of meeting for seven days, till the days for making you priest are ended; for this will be the work of seven days.

像今天所行的都是耶和华吩咐行的，为你们赎罪。
What has been done this day, has been ordered by the Lord to take away your sin.

七天你们要昼夜住在会幕门口，遵守耶和华的吩咐，免得你们死亡，因为所吩咐我的就是这样。
And you are to keep watch for the Lord at the door of the Tent of meeting day and night for seven days, so that death may not come to you: for so he has given me orders.

于是亚伦和他儿子行了耶和华借着摩西所吩咐的一切事。
And Aaron and his sons did all the things about which the Lord had given orders through Moses.

到了第八天，摩西召了亚伦和他儿子，并以色列的众长老来，
And on the eighth day Moses sent for Aaron and his sons and the responsible men of Israel;

对亚伦说，你当取牛群中的一只公牛犊作赎罪祭，一只公绵羊作燔祭，都要没有残疾的，献在耶和华面前。
And he said to Aaron, Take a young ox for a sin-offering and a male sheep for a burned offering, without a mark, and make an offering of them before the Lord.

你也要对以色列人说，你们当取一只公山羊作赎罪祭，又取一只牛犊和一只绵羊羔，都要一岁，没有残疾的，作燔祭，
And say to the children of Israel: Take a he-goat for a sin-offering, and a young ox and a lamb, in their first year, without any mark on them, for a burned offering;

又取一只公牛，一只公绵羊作平安祭，献在耶和华面前，并取调油的素祭，因为今天耶和华要向你们显现。
And an ox and a male sheep for peace-offerings, to be put to death before the Lord; and a meal offering mixed with oil: for this day you are to see the Lord.

于是他们把摩西所吩咐的，带到会幕前，全会众都近前来，站在耶和华面前。
And they took the things ordered by Moses, before the Tent of meeting, and all the people came near, waiting before the Lord.

摩西说，这是耶和华吩咐你们所当行的，耶和华的荣光就要向你们显现。
And Moses said, This is what the Lord has said you are to do; and you will see the glory of the Lord.

摩西对亚伦说，你就近坛前，献你的赎罪祭和燔祭，为自己与百姓赎罪，又献上百姓的供物，为他们赎罪，都照耶和华所吩咐的。
And Moses said to Aaron, Come near to the altar and make your sin-offering and your burned offering to take away your sin and the sin of the people, and make the people's offering to take away their sin; as the Lord has given orders.

于是，亚伦就近坛前，宰了为自己作赎罪祭的牛犊。
So Aaron came near to the altar and put to death the ox for the sin-offering for himself;

亚伦的儿子把血奉给他，他就把指头蘸在血中，抹在坛的四角上，又把血倒在坛脚那里。
And the sons of Aaron gave him the blood and he put his finger in the blood and put it on the horns of the altar, draining out the blood at the base of the altar;

惟有赎罪祭的脂油和腰子，并肝上取的网子，都烧在坛上，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
But the fat and the kidneys and the fat on the liver of the sin-offering were burned by him on the altar as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

又用火将肉和皮烧在营外。
And the flesh and the skin were burned with fire outside the tent-circle;

亚伦宰了燔祭牲，他儿子把血递给他，他就洒在坛的周围，
And he put to death the burned offering; and Aaron's sons gave him the blood and he put some of it on and round the altar;

又把燔祭一块一块地，连头递给他，他都烧在坛上。
And they gave him the parts of the burned offering, in their order, and the head, to be burned on the altar.

又洗了脏腑和腿，烧在坛上的燔祭上。
And the inside parts and the legs, when they had been washed with water, were burned on the burned offering on the altar.

他奉上百姓的供物，把那给百姓作赎罪祭的公山羊宰了，为罪献上，和先献的一样。
And he made an offering for the people and took the goat of the sin-offering for the people and put it to death, offering it for sin, in the same way as the first.

也奉上燔祭，照例而献。
And he took the burned offering, offering it in the ordered way;

他又奉上素祭，从其中取一满把，烧在坛上，这是在早晨的燔祭以外。
And he put the meal offering before the Lord, and taking some of it in his hand he had it burned on the altar, separately from the burned offering of the morning.

亚伦宰了那给百姓作平安祭的公牛和公绵羊。他儿子把血递给他，他就洒在坛的周围。
And he put to death the ox and the sheep, which were the peace-offerings for the people; and Aaron's sons gave him the blood and he put some of it on and round the altar;

又把公牛和公绵羊的脂油，肥尾巴，并盖脏的脂油与腰子，和肝上的网子，都递给他。
And as for the fat of the ox and the fat tail of the sheep and the fat covering the inside parts and the kidneys and the fat on the liver;

把脂油放在胸上，他就把脂油烧在坛上。
They put the fat on the breasts, and the fat was burned on the altar.

胸和右腿，亚伦当作摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，都是照摩西所吩咐的。
And Aaron took the breasts and the right leg, waving them for a wave offering before the Lord, as Moses gave orders.

亚伦向百姓举手，为他们祝福。他献了赎罪祭，燔祭，平安祭就下来了。
And Aaron, lifting up his hands to the people, gave them a blessing; and he came down from offering the sin-offering, and the burned offering, and the peace-offerings.

摩西，亚伦进入会幕，又出来为百姓祝福，耶和华的荣光就向众民显现。
And Moses and Aaron went into the Tent of meeting, and came out and gave the people a blessing, and the glory of the Lord was seen by all the people.

有火从耶和华面前出来，在坛上烧尽燔祭和脂油，众民一见，就都欢呼，俯伏在地。
And fire came out from before the Lord, burning up the offering on the altar and the fat: and when all the people saw it, they gave a loud cry, falling down on their faces.

亚伦的儿子拿答，亚比户各拿自己的香炉，盛上火，加上香，在耶和华面前献上凡火，是耶和华没有吩咐他们的，
And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took their vessels and put fire in them and perfume, burning strange fire before the Lord, which he had not given them orders to do.

就有火从耶和华面前出来，把他们烧灭，他们就死在耶和华面前。
And fire came out from before the Lord, burning them up and causing their destruction before the Lord.

于是摩西对亚伦说，这就是耶和华所说，我在亲近我的人中要显为圣，在众民面前，我要得荣耀。亚伦就默默不言。
Then Moses said to Aaron, This is what the Lord said, I will be holy in the eyes of all those who come near to me, and I will be honoured before all the people. And Aaron said nothing.

摩西召了亚伦叔父乌薛的儿子米沙利，以利撒反来，对他们说，上前来，把你们的亲属从圣所前抬到营外。
And Moses sent for Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel, the brother of Aaron's father, and said to them, Come near and take your brothers away from before the holy place, outside the tent-circle.

于是二人上前来，把他们穿着袍子抬到营外，是照摩西所吩咐的。
So they came and took them, in their coats, outside the tent-circle, as Moses had said.

摩西对亚伦和他儿子以利亚撒，以他玛说，不可蓬头散发，也不可撕裂衣裳，免得你们死亡，又免得耶和华向会众发怒，只要你们的弟兄以色列全家为耶和华所发的火哀哭。
And Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons, Do not let your hair be loose, and give no signs of grief; so that death may not overtake you, and his wrath come on all the people; but let there be weeping among your brothers and all the house of Israel for this burning of the Lord's fire.

你们也不可出会幕的门，恐怕你们死亡，因为耶和华的膏油在你们的身上。他们就照摩西的话行了。
And do not go out from the door of the Tent of meeting, or death will come to you; for the holy oil of the Lord is on you. And they did as Moses said.

耶和华晓谕亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Aaron:

你和你儿子进会幕的时候，清酒，浓酒都不可喝，免得你们死亡，这要作你们世世代代永远的定例。
Take no wine, or strong drink, you or your sons with you, when you go into the Tent of meeting, that it may not be the cause of death to you; this is an order for ever through all your generations.

使你们可以将圣的，俗的，洁净的，不洁净的，分别出来。
And make a division between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean;

又使你们可以将耶和华借摩西晓谕以色列人的一切律例教训他们。
Teaching the children of Israel all the laws which the Lord has given them by the hand of Moses.

摩西对亚伦和他剩下的儿子以利亚撒，以他玛说，你们献给耶和华火祭中所剩的素祭，要在坛旁不带酵而吃，因为是至圣的。
And Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and Ithamar, his sons who were still living, Take the rest of the meal offering from the offerings of the Lord made by fire, and take it for your food, without leaven, at the side of the altar, for it is most holy.

你们要在圣处吃，因为在献给耶和华的火祭中，这是你的分和你儿子的分，所吩咐我的本是这样。
It is to be for your food in a holy place, because it is your right and your sons' right, from the offerings of the Lord made by fire: for so am I ordered.

所摇的胸，所举的腿，你们要在洁净地方吃。你和你的儿女都要同吃，因为这些是从以色列人平安祭中给你，当你的分和你儿子的分。
And the breast which is waved and the leg which is lifted up on high, you are to take as your food in a clean place; you and your sons and your daughters with you: for they are given to you as your right and your sons' right, from the peace-offerings of the children of Israel.

所举的腿，所摇的胸，他们要与火祭的脂油一同带来当摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，这要归你和你儿子，当作永得的分，都是照耶和华所吩咐的。
Let them take the breast which is waved and the leg which is lifted up on high, with the fat of the burned offering, to be waved for a wave offering before the Lord; and this will be for you and for your sons with you, for a right for ever, as the Lord has given orders.

当下摩西急切地寻找作赎罪祭的公山羊，谁知已经焚烧了，便向亚伦剩下的儿子以利亚撒，以他玛发怒，说，
And Moses was looking for the goat of the sin-offering, but it was burned; and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron, who were still living, saying,

这赎罪祭既是至圣的，主又给了你们，为要你们担当会众的罪孽，在耶和华面前为他们赎罪，你们为何没有在圣所吃呢？
Why did you not make a meal of the sin-offering in the holy place? For it is most holy and he has given it to you, so that the sin of the people may be put on it, to take away their sin before the Lord.

看哪，这祭牲的血并没有拿到圣所里去，你们本当照我所吩咐的，在圣所里吃这祭肉。
See, its blood was not taken into the holy place: certainly it was right for you to have taken it as food in the holy place, as I gave orders.

亚伦对摩西说，今天他们在耶和华面前献上赎罪祭和燔祭，我又遇见这样的灾，若今天吃了赎罪祭，耶和华岂能看为美呢？
And Aaron said to Moses, You have seen that today they have made their sin-offering and their burned offering before the Lord, and such things as these have come on me. If I had taken the sin-offering as food today, would it have been pleasing to the Lord?

摩西听见这话，便以为美。
And after hearing this, Moses was no longer angry.

耶和华对摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

你们晓谕以色列人说，在地上一切走兽中可吃的乃是这些，
Say to the children of Israel: These are the living things which you may have for food among all the beasts on the earth.

凡蹄分两瓣，倒嚼的走兽，你们都可以吃。
You may have as food any beast which has a division in the horn of its foot, and whose food comes back into its mouth to be crushed again.

但那倒嚼或分蹄之中不可吃的乃是骆驼，因为倒嚼不分蹄，就与你们不洁净。
But, at the same time, of those beasts, you may not take for food the camel, because its food comes back but the horn of its foot is not parted in two; it is unclean to you.

沙番因为倒嚼不分蹄，就与你们不洁净。
And the rock-badger, for the same reason, is unclean to you.

兔子因为倒嚼不分蹄，就与你们不洁净。
And the hare, because the horn of its foot is not parted in two, is unclean to you.

猪因为蹄分两瓣，却不倒嚼，就与你们不洁净。
And the pig is unclean to you, because though the horn of its foot is parted, its food does not come back.

这些兽的肉，你们不可吃，死的，你们不可摸，都与你们不洁净。
Their flesh may not be used for food, and their dead bodies may not even be touched; they are unclean to you.

水中可吃的乃是这些，凡在水里，海里，河里，有翅有鳞的，都可以吃。
These you may have for food of all things living in the water: anything living in the water, in the seas or rivers, which has special parts for swimming and skin formed of thin plates, may be used for food.

凡在海里，河里，并一切水里游动的活物，无翅无鳞的，你们都当以为可憎。
All other things living and moving in the water, in the sea or in the rivers, are a disgusting thing to you;

这些无翅无鳞，以为可憎的，你们不可吃它的肉，死的也当以为可憎。
They may not be used for food, and their dead bodies are disgusting to you.

凡水里无翅无鳞的，你们都当以为可憎。
Anything in the water which has no special parts for swimming and no thin plates on its skin is disgusting to you.

雀鸟中你们当以为可憎，不可吃的乃是，雕，狗头雕，红头雕，
And among birds these are to be disgusting to you, and not to be used for food: the eagle and the gier-eagle and the ospray;

鹞鹰，小鹰与其类。
And the kite and the falcon, and birds of that sort;

乌鸦与其类。
Every raven, and birds of that sort;

鸵鸟，夜鹰，鱼鹰，鹰与其类。
And the ostrich and the night-hawk and the sea-hawk, and birds of that sort;

？？鸟，鸬鹚，猫头鹰，
And the little owl and the cormorant and the great owl;

角鸱，鹈鹕，秃雕，
And the water-hen and the pelican and the vulture;

鹳，鹭鸶与其类，戴？？与蝙蝠。
The stork and the heron, and birds of that sort, and the hoopoe and the bat.

凡有翅膀用四足爬行的物，你们都当以为可憎。
Every winged four-footed thing which goes on the earth is disgusting to you;

只是有翅膀用四足爬行的物中，有足有腿，在地上蹦跳的，你们还可以吃。
But of the winged four-footed things, those which have long legs for jumping on the earth you may have for food;

其中有蝗虫，蚂蚱，蟋蟀与其类，蚱蜢与其类，这些你们都可以吃。
Such as all the different sorts of locust.

但是有翅膀有四足的爬物，你们都当以为可憎。
But all other winged four-footed things which go on the earth are disgusting to you.

这些都能使你们不洁净。凡摸了死的，必不洁净到晚上。
By these you will be made unclean; anyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean till evening:

凡拿了死的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服。
Whoever takes away the dead body of one of them is to have his clothing washed, and will be unclean till evening.

凡走兽分蹄不成两瓣，也不倒嚼的，是与你们不洁净，凡摸了的就不洁净。
Every beast, in the horn of whose foot there is not a complete division, and whose food does not come back, is unclean to you: anyone touching one of these will be unclean.

凡四足的走兽，用掌行走的，是与你们不洁净，摸其尸的，必不洁净到晚上。
Any four-footed beast which goes on the ball of its foot, is unclean to you: anyone touching the dead body of one of these will be unclean till evening.

拿其尸的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服。这些是与你们不洁净的。
Anyone who takes away the dead body of one of these is to have his clothing washed and be unclean till evening.

地上爬物与你们不洁净的乃是这些，鼬鼠，？？鼠，蜥蜴与其类。
And these are unclean to you among things which go low down on the earth; the weasel and the mouse and the great lizard, and animals of that sort;

壁虎，龙子，守宫，蛇医，？？蜓。
And the ferret and the land crocodile and the lizard and the sand-lizard and the chameleon.

这些爬物都是与你们不洁净的。在它死了以后，凡摸了的，必不洁净到晚上。
All these are unclean to you: anyone touching them when they are dead will be unclean till evening.

其中死了的，掉在什么东西上，这东西就不洁净，无论是木器，衣服，皮子，口袋，不拘是作什么工用的器皿，须要放在水中，必不洁净到晚上，到晚上才洁净了。
The dead body of any of these, falling on anything, will make that thing unclean; if it is any vessel of wood, or clothing, or skin, or bag, whatever it is, if it is used for any purpose, it will have to be put into water, and will be unclean till evening; after that it will be clean.

若有死了掉在瓦器里的，其中不拘有什么，就不洁净，你们要把这瓦器打破了。
And if one of them gets into any vessel of earth, whatever is in the vessel will be unclean and the vessel will have to be broken.

其中一切可吃的食物，沾水的就不洁净，并且那样器皿中一切可喝的，也必不洁净。
Any food in it, and anything on which water from it comes, will be unclean: any drink taken from such a vessel will be unclean.

其中已死的，若有一点掉在什么物件上，那物件就不洁净，不拘是炉子，是锅台，就要打碎，都不洁净，也必与你们不洁净。
Any part of the dead body of one of these, falling on anything, will make it unclean; if it is an oven or a cooking-pot it will have to be broken: they are unclean and will be unclean to you.

但是泉源或是聚水的池子仍是洁净，惟挨了那死的，就不洁净。
But at the same time a fountain or a place where water is stored for use will be clean; but anyone touching their dead bodies will be unclean.

若是死的，有一点掉在要种的子粒上，子粒仍是洁净。
If any part of the dead body of one of these gets on to any seed for planting, it is clean;

若水已经浇在子粒上，那死的有一点掉在上头，这子粒就与你们不洁净。
But if water is put on the seed, and any part of the dead body gets on to it, it will be unclean to you.

你们可吃的走兽若是死了，有人摸它，必不洁净到晚上。
And if any beast which may be used for food comes to a natural death, anyone touching its dead body will be unclean till evening.

有人吃那死了的走兽，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，拿了死走兽的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服。
And he who makes use of any part of its body for food is to have his clothing washed and be unclean till evening; and anyone taking away its body is to have his clothing washed and be unclean till evening.

凡地上的爬物是可憎的，都不可吃。
Everything which goes flat on its body on the earth is disgusting, and is not to be used for food.

凡用肚子行走的和用四足行走的，或是有许多足的，就是一切爬在地上的，你们都不可吃，因为是可憎的。
Whatever goes on its stomach or on four feet or has a great number of feet, even all those going flat on the earth, may not be used for food, for they are disgusting.

你们不可因什么爬物使自己成为可憎的，也不可因这些使自己不洁净，以致染了污秽。
You are not to make yourselves disgusting with anything which goes about flat on the earth; you may not make yourselves unclean with them, in such a way that you are not holy to me.

我是耶和华你们的神，所以你们要成为圣洁，因为我是圣洁的。你们也不可在地上的爬物污秽自己。
For I am the Lord your God: for this reason, make and keep yourselves holy, for I am holy; you are not to make yourselves unclean with any sort of thing which goes about flat on the earth.

我是把你们从埃及地领出来的耶和华，要作你们的神，所以你们要圣洁，因为我是圣洁的。
For I am the Lord, who took you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God; so be you holy, for I am holy.

这是走兽，飞鸟，和水中游动的活物，并地上爬物的条例。
This is the law about beasts and birds and every living thing moving in the waters, and every living thing which goes flat on the earth:

要把洁净的和不洁净的，可吃的与不可吃的活物，都分别出来。
Marking out the unclean from the clean, and the living thing which may be used for food from that which may not.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，若有妇人怀孕生男孩，她就不洁净七天，像在月经污秽的日子不洁净一样。
Say to the children of Israel, If a woman is with child and gives birth to a male child, she will be unclean for seven days, as when she is unwell.

第八天，要给婴孩行割礼。
And on the eighth day let him be given circumcision.

妇人在产血不洁之中，要家居三十三天。她洁净的日子未满，不可摸圣物，也不可进入圣所。
And she will be unclean for thirty-three days till the flow of her blood is stopped; no holy thing may be touched by her, and she may not come into the holy place, till the days for making her clean are ended.

她若生女孩，就不洁净两个七天，像污秽的时候一样，要在产血不洁之中，家居六十六天。
But if she gives birth to a female child, then she will be unclean for two weeks, as when she is unwell; and she will not be completely clean for sixty-six days.

满了洁净的日子，无论是为男孩是为女孩，她要把一岁的羊羔为燔祭，一只雏鸽或是一只斑鸠为赎罪祭，带到会幕门口交给祭司。
And when the days are ended for making her clean for a son or a daughter, let her take to the priest at the door of the Tent of meeting, a lamb of the first year for a burned offering and a young pigeon or a dove for a sin-offering:

祭司要献在耶和华面前，为她赎罪，她的血源就洁净了。这条例是为生育的妇人，无论是生男生女。
And the priest is to make an offering of it before the Lord and take away her sin, and she will be made clean from the flow of her blood. This is the law for a woman who gives birth to a male or a female.

她的力量若不够献一只羊羔，她就要取两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽，一只为燔祭，一只为赎罪祭。祭司要为她赎罪，她就洁净了。
And if she has not money enough for a lamb, then let her take two doves or two young pigeons, one for a burned offering and the other for a sin-offering, and the priest will take away her sin and she will be clean,

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

人的肉皮上若长了疖子，或长了癣，或长了火斑，在他肉皮上成了大麻疯的灾病，就要将他带到祭司亚伦或亚伦作祭司的一个子孙面前。
If a man has on his skin a growth or a mark or a white place, and it becomes the disease of a leper, let him be taken to Aaron the priest, or to one of the priests, his sons;

祭司要察看肉皮上的灾病，若灾病处的毛已经变白，灾病的现象深于肉上的皮，这便是大麻疯的灾病。祭司要察看他，定他为不洁净。
And if, when the priest sees the mark on his skin, the hair on the place is turned white and the mark seems to go deeper than the skin, it is the mark of a leper: and the priest, after looking at him, will say that he is unclean.

若火斑在他肉皮上是白的，现象不深于皮，其上的毛也没有变白，祭司就要将有灾病的人关锁七天。
But if the mark on his skin is white, and does not seem to go deeper than the skin, and the hair on it is not turned white, then the priest will keep him shut up for seven days;

第七天，祭司要察看他，若看灾病止住了，没有在皮上发散，祭司还要将他关锁七天。
And the priest is to see him on the seventh day; and if, in his opinion, the place on his skin has not become worse and is not increased in size, then the priest will keep him shut up for seven days more:

第七天，祭司要再察看他，若灾病发暗，而且没有在皮上发散，祭司要定他为洁净，原来是癣，那人就要洗衣服，得为洁净。
And the priest is to see him again on the seventh day; and if the mark is less bright and is not increased on his skin, then let the priest say that he is clean: it is only a skin-mark, and after his clothing has been washed he will be clean.

但他为得洁净，将身体给祭司察看以后，癣若在皮上发散开了，他要再将身体给祭司察看。
But if the size of the mark on his skin is increased after he has been seen by the priest, let him go to the priest again:

祭司要察看，癣若在皮上发散，就要定他为不洁净，是大麻疯。
And if, after looking at him, he sees that the mark is increased in his skin, let the priest say that he is unclean; he is a leper.

人有了大麻疯的灾病，就要将他带到祭司面前。
When the disease of a leper is seen on a man, let him be taken to the priest;

祭司要察看，皮上若长了白疖，使毛变白，在长白疖之处有了红瘀肉，
And if the priest sees that there is a white growth on the skin, and the hair is turned white, and there is diseased flesh in the growth,

这是肉皮上的旧大麻疯，祭司要定他为不洁净，不用将他关锁，因为他是不洁净了。
It is an old disease in the skin of his flesh, and the priest will say that he is unclean; he will not have to be shut up, for he is clearly unclean.

大麻疯若在皮上四外发散，长满了患灾病人的皮，据祭司察看，从头到脚无处不有，
And if the disease comes out all over his skin, from his head to his feet, as far as the priest is able to see,

祭司就要察看，全身的肉若长满了大麻疯，就要定那患灾病的为洁净，全身都变为白，他乃洁净了。
And if the priest sees that all his flesh is covered with the leper's disease, the priest will say that he is clean: it is all turned white, he is clean.

但红肉几时显在他的身上就几时不洁净。
But whenever diseased flesh is seen on him, he will be unclean.

祭司一看那红肉就定他为不洁净。红肉本是不洁净，是大麻疯。
And when the priest sees the diseased flesh he will say that he is unclean; the diseased flesh is unclean, he is a leper.

红肉若复原，又变白了，他就要来见祭司。
Or if the diseased flesh is turned again and changed to white then he is to come to the priest,

祭司要察看，灾病处若变白了，祭司就要定那患灾病的为洁净，他乃洁净了。
And the priest will see him: and if the place is turned white, then the priest will say that he is free from the disease.

人若在皮肉上长疮，却治好了，
And if a bad place has come out on the skin and is well again,

在长疮之处又起了白疖，或是白中带红的火斑，就要给祭司察看。
And on the same place there is a white growth of a bright mark, red and white, then let the priest see it;

祭司要察看，若现象洼于皮，其上的毛也变白了，就要定他为不洁净，是大麻疯的灾病发在疮中。
And after looking at it, if it seems to go deeper than the skin, and the hair on it is turned white, then the priest will say that the man is unclean: it is the leper's disease, it has come out in the bad place.

祭司若察看，其上没有白毛，也没有洼于皮，乃是发暗，就要将他关锁七天。
But if, after looking at it, he sees that there are no white hairs on it, and it is not deeper than the skin, and it is not very bright, then let the priest keep him shut up for seven days:

若在皮上发散开了，祭司就要定他为不洁净，是灾病。
And if it is increasing on the skin, the priest will say that he is unclean: it is a disease.

火斑若在原处止住，没有发散，便是疮的痕迹，祭司就要定他为洁净。
But if the bright mark keeps in the same place and gets no greater, it is the mark of the old wound, and the priest will say that he is clean.

人的皮肉上若起了火毒，火毒的瘀肉成了火斑，或是白中带红的，或是全白的，
Or if there is a burn on the skin of the flesh, and if the diseased flesh in the burn becomes a bright place, red and white or white,

祭司就要察看，火斑中的毛若变白了，现象又深于皮，是大麻疯在火毒中发出，就要定他为不洁净，是大麻疯的灾病。
The priest is to see it: and if the hair on the bright place is turned white and it seems to go deeper than the skin, he is a leper: it has come out in the burn, and the priest will say that he is unclean: it is the leper's disease.

但是祭司察看，在火斑中若没有白毛，也没有洼于皮，乃是发暗，就要将他关锁七天。
But if, after looking at it, the priest sees that there is no white hair on the bright place, and it is not deeper than the skin, and is not very bright, then let the priest keep him shut up for seven days:

到第七天，祭司要察看他，火斑若在皮上发散开了，就要定他为不洁净，是大麻疯的灾病。
And the priest is to see him again on the seventh day; if it is increased in the skin, then the priest will say that he is unclean: it is the leper's disease.

火斑若在原处止住，没有在皮上发散，乃是发暗，是起的火毒，祭司要定他为洁净，不过是火毒的痕迹。
And if the bright place keeps the same size and gets no greater on the skin, but is less bright, it is the effect of the burn, and the priest will say that he is clean: it is the mark of the burn.

无论男女，若在头上有灾病，或是男人胡须上有灾病，
And when a man or a woman has a disease on the head, or in the hair of the chin,

祭司就要察看，这灾病现象若深于皮，其间有细黄毛，就要定他为不洁净，这是头疥，是头上或是胡须上的大麻疯。
Then the priest is to see the diseased place: and if it seems to go deeper than the skin, and if there is thin yellow hair in it, then the priest will say that he is unclean: he has the mark of the leper's disease on his head or in the hair of his chin.

祭司若察看头疥的灾病，现象不深于皮，其间也没有黑毛，就要将长头疥灾病的关锁七天。
And after looking at the diseased place, if it does not seem to go deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then the priest will have him shut up for seven days:

第七天，祭司要察看灾病，若头疥没有发散，其间也没有黄毛，头疥的现象不深于皮，
And on the seventh day the priest will see the place: and if it is not increased, and there is no yellow hair in it, and it does not seem to go deeper than the skin,

那人就要剃去须发，但他不可剃头疥之处。祭司要将那长头疥的，再关锁七天。
Then his hair is to be cut off, but not on the diseased place, and he is to be shut up for seven days more:

第七天，祭司要察看头疥，头疥若没有在皮上发散，现象也不深于皮，就要定他为洁净，他要洗衣服，便成为洁净。
And on the seventh day the priest will see the place: and if it is not increased, and does not seem to go deeper than the skin, the priest will say that he is clean: and after his clothing has been washed he will be clean.

但他得洁净以后，头疥若在皮上发散开了，
But if the disease in his skin becomes worse after he has been made clean,

祭司就要察看他。头疥若在皮上发散，就不必找那黄毛，他是不洁净了。
Then the priest is to see him: and if the mark is increased, the priest, without looking for the yellow hair, will say that he is unclean.

祭司若看头疥已经止住，其间也长了黑毛，头疥已然痊愈，那人是洁净了，就要定他为洁净。
But if, in his opinion, the growth is stopped, and black hair has come up on it, the disease has gone; he is clean and the priest will say that he is clean.

无论男女，皮肉上若起了火斑，就是白火斑，
And if a man or a woman has bright marks on the skin of their flesh, that is, bright white marks,

祭司就要察看，他们肉皮上的火斑若白中带黑，这是皮上发出的白癣，那人是洁净了。
Then the priest is to see them: and if the white marks on their skin are not very bright, it is a skin disease which has come out on the skin; he is clean.

人头上的发若掉了，他不过是头秃，还是洁净。
And if a man's hair has come out and he has no hair, still he is clean.

他顶前若掉了头发，他不过是顶门秃，还是洁净。
And if the hair has gone from the front part of his head, so that he has no hair there, still he is clean.

头秃处或是顶门秃处若有白中带红的灾病，这就是大麻疯发在他头秃处或是顶门秃处，
But if, on his head or on his brow, where he has no hair, there is a red and white place, it is the disease of the leper coming out on his head or on his brow.

祭司就要察看，他起的那灾病若在头秃处或是顶门秃处有白中带红的，像肉皮上大麻疯的现象，
Then if the priest sees that the growth of the disease has become red and white on his head or on his brow where there is no hair, like the mark in the skin of a leper;

那人就是长大麻疯，不洁净的，祭司总要定他为不洁净，他的灾病是在头上。
He is a leper and unclean; the priest is to say that he is most certainly unclean: the disease is in his head.

身上有长大麻疯灾病的，他的衣服要撕裂，也要蓬头散发，蒙着上唇，喊叫说，不洁净了，不洁净了。
And the leper who has the disease on him is to go about with signs of grief, with his hair loose and his mouth covered, crying, Unclean, unclean.

灾病在他身上的日子，他便是不洁净，他既是不洁净，就要独居营外。
While the disease is on him, he will be unclean. He is unclean: let him keep by himself, living outside the tent-circle.

染了大麻疯灾病的衣服，无论是羊毛衣服，是麻布衣服，
And any clothing of wool or of linen in which is the mark of the disease;

无论是在经上，在纬上，是麻布的，是羊毛的，是在皮子上，或在皮子作的什么物件上，
If it is in the threads of the linen or of the wool, or in leather, or in anything made of skin;

或在衣服上，皮子上，经上，纬上，或在皮子作的什么物件上，这灾病若是发绿，或是发红，是大麻疯的灾病，要给祭司察看。
If there are red or green marks on the clothing, or on the leather, or in the threads of the cloth, or in anything made of skin, it is the leper's disease: let the priest see it.

祭司就要察看那灾病，把染了灾病的物件关锁七天。
And after it has been seen by the priest, the thing which is so marked is to be shut up for seven days:

第七天，他要察看那灾病，灾病或在衣服上，经上，纬上，皮子上，若发散，这皮子无论当作何用，这灾病是蚕食的大麻疯，都是不洁净了。
And he is to see the mark on the seventh day; if the mark is increased in the clothing, or in the threads of the material, or in the leather, whatever the leather is used for, it is the disease biting into it: it is unclean.

那染了灾病的衣服，或是经上，纬上，羊毛上，麻衣上，或是皮子作的什么物件上，他都要焚烧，因为这是蚕食的大麻疯，必在火中焚烧。
And the clothing, or the wool or linen material, or anything of leather in which is the disease, is to be burned: for the disease is biting into it; let it be burned in the fire.

祭司要察看，若灾病在衣服上，经上，纬上，或是皮子作的什么物件上，没有发散，
And if the priest sees that the mark is not increased in the clothing or in any part of the material or in the leather,

祭司就要吩咐他们，把染了灾病的物件洗了，再关锁七天。
Then the priest will give orders for the thing on which the mark is, to be washed, and to be shut up for seven days more:

洗过以后，祭司要察看，那物件若没有变色，灾病也没有消散，那物件就不洁净，是透重的灾病，无论正面反面，都要在火中焚烧。
And if, after the mark has been washed, the priest sees that the colour of it is not changed and it is not increased, it is to be burned in the fire: the disease is working in it, though the damage may be inside or outside.

洗过以后，祭司要察看，若见那灾病发暗，他就要把那灾病从衣服上，皮子上，经上，纬上，都撕去。
And if the priest sees that the mark is less bright after the washing, then let him have it cut out of the clothing or the leather or from the threads of the material:

若仍现在衣服上，或是经上，纬上，皮子作的什么物件上，这就是灾病又发了，必用火焚烧那染灾病的物件。
And if the mark is still seen in the clothing or in the threads of the material or in the leather, it is the disease coming out: the thing in which the disease is will have to be burned with fire.

所洗的衣服，或是经，或是纬，或是皮子作的什么物件，若灾病离开了，要再洗，就洁净了。
And the material of the clothing, or anything of skin, which has been washed, if the mark has gone out of it, let it be washed a second time and it will be clean.

这就是大麻疯灾病的条例，无论是在羊毛衣服上，麻布衣服上，经上，纬上，和皮子作的什么物件上，可以定为洁净或是不洁净。
This is the law about the leper's disease in the thread of wool or linen material, in clothing or in anything of skin, saying how it is to be judged clean or unclean.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

长大麻疯得洁净的日子，其例乃是这样，要带他去见祭司。
This is the law of the leper on the day when he is made clean: he is to be taken to the priest;

祭司要出到营外察看，若见他的大麻疯痊愈了，
And the priest is to go outside the tent-circle; and if, after looking, the priest sees that the mark of the disease has gone from him,

就要吩咐人为那求洁净的拿两只洁净的活鸟和香柏木，朱红色线，并牛膝草来。
Then the priest is to give orders to take, for him who is to be made clean, two living clean birds and some cedar wood and red thread and hyssop.

祭司要吩咐用瓦器盛活水，把一只鸟宰在上面。
And the priest will give orders for one of the birds to be put to death in a vessel made of earth, over flowing water.

至于那只活鸟，祭司要把它和香柏木，朱红色线并牛膝草一同蘸于宰在活水上的鸟血中，
And he will take the living bird and the wood and the red thread and the hyssop and put them in the blood of the bird which was put to death over flowing water.

用以在那长大麻疯求洁净的人身上洒七次，就定他为洁净，又把活鸟放在田野里。
And shaking it seven times over the man who is to be made clean, he will say that he is clean and will let the living bird go free into the open country.

求洁净的人当洗衣服，剃去毛发，用水洗澡，就洁净了，然后可以进营，只是要在自己的帐棚外居住七天。
And he who is to be made clean will have his clothing washed and his hair cut and have a bath, and he will be clean. And after that he will come back to the tent-circle; but he is to keep outside his tent for seven days.

第七天，再把头上所有的头发与胡须，眉毛，并全身的毛，都剃了，又要洗衣服，用水洗身，就洁净了。
And on the seventh day he is to have all the hair cut off his head and his chin and over his eyes--all his hair is to be cut off--and he will have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and he will be clean.

第八天，他要取两只没有残疾的公羊羔和一只没有残疾，一岁的母羊羔，又要把调油的细面伊法十分之三为素祭，并油一罗革，一同取来。
And on the eighth day let him take two male lambs, without any marks on them, and one female lamb of the first year, without a mark, and three tenth parts of an ephah of the best meal, mixed with oil, and one log of oil.

行洁净之礼的祭司要将那求洁净的人和这些东西安置在会幕门口，耶和华面前。
And the priest who is making him clean will put the man who is being made clean, together with these things, before the door of the Tent of meeting.

祭司要取一只公羊羔献为赎愆祭，和那一罗革油一同作摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇。
And the priest is to take one of the male lambs and give it as an offering for wrongdoing, and the log of oil, waving them for a wave offering before the Lord;

把公羊羔宰于圣地，就是宰赎罪祭牲和燔祭牲之地。赎愆祭要归祭司，与赎罪祭一样，是至圣的。
And he is to put the male lamb to death in the place where they put to death the sin-offering and the burned offering, in the holy place; for as the sin-offering is the property of the priest, so is the offering for wrongdoing: it is most holy.

祭司要取些赎愆祭牲的血，抹在求洁净人的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上。
And let the priest take some of the blood of the offering for wrongdoing and put it on the point of the right ear of him who is to be made clean, and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot;

祭司要从那一罗革油中取些倒在自己的左手掌里，
And take some of the oil and put it in the hollow of his left hand;

把右手的一个指头蘸在左手的油里，在耶和华面前用指头弹七次。
And let the priest put his right finger in the oil which is in his left hand, shaking it out with his finger seven times before the Lord;

将手里所剩的油抹在那求洁净人的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上，就是抹在赎愆祭牲的血上。
And of the rest of the oil which is in his hand, the priest will put some on the point of the right ear of the man who is to be made clean, and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot, over the blood of the offering for wrongdoing;

祭司手里所剩的油要抹在那求洁净人的头上，在耶和华面前为他赎罪。
And the rest of the oil in the priest's hand he will put on the head of him who is to be made clean; and so the priest will make him free from sin before the Lord.

祭司要献赎罪祭，为那本不洁净，求洁净的人赎罪，然后要宰燔祭牲，
And the priest will give the sin-offering, and take away the sin of him who is to be made clean from his unclean condition; and after that he will put the burned offering to death.

把燔祭和素祭献在坛上，为他赎罪，他就洁净了。
And the priest is to have the burned offering and the meal offering burned on the altar; and the priest will take away his sin and he will be clean.

他若贫穷不能预备够数，就要取一只公羊羔作赎愆祭，可以摇一摇，为他赎罪，也要把调油的细面伊法十分之一为素祭，和油一罗革一同取来。
And if he is poor and not able to get so much, then he may take one male lamb as an offering for wrongdoing, to be waved to take away his sin, and one tenth part of an ephah of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering, and a log of oil;

又照他的力量取两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽，一只作赎罪祭，一只作燔祭。
And two doves or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and one will be for a sin-offering and the other for a burned offering.

第八天，要为洁净，把这些带到会幕门口，耶和华面前，交给祭司。
And on the eighth day he will take them to the priest, to the door of the Tent of meeting before the Lord, so that he may be made clean.

祭司要把赎愆祭的羊羔和那一罗革油一同作摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇。
And the priest will take the lamb of the offering for wrongdoing and the oil, waving them for a wave offering before the Lord;

要宰了赎愆祭的羊羔，取些赎愆祭牲的血，抹在那求洁净人的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上。
And he will put to death the lamb of the offering for wrongdoing and the priest will take some of the blood of the offering for wrongdoing and put it on the point of the right ear of him who is to be made clean, and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot;

祭司要把些油倒在自己的左手掌里，
And the priest will put out some of the oil in the hollow of his left hand,

把左手里的油，在耶和华面前，用右手的一个指头弹七次，
Shaking out drops of oil with his right finger before the Lord seven times:

又把手里的油抹些在那求洁净人的右耳垂上和右手的大拇指上，并右脚的大拇指上，就是抹赎愆祭之血的原处。
And the priest will put some of the oil which is in his hand on the point of the ear of the man who is to be made clean and on the thumb of his right hand and on the great toe of his right foot, on the place where the blood of the offering for wrongdoing was put;

祭司手里所剩的油要抹在那求洁净人的头上，在耶和华面前为他赎罪。
And the rest of the oil which is in the priest's hand he will put on the head of him who is to be made clean, to take away his sin before the Lord.

那人又要照他的力量献上一只斑鸠或是一只雏鸽，
And he will make an offering of one of the doves or the young pigeons, such as he is able to get;

就是他所能办的，一只为赎罪祭，一只为燔祭，与素祭一同献上，祭司要在耶和华面前为他赎罪。
And of these, he will give one for a sin-offering and one for a burned offering, with the meal offering; and the priest will take away the sin of him who is to be made clean before the Lord.

这是那有大麻疯灾病的人，不能将关乎得洁净之物预备够数的条例。
This is the law for the man who has the disease of the leper on him, and who is not able to get that which is necessary for making himself clean.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

你们到了我赐给你们为业的迦南地，我若使你们所得为业之地的房屋中有大麻疯的灾病，
When you have come into the land of Canaan which I will give you for your heritage, if I put the leper's disease on a house in the land of your heritage,

房主就要去告诉祭司说，据我看，房屋中似乎有灾病。
Then let the owner of the house come and say to the priest, It seems to me that there is a sort of leper's disease in the house.

祭司还没有进去察看灾病以前，就要吩咐人把房子腾空，免得房子里所有的都成了不洁净，然后祭司要进去察看房子。
And the priest will give orders for everything to be taken out of the house, before he goes in to see the disease, so that the things in the house may not become unclean; and then the priest is to go in to see the house;

他要察看那灾病，灾病若在房子的墙上有发绿或发红的凹斑纹，现象洼于墙，
And if he sees that the walls of the house are marked with hollows of green and red, and if it seems to go deeper than the face of the wall;

祭司就要出到房门外，把房子封锁七天。
Then the priest will go out of the door of the house, and keep the house shut up for seven days:

第七天，祭司要再去察看，灾病若在房子的墙上发散，
And the priest is to come again on the seventh day and have a look and see if the marks on the walls of the house are increased in size;

就要吩咐人把那有灾病的石头挖出来，扔在城外不洁净之处。
Then the priest will give orders to them to take out the stones in which the disease is seen, and put them out into an unclean place outside the town:

也要叫人刮房内的四围，所刮掉的灰泥要倒在城外不洁净之处。
And he will have the house rubbed all over inside, and the paste which is rubbed off will be put out into an unclean place outside the town:

又要用别的石头代替那挖出来的石头，要另用灰泥墁房子。
And they will take other stones and put them in place of those stones, and he will take other paste and put it on the walls of the house.

他挖出石头，刮了房子，墁了以后，灾病若在房子里又发现，
And if the disease comes out again in the house after he has taken out the stones and after the walls have been rubbed and the new paste put on,

祭司就要进去察看，灾病若在房子里发散，这就是房内蚕食的大麻疯，是不洁净。
Then the priest will come and see it; and if the disease in the house is increased in size, it is the leper's disease working out in the house: it is unclean.

他就要拆毁房子，把石头，木头，灰泥都搬到城外不洁净之处。
And the house will have to be pulled down, the stones of it and the wood and the paste; and everything is to be taken out to an unclean place outside the town.

在房子封锁的时候，进去的人必不洁净到晚上。
And, in addition, anyone who goes into the house at any time, while it is shut up, will be unclean till evening.

在房子里躺着的必洗衣服，在房子里吃饭的也必洗衣服。
And anyone who has been sleeping in the house will have to have his clothing washed; and anyone who takes food in that house will have to have his clothing washed.

房子墁了以后，祭司若进去察看，见灾病在房内没有发散，就要定房子为洁净，因为灾病已经消除。
And if the priest comes in, and sees that the disease is not increased after the new paste has been put on the house, then the priest will say that the house is clean, because the disease is gone.

要为洁净房子取两只鸟和香柏木，朱红色线并牛膝草，
And in order to make the house clean, let him take two birds and cedar-wood and red thread and hyssop;

用瓦器盛活水，把一只鸟宰在上面，
And put one of the birds to death in a vessel of earth over flowing water;

把香柏木，牛膝草，朱红色线，并那活鸟，都蘸在被宰的鸟血中与活水中，用以洒房子七次。
And take the cedar-wood and the hyssop and the red thread and the living bird and put them in the blood of the dead bird and in the flowing water, shaking it over the house seven times.

要用鸟血，活水，活鸟，香柏木，牛膝草，并朱红色线，洁净那房子。
And he will make the house clean with the blood of the bird and the flowing water and with the living bird and with the cedar-wood and the hyssop and the red thread.

但要把活鸟放在城外田野里。这样洁净房子（原文作为房子赎罪），房子就洁净了。
But he will let the living bird go out of the town into the open country; so he will take away sin from the house and it will be clean.

这是为各类大麻疯的灾病和头疥，
This is the law for all signs of the leper's disease and for skin diseases;

并衣服与房子的大麻疯，
And for signs of disease in clothing, or in a house;

以及疖子，癣，火斑所立的条例，
And for a growth or a bad place or a bright mark on the skin;

指明何时为洁净，何时为不洁净。这是大麻疯的条例。
To make clear when it is unclean and when it is clean: this is the law about the disease of the leper.

耶和华对摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and to Aaron,

你们晓谕以色列人说，人若身患漏症，他因这漏症就不洁净了。
Say to the children of Israel: If a man has an unclean flow from his flesh, it will make him unclean.

他患漏症，无论是下流的，是止住的，都是不洁净。
If the flow goes on or if the part is stopped up, to keep back the flow, he is still unclean.

他所躺的床都为不洁净，所坐的物也为不洁净。
Every bed on which he has been resting will be unclean, and everything on which he has been seated will be unclean.

凡摸那床的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching his bed is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

那坐患漏症人所坐之物的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And he who has been seated on anything on which the unclean man has been seated is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

那摸患漏症人身体的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching the flesh of the unclean man is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

若患漏症人吐在洁净的人身上，那人必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And if liquid from the mouth of the unclean man comes on to him who is clean, then he is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

患漏症人所骑的鞍子也为不洁净。
And any leather seat on a horse on which the unclean man has been seated will be unclean.

凡摸了他身下之物的，必不洁净到晚上，拿了那物的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching anything which was under him will be unclean till the evening; anyone taking up any of these things is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

患漏症的人没有用水涮手，无论摸了谁，谁必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone on whom the unclean man puts his hands, without washing them in water, is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

患漏症人所摸的瓦器就必打破，所摸的一切木器也必用水涮洗。
And any vessel of earth which has been touched by the unclean man will have to be broken and any vessel of wood washed.

患漏症的人痊愈了，就要为洁净自己计算七天，也必洗衣服，用活水洗身，就洁净了。
And when a man who has a flow from his body is made clean from it, he is to take seven days to make himself clean, washing his clothing and bathing his body in flowing water, and then he will be clean.

第八天，要取两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽，来到会幕门口，耶和华面前，把鸟交给祭司。
And on the eighth day he is to take two doves or two young pigeons and come before the Lord to the door of the Tent of meeting and give them to the priest:

祭司要献上一只为赎罪祭，一只为燔祭，因那人患的漏症，祭司要在耶和华面前为他赎罪。
And they are to be offered by the priest, one for a sin-offering and one for a burned offering, and the priest will take away his sin before the Lord on account of his flow.

人若梦遗，他必不洁净到晚上，并要用水洗全身。
And if a man's seed goes out from him, then all his body will have to be bathed in water and he will be unclean till evening.

无论是衣服是皮子，被精所染，必不洁净到晚上，并要用水洗。
And any clothing or skin on which the seed comes is to be washed with water and be unclean till evening.

若男女交合，两个人必不洁净到晚上，并要用水洗澡。
And if a man has sex relations with a woman and his seed goes out from him, the two of them will have to be bathed in water and will be unclean till evening.

女人行经，必污秽七天，凡摸她的，必不洁净到晚上。
And if a woman has a flow of blood from her body, she will have to be kept separate for seven days, and anyone touching her will be unclean till evening.

女人在污秽之中，凡她所躺的物件都为不洁净，所坐的物件也都不洁净。
And everything on which she has been resting, while she is kept separate, will be unclean, and everything on which she has been seated will be unclean.

凡摸她床的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching her bed will have to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

凡摸她所坐什么物件的，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching anything on which she has been seated will have to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

在女人的床上，或在她坐的物上，若有别的物件，人一摸了，必不洁净到晚上。
Anyone touching anything on the bed or on the thing on which she has been seated, will be unclean till evening.

男人若与那女人同房，染了她的污秽，就要七天不洁净，所躺的床也为不洁净。
And if any man has sex relations with her so that her blood comes on him, he will be unclean for seven days and every bed on which he has been resting will be unclean.

女人若在经期以外患多日的血漏，或是经期过长，有了漏症，她就因这漏症不洁净，与她在经期不洁净一样。
And if a woman has a flow of blood for a long time, not at the time when she generally has it, or if the flow goes on longer than the normal time, she will be unclean while the flow of blood goes on, as she is at other normal times.

她在患漏症的日子所躺的床，所坐的物都要看为不洁净，与她月经的时候一样。
Every bed on which she has been resting will be unclean, as at the times when she normally has a flow of blood, and everything on which she has been seated will be unclean, in the same way.

凡摸这些物件的，就为不洁净，必不洁净到晚上，并要洗衣服，用水洗澡。
And anyone touching these things will be unclean, and his clothing will have to be washed and his body bathed in water and he will be unclean till evening.

女人的漏症若好了，就要计算七天，然后才为洁净。
But when her flow of blood is stopped, after seven days she will be clean.

第八天，要取两只斑鸠或是两只雏鸽，带到会幕门口给祭司。
And on the eighth day let her get two doves or two young pigeons and take them to the priest to the door of the Tent of meeting,

祭司要献一只为赎罪祭，一只为燔祭，因那人血漏不洁，祭司要在耶和华面前为她赎罪。
To be offered by the priest, one for a sin-offering and one for a burned offering; and the priest will take away her sin before the Lord on account of her unclean condition.

你们要这样使以色列人与他们的污秽隔绝，免得他们玷污我的帐幕，就因自己的污秽死亡。
In this way may the children of Israel be made free from all sorts of unclean conditions, so that death may not overtake them when they are unclean and when they make unclean my holy place which is among them.

这是患漏症和梦遗而不洁净的，
This is the law for the man who has a flow from his body, or whose seed goes from him so that he is unclean;

并有月经病的和患漏症的，无论男女，并人与不洁净女人同房的条例。
And for her who has a flow of blood, and for any man or woman who has an unclean flow, and for him who has sex relations with a woman when she is unclean.

亚伦的两个儿子近到耶和华面前死了。死了之后，耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses, after the death of the two sons of Aaron when they took in strange fire before the Lord and death overtook them;

要告诉你哥哥亚伦，不可随时进圣所的幔子内，到柜上的施恩座前，免得他死亡，因为我要从云中显现在施恩座上。
The Lord said to Moses, Say to Aaron, your brother, that he may not come at all times into the holy place inside the veil, before the cover which is on the ark, for fear that death may overtake him; for I will be seen in the cloud on the cover of the ark.

亚伦进圣所，要带一只公牛犊为赎罪祭，一只公绵羊为燔祭。
Let Aaron come into the holy place in this way: with an ox for a sin-offering and a male sheep for a burned offering.

要穿上细麻布圣内袍，把细麻布裤子穿在身上，腰束细麻布带子，头戴细麻布冠冕，这都是圣服。他要用水洗身，然后穿戴。
Let him put on the holy linen coat, and the linen trousers on his body, and the linen band round him, and the linen head-dress on his head; for this is holy clothing, and before he puts them on his body is to be washed with water.

要从以色列会众取两只公山羊为赎罪祭，一只公绵羊为燔祭。
And let him take from the children of Israel two he-goats for a sin-offering and one male sheep for a burned offering.

亚伦要把赎罪祭的公牛奉上，为自己和本家赎罪。
And Aaron is to give the ox of the sin-offering for himself, to make himself and his house free from sin.

也要把两只公山羊安置在会幕门口，耶和华面前，
And he is to take the two goats and put them before the Lord at the door of the Tent of meeting.

为那两只羊拈阄，一阄归与耶和华，一阄归与阿撒泻勒。
And Aaron will make selection from the two goats by the decision of the Lord, one goat for the Lord and one for Azazel.

亚伦要把那拈阄归与耶和华的羊献为赎罪祭，
And the goat which is marked out for the Lord, let Aaron give for a sin-offering.

但那拈阄归与阿撒泻勒的羊要活着安置在耶和华面前，用以赎罪，打发人送到旷野去，归与阿撒泻勒。
But the goat for Azazel is to be placed living before the Lord, for the taking away of sin, that it may be sent away for Azazel into the waste land.

亚伦要把赎罪祭的公牛牵来宰了，为自己和本家赎罪。
And Aaron is to give the ox of the sin-offering for himself and take away sin from himself and his house, and put to death the ox of the sin-offering which is for himself.

拿香炉，从耶和华面前的坛上盛满火炭，又拿一捧捣细的香料，都带入幔子内，
And he is to take a vessel full of burning coal from the altar before the Lord and in his hand some sweet perfume crushed small, and take it inside the veil;

在耶和华面前，把香放在火上，使香的烟云遮掩法柜上的施恩座，免得他死亡。
And let him put the perfume on the fire before the Lord so that the ark may be covered with a cloud of the smoke of the perfume, in order that death may not overtake him.

也要取些公牛的血，用指头弹在施恩座的东面，又在施恩座的前面弹血七次。
And let him take some of the blood of the ox, shaking drops of it from his finger on the cover of the ark on the east side, and before it, seven times.

随后他要宰那为百姓作赎罪祭的公山羊，把羊的血带入幔子内，弹在施恩座的上面和前面，好像弹公牛的血一样。
Then let him put to death the goat of the sin-offering for the people, and take its blood inside the veil and do with it as he did with the blood of the ox, shaking drops of it on and before the cover of the ark.

他因以色列人诸般的污秽，过犯，就是他们一切的罪愆，当这样在圣所行赎罪之礼，并因会幕在他们污秽之中，也要照样而行。
And let him make the holy place free from whatever is unclean among the children of Israel and from their wrongdoing in all their sins; and let him do the same for the Tent of meeting, which has its place among an unclean people.

他进圣所赎罪的时候，会幕里不可有人，直等到他为自己和本家并以色列全会众赎了罪出来。
And no man may be in the Tent of meeting from the time when Aaron goes in to take away sin in the holy place till he comes out, having made himself and his house and all the people of Israel free from sin.

他出来，要到耶和华面前的坛那里，在坛上行赎罪之礼，又要取些公牛的血和公山羊的血，抹在坛上四角的周围。
And he is to go out to the altar which is before the Lord and make it free from sin; and he is to take some of the blood of the ox and the blood of the goat and put it on the horns of the altar and round it;

也要用指头把血弹在坛上七次，洁净了坛，从坛上除掉以色列人诸般的污秽，使坛成圣。
Shaking drops of the blood from his finger on it seven times to make it holy and clean from whatever is unclean among the children of Israel.

亚伦为圣所和会幕并坛献完了赎罪祭，就要把那只活着的公山羊奉上。
And when he has done whatever is necessary to make the holy place and the Tent of meeting and the altar free from sin, let him put the living goat before the Lord;

两手按在羊头上，承认以色列人诸般的罪孽过犯，就是他们一切的罪愆，把这罪都归在羊的头上，借着所派之人的手，送到旷野去。
And Aaron, placing his two hands on the head of the living goat, will make a public statement over him of all the evil doings of the children of Israel and all their wrongdoing, in all their sins; and he will put them on the head of the goat and send him away, in the care of a man who will be waiting there, into the waste land.

要把这羊放在旷野，这羊要担当他们一切的罪孽，带到无人之地。
And the goat will take all their sins into a land cut off from men, and he will send the goat away into the waste land.

亚伦要进会幕，把他进圣所时所穿的细麻布衣服脱下，放在那里，
Then let Aaron come into the Tent of meeting and take off the linen clothing which he put on when he went into the holy place, and put them down there;

又要在圣处用水洗身，穿上衣服，出来，把自己的燔祭和百姓的燔祭献上，为自己和百姓赎罪。
And after bathing his body in water in a holy place, he is to put on his clothing and come out and give his burned offering and the burned offering of the people, to take away his sin and the sin of the people.

赎罪祭牲的脂油要在坛上焚烧。
And the fat of the sin-offering is to be burned by him on the altar.

那放羊归与阿撒泻勒的人要洗衣服，用水洗身，然后进营。
And the man who takes away the goat for Azazel is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and then he may come back to the tent-circle.

作赎罪祭的公牛和公山羊的血既带入圣所赎罪，这牛羊就要搬到营外，将皮，肉，粪用火焚烧。
And the ox of the sin-offering and the goat of the sin-offering, whose blood was taken in to make the holy place free from sin, are to be taken away outside the tent-circle and their skins and their flesh and their waste are to be burned with fire.

焚烧的人要洗衣服，用水洗身，然后进营。
And the man by whom they are burned is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water, and then he may come back to the tent-circle.

每逢七月初十日，你们要刻苦己心，无论是本地人，是寄居在你们中间的外人，什么工都不可作，这要作你们永远的定例。
And let this be an order to you for ever: in the seventh month, on the tenth day, you are to keep yourselves from pleasure and do no sort of work, those who are Israelites by birth and those from other lands who are living among you:

因在这日要为你们赎罪，使你们洁净。你们要在耶和华面前得以洁净，脱尽一切的罪愆。
For on this day your sin will be taken away and you will be clean: you will be made free from all your sins before the Lord.

这日你们要守为圣安息日，要刻苦己心，这为永远的定例。
It is a special Sabbath for you, and you are to keep yourselves from pleasure; it is an order for ever.

那受膏，接续他父亲承接圣职的祭司要穿上细麻布的圣衣，行赎罪之礼。
And the man on whose head the holy oil has been put, and who has been marked out to be a priest in his father's place, will do what is necessary to take away sin, and will put on the linen clothing, even the holy robes:

他要在至圣所和会幕与坛行赎罪之礼，并要为众祭司和会众的百姓赎罪。
And he will make the holy place and the Tent of meeting and the altar free from sin; he will take away sin from the priests and from all the people.

这要作你们永远的定例就是因以色列人一切的罪，要一年一次为他们赎罪。于是，亚伦照耶和华所吩咐摩西的行了。
And let this be an order for ever for you, so that the sin of the children of Israel may be taken away once every year. And he did as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕亚伦和他儿子并以色列众人说，耶和华所吩咐的乃是这样，
Say to Aaron and to his sons and to all the children of Israel: This is the order which the Lord has given.

凡以色列家中的人宰公牛，或是绵羊羔，或是山羊，不拘宰于营内营外，
If any man of Israel puts to death an ox or a lamb or a goat, in or outside the tent-circle;

若未曾牵到会幕门口，耶和华的帐幕前献给耶和华为供物，流血的罪必归到那人身上。他流了血，要从民中剪除。
And has not taken it to the door of the Tent of meeting, to make an offering to the Lord, before the Lord's House, its blood will be on him, for he has taken life, and he will be cut off from among his people:

这是为要使以色列人把他们在田野里所献的祭带到会幕门口，耶和华面前，交给祭司，献与耶和华为平安祭。
So that the children of Israel may take to the Lord, to the door of the Tent of meeting and to the priest, the offerings which they have put to death in the open country, and that they may make their peace-offerings to the Lord.

祭司要把血洒在会幕门口，耶和华的坛上，把脂油焚烧，献给耶和华为馨香的祭。
And the priest will put blood on the altar of the Lord at the door of the Tent of meeting, burning the fat for a sweet smell to the Lord.

他们不可再献祭给他们行邪淫所随从的鬼魔（原文作公山羊），这要作他们世世代代永远的定例。
And let them make no more offerings to evil spirits, after which they have gone, turning away from the Lord. Let this be a law to them for ever, through all their generations.

你要晓谕他们说，凡以色列家中的人，或是寄居在他们中间的外人，献燔祭或是平安祭，
And say to them, If any man of Israel, or any other living among them, makes a burned offering or other offering,

若不带到会幕门口献给耶和华，那人必从民中剪除。
And does not take it to the door of the Tent of meeting to make an offering to the Lord, that man will be cut off from among his people.

凡以色列家中的人，或是寄居在他们中间的外人，若吃什么血，我必向那吃血的人变脸，把他从民中剪除。
And if any man of Israel, or any other living among them, takes any sort of blood for food, my wrath will be turned against that man and he will be cut off from among his people.

因为活物的生命是在血中。我把这血赐给你们，可以在坛上为你们的生命赎罪，因血里有生命，所以能赎罪。
For the life of the flesh is in its blood; and I have given it to you on the altar to take away your sin: for it is the blood which makes free from sin because of the life in it.

因此，我对以色列人说，你们都不可吃血，寄居在你们中间的外人也不可吃血。
For this reason I have said to the children of Israel, No man among you, or any others living with you, may take blood as food.

凡以色列人，或是寄居在他们中间的外人，若打猎得了可吃的禽兽，必放出它的血来，用土掩盖。
And any man of Israel, or any other living among them, who gets with his bow any beast or bird used for food, is to see that its blood is covered with earth.

论到一切活物的生命，就在血中。所以我对以色列人说，无论什么活物的血，你们都不可吃，因为一切活物的血就是他的生命。凡吃了血的，必被剪除。
For the blood is the life of all flesh: and so I have said to the children of Israel, You may not take any sort of blood as food, and any man who does so will be cut of.

凡吃自死的，或是被野兽撕裂的，无论是本地人，是寄居的，必不洁净到晚上，都要洗衣服，用水洗身，到了晚上才为洁净。
And anyone who takes as food anything which has come to a natural end, or anything which has been put to death by beasts, if he is one of you by birth, or of another nation, will have to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening, and then he will be clean.

但他若不洗衣服，也不洗身，就必担当他的罪孽。
But if his clothing is not washed and his body bathed, his sin will be on him.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，我是耶和华你们的神。
Say to the children of Israel, I am the Lord your God.

你们从前住的埃及地，那里人的行为，你们不可效法，我要领你们到的迦南地，那里人的行为也不可效法，也不可照他们的恶俗行。
You may not do those things which were done in the land of Egypt where you were living; and you may not do those things which are done in the land of Canaan where I am taking you, or be guided in your behaviour by their rules.

你们要遵我的典章，守我的律例，按此而行。我是耶和华你们的神。
But you are to be guided by my decisions and keep my rules, and be guided by them: I am the Lord your God.

所以，你们要守我的律例典章，人若遵行，就必因此活着。我是耶和华。
So keep my rules and my decisions, which, if a man does them, will be life to him: I am the Lord.

你们都不可露骨肉之亲的下体，亲近他们。我是耶和华。
You may not have sex connection with anyone who is a near relation: I am the Lord.

不可露你母亲的下体，羞辱了你父亲。她是你的母亲，不可露她的下体。
You may not have sex relations with your father or your mother: she is your mother, you may not take her.

不可露你继母的下体，这本是你父亲的下体。
And you may not have sex relations with your father's wife: she is your father's.

你的姐妹，不拘是异母同父的，是异父同母的，无论是生在家生在外的，都不可露她们的下体。
You may not take your sister, the daughter of your father or of your mother, wherever her birth took place, among you or in another country.

不可露你孙女或是外孙女的下体，露了她们的下体就是露了自己的下体。
You may not have sex relations with your son's daughter or your daughter's daughter, for they are part of yourself;

你继母从你父亲生的女儿本是你的妹妹，不可露她的下体。
Or your father's wife's daughter, the child of your father, for she is your sister.

不可露你姑母的下体，她是你父亲的骨肉之亲。
You may not have sex connection with your father's sister, for she is your father's near relation.

不可露你姨母的下体，她是你母亲的骨肉之亲。
You may not have sex connection with your mother's sister, for she is your mother's near relation.

不可亲近你伯叔之妻，羞辱了你伯叔，她是你的伯叔母。
You may not have sex relations with the wife of your father's brother, for she is of your family;

不可露你儿妇的下体，她是你儿子的妻，不可露她的下体。
Or with your daughter-in-law, for she is your son's wife, and you may not take her.

不可露你弟兄妻子的下体，这本是你弟兄的下体。
You may not have sex relations with your brother's wife, for she is your brother's.

不可露了妇人的下体，又露她女儿的下体，也不可娶她孙女或是外孙女，露她们的下体，她们是骨肉之亲，这本是大恶。
You may not take as wife a woman and her daughter, or her son's daughter or her daughter's daughter, for they are of one family: it is an act of shame.

你妻还在的时候，不可另娶她的姐妹作对头，露她的下体。
And you may not take as wife a woman and at the same time her sister, to be in competition with her in her life-time.

女人行经不洁净的时候，不可露她的下体，与她亲近。
And you may not go near a woman or have sex relations with her when she is unclean, at her regular time.

不可与邻舍的妻行淫，玷污自己。
And you may not have sex relations with your neighbour's wife, making yourself unclean with her.

不可使你的儿女经火归与摩洛，也不可亵渎你神的名。我是耶和华。
And you may not make any of your children go through the fire as an offering to Molech, and you may not put shame on the name of your God: I am the Lord.

不可与男人苟合，像与女人一样，这本是可憎恶的。
You may not have sex relations with men, as you do with women: it is a disgusting thing.

不可与兽淫合，玷污自己。女人也不可站在兽前，与它淫合，这本是逆性的事。
And you may not have sex relations with a beast, making yourself unclean with it; and a woman may not give herself to a beast: it is an unnatural act.

在这一切的事上，你们都不可玷污自己，因为我在你们面前所逐出的列邦，在这一切的事上玷污了自己。
Do not make yourself unclean in any of these ways; for so have those nations whom I am driving out from before you made themselves unclean:

连地也玷污了，所以我追讨那地的罪孽，那地也吐出它的居民。
And the land itself has become unclean; so that I have sent on it the reward of its wrongdoing, and the land itself puts out those who are living in it.

故此，你们要守我的律例典章。这一切可憎恶的事，无论是本地人，是寄居在你们中间的外人，都不可行，
So then keep my rules and my decisions, and do not do any of these disgusting things, those of you who are Israelites by birth, or any others who are living with you:

（在你们以先居住那地的人行了这一切可憎恶的事，地就玷污了，）
(For all these disgusting things were done by the men of this country who were there before you, and the land has been made unclean by them;)

免得你们玷污那地的时候，地就把你们吐出，像吐出在你们以先的国民一样。
So that the land may not put you out from it, when you make it unclean, as it put out the nations which were there before you.

无论什么人，行了其中可憎的一件事，必从民中剪除。
For all those who do any of these disgusting things will be cut off from among their people.

所以，你们要守我所吩咐的，免得你们随从那些可憎的恶俗，就是在你们以先的人所常行的，以致玷污了自己。我是耶和华你们的神。
So then, keep my orders, so that you may not do any of these disgusting things which were done before you, or make yourselves unclean through them: I am the Lord your God.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列全会众说，你们要圣洁，因为我耶和华你们的神是圣洁的。
Say to all the people of Israel, You are to be holy, for I, the Lord your God, am holy.

你们各人都当孝敬父母，也要守我的安息日。我是耶和华你们的神。
Let every man give honour to his mother and to his father and keep my Sabbaths: I am the Lord your God.

你们不可偏向虚无的神，也不可为自己铸造神像。我是耶和华你们的神。
Do not go after false gods, and do not make metal images of gods for yourselves: I am the Lord your God.

你们献平安祭给耶和华的时候，要献得可蒙悦纳。
And when you give a peace offering to the Lord, do it in the way which is pleasing to the Lord.

这祭物要在献的那一天和第二天吃，若有剩到第三天的，就必用火焚烧。
Let it be used for food on the same day on which it is offered, or on the day after; and whatever is over on the third day is to be burned with fire.

第三天若再吃，这就为可憎恶的，必不蒙悦纳。
If any of it is used for food on the third day, it is a disgusting thing and will not be pleasing to the Lord.

凡吃的人必担当他的罪孽，因为他亵渎了耶和华的圣物，那人必从民中剪除。
And as for anyone who takes it for food, his sin will be on him, for he has put shame on the holy thing of the Lord: he will be cut off from his people.

在你们的地收割庄稼，不可割尽田角，也不可拾取所遗落的。
And when you get in the grain from your land, do not let all the grain be cut from the edges of the field, or take up what has been dropped on the earth after the getting in of the grain.

不可摘尽葡萄园的果子，也不可拾取葡萄园所掉的果子，要留给穷人和寄居的。我是耶和华你们的神。
And do not take all the grapes from your vine-garden, or the fruit dropped on the earth; let the poor man, and the man from another country, have these: I am the Lord your God.

你们不可偷盗，不可欺骗，也不可彼此说谎。
Do not take anyone's property or be false in act or word to another.

不可指着我的名起假誓，亵渎你神的名。我是耶和华。
And do not take an oath in my name falsely, putting shame on the name of your God: I am the Lord.

不可欺压你的邻舍，也不可抢夺他的物。雇工人的工价，不可在你那里过夜，留到早晨。
Do not be cruel to your neighbour or take what is his; do not keep back a servant's payment from him all night till the morning.

不可咒骂聋子，也不可将绊脚石放在瞎子面前，只要敬畏你的神。我是耶和华。
Do not put a curse on those who have no hearing, or put a cause of falling in the way of the blind, but keep the fear of your God before you: I am the Lord.

你们施行审判，不可行不义，不可偏护穷人，也不可重看有势力的人，只要按着公义审判你的邻舍。
Do no wrong in your judging: do not give thought to the position of the poor, or honour to the position of the great; but be a judge to your neighbour in righteousness.

不可在民中往来搬弄是非，也不可与邻舍为敌，置之于死（原文作流他的血）。我是耶和华。
Do not go about saying untrue things among your people, or take away the life of your neighbour by false witness: I am the Lord.

不可心里恨你的弟兄，总要指摘你的邻舍，免得因他担罪。
Let there be no hate in your heart for your brother; but you may make a protest to your neighbour, so that he may be stopped from doing evil.

不可报仇，也不可埋怨你本国的子民，却要爱人如己。我是耶和华。
Do not make attempts to get equal with one who has done you wrong, or keep hard feelings against the children of your people, but have love for your neighbour as for yourself: I am the Lord.

你们要守我的律例。不可叫你的牲畜与异类配合，不可用两样搀杂的种种你的地，也不可用两样搀杂的料作衣服穿在身上。
Keep my laws. Do not let your cattle have offspring by those of a different sort; do not put mixed seed into your field; do not put on a robe made of two sorts of cloth.

婢女许配了丈夫，还没有被赎得释放，人若与她行淫，二人要受刑罚，却不把他们治死，因为婢女还没有得自由。
If any man has sex relations with a servant-woman who has given her word to be married to a man, and has not been made free for a price or in any other way, the thing will be looked into; but they will not be put to death because she was not a free woman.

那人要把赎愆祭，就是一只公绵羊牵到会幕门口，耶和华面前。
Let him take his offering for wrongdoing to the Lord, to the door of the Tent of meeting; let him give a male sheep as an offering for wrongdoing.

祭司要用赎愆祭的羊在耶和华面前赎他所犯的罪，他的罪就必蒙赦免。
And the priest will take away his sin before the Lord with the sheep which is offered for his wrongdoing, and he will have forgiveness for the sin which he has done.

你们到了迦南地，栽种各样结果子的树木，就要以所结的果子如未受割礼的一样。三年之久，你们要以这些果子，如未受割礼的，是不可吃的。
And when you have come into the land, and have put in all sorts of fruit-trees, their fruit will be as if they had not had circumcision, and for three years their fruit may not be used for food.

但第四年所结的果子全要成为圣，用以赞美耶和华。
And in the fourth year all the fruit will be holy as a praise-offering to the Lord.

第五年，你们要吃那树上的果子，好叫树给你们结果子更多。我是耶和华你们的神。
But in the fifth year you may take the fruit and the increase of it for your food: I am the Lord your God.

你们不可吃带血的物，不可用法术，也不可观兆。
Nothing may be used for food with its blood in it; you may not make use of strange arts, or go in search of signs and wonders.

头的周围不可剃（周围或作两鬓），胡须的周围也不可损坏。
The ends of the hair round your face and on your chin may not be cut off.

不可为死人用刀划身，也不可在身上刺花纹。我是耶和华。
You may not make cuts in your flesh in respect for the dead, or have marks printed on your bodies: I am the Lord.

不可辱没你的女儿，使她为娼妓，恐怕地上的人专向淫乱，地就满了大恶。
Do not make your daughter common by letting her become a loose woman, for fear that the land may become full of shame.

你们要守我的安息日，敬我的圣所。我是耶和华。
Keep my Sabbaths and have respect for my holy place: I am the Lord.

不可偏向那些交鬼的和行巫术的，不可求问他们，以致被他们玷污了。我是耶和华你们的神。
Do not go after those who make use of spirits, or wonder-workers; do not go in their ways or become unclean through them: I am the Lord your God.

在白发的人面前，你要站起来，也要尊敬老人，又要敬畏你的神。我是耶和华。
Get up from your seats before the white-haired, and give honour to the old, and let the fear of your God be before you: I am the Lord.

若有外人在你们国中和你同居，就不可欺负他。
And if a man from another country is living in your land with you, do not make life hard for him;

和你们同居的外人，你们要看他如本地人一样，并要爱他如己，因为你们在埃及地也作过寄居的。我是耶和华你们的神。
Let him be to you as one of your countrymen and have love for him as for yourself; for you were living in a strange land, in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.

你们施行审判，不可行不义，在尺，秤，升，斗上也是如此。
Do not make false decisions in questions of yard-sticks and weights and measures.

要用公道天平，公道法码，公道升斗，公道秤。我是耶和华你们的神，曾把你们从埃及地领出来的。
Have true scales, true weights and measures for all things: I am the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt;

你们要谨守遵行我一切的律例典章。我是耶和华。
You are to keep all my rules and my decisions and do them: I am the Lord.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你还要晓谕以色列人说，凡以色列人，或是在以色列中寄居的外人，把自己的儿女献给摩洛的，总要治死他，本地人要用石头把他打死。
Again, say to the children of Israel, If any man of the children of Israel, or any other man living in Israel, gives his offspring to Molech, he is certainly to be put to death: he is to be stoned by the people of the land;

我也要向那人变脸，把他从民中剪除，因为他把儿女献给摩洛，玷污我的圣所，亵渎我的圣名。
And my face will be turned against that man, and he will be cut off from his people; because he has given his offspring to Molech, making my holy place unclean, and making my holy name common.

那人把儿女献给摩洛，本地人若佯为不见，不把他治死，
And if the people of the land do not take note of that man when he gives his offspring to Molech, and do not put him to death,

我就要向这人和他的家变脸，把他和一切随他与摩洛行邪淫的人都从民中剪除。
Then my face will be turned against him and his family, and he and all those who do evil with him will be cut off from among their people.

人偏向交鬼的和行巫术的，随他们行邪淫，我要向那人变脸，把他从民中剪除。
And whoever goes after those who make use of spirits and wonder-workers, doing evil with them, against him will my face be turned, and he will be cut off from among his people.

所以你们要自洁成圣，因为我是耶和华你们的神。
So make and keep yourselves holy, for I am the Lord your God.

你们要谨守遵行我的律例，我是叫你们成圣的耶和华。
And keep my rules and do them: I am the Lord, who make you holy.

凡咒骂父母的，总要治死他，他咒骂了父母，他的罪要归到他身上（罪原文作血。本章同。）。
Every man cursing his father or his mother is certainly to be put to death; because of his curse on his father or his mother, his blood will be on him.

与邻舍之妻行淫的，奸夫淫妇都必治死。
And if a man has sex relations with another man's wife, even the wife of his neighbour, he and she are certainly to be put to death.

与继母行淫的，就是羞辱了他父亲，总要把他们二人治死，罪要归到他们身上。
And the man who has sex relations with his father's wife has put shame on his father: the two of them are to be put to death; their blood will be on them.

与儿妇同房的，总要把他们二人治死，他们行了逆伦的事，罪要归到他们身上。
And if a man has sex relations with his son's wife, the two of them are to be put to death: it is unnatural; their blood will be on them.

人若与男人苟合，像与女人一样，他们二人行了可憎的事，总要把他们治死，罪要归到他们身上。
And if a man has sex relations with a man, the two of them have done a disgusting thing: let them be put to death; their blood will be on them.

人若娶妻，并娶其母，便是大恶，要把这三人用火焚烧，使你们中间免去大恶。
And if a man takes as wife a woman and her mother, it is an act of shame; let them be burned with fire, all three of them, so that there may be no shame among you.

人若与兽淫合，总要治死他，也要杀那兽。
And if a man has sex relations with a beast, let him be put to death, and let the beast be put to destruction.

女人若与兽亲近，与它淫合，你要杀那女人和那兽，总要把他们治死，罪要归到他们身上。
And if a woman goes near a beast and has sex relations with it, you will put an end to the woman and the beast: their blood will be on them.

人若娶他的姐妹，无论是异母同父的，是异父同母的，彼此见了下体，这是可耻的事，他们必在本民的眼前被剪除。他露了姐妹的下体，必担当自己的罪孽。
And if a man takes his sister, daughter of his father or his mother, and has sex relations with her and she with him, it is an act of shame: they are to be cut off before the children of their people; he has had sex relations with his sister, and his sin will be on him.

妇人有月经，若与她同房，露了她的下体，就是露了妇人的血源，妇人也露了自己的血源，二人必从民中剪除。
And if a man has sex relations with a woman at the time when she is unwell, he has seen her fountain and she has let the fountain of her blood be uncovered, and the two of them are to be cut off from among their people.

不可露姨母或是姑母的下体，这是露了骨肉之亲的下体，二人必担当自己的罪孽。
And you may not have sex connection with your mother's sister or your father's sister, for they are his near relations: their sin will be on them.

人若与伯叔之妻同房，就羞辱了他的伯叔，二人要担当自己的罪，必无子女而死。
And if a man has sex relations with the wife of his father's brother, he has put shame on his father's brother: their sin will be on them; till the day of their death they will have no children.

人若娶弟兄之妻，这本是污秽的事，羞辱了他的弟兄，二人必无子女。
And if a man takes his brother's wife, it is an unclean act; he has put shame on his brother; they will have no children.

所以，你们要谨守遵行我一切的律例典章，免得我领你们去住的那地把你们吐出。
So then, keep my rules and my decisions and do them, so that the land which I am giving you as your resting-place may not violently send you out again.

我在你们面前所逐出的国民，你们不可随从他们的风俗，因为他们行了这一切的事，所以我厌恶他们。
And do not keep the rules of the nations which I am driving out before you; for they did all these things, and for that reason my soul was turned against them.

但我对你们说过，你们要承受他们的地，就是我要赐给你们为业，流奶与蜜之地。我是耶和华你们的神，使你们与万民有分别的。
But I have said to you, You will take their land and I will give it to you for your heritage, a land flowing with milk and honey: I am the Lord your God who have made you separate from all other peoples.

所以，你们要把洁净和不洁净的禽兽分别出来，不可因我给你们分为不洁净的禽兽，或是滋生在地上的活物，使自己成为可憎恶的。
So then, make division between the clean beast and the unclean, and between the clean bird and the unclean: do not make yourselves disgusting by any beast or bird or anything which goes flat on the earth, which has been marked by me as unclean for you.

你们要归我为圣，因为我耶和华是圣的，并叫你们与万民有分别，使你们作我的民。
And you are to be holy to me; for I the Lord am holy and have made you separate from the nations, so that you may be my people.

无论男女，是交鬼的或行巫术的，总要治死他们。人必用石头把他们打死，罪要归到他们身上。
Any man or woman who makes use of spirits, or who is a wonder-worker, is to be put to death: they are to be stoned with stones: their blood will be on them.

耶和华对摩西说，你告诉亚伦子孙作祭司的说，祭司不可为民中的死人沾染自己，
And the Lord said to Moses, Say to the priests, the sons of Aaron, Let no man make himself unclean for the dead among his people;

除非为他骨肉之亲的父母，儿女，弟兄，
But only for his near relations, for his mother or his father, his son or his daughter, and his brother;

和未曾出嫁，作处女的姐妹，才可以沾染自己。
And for his sister, a virgin, for she is his near relation and has had no husband, he may make himself unclean.

祭司既在民中为首，就不可从俗沾染自己。
But let him, being a chief among his people, not make himself unclean in such a way as to put shame on himself.

不可使头光秃，不可剃除胡须的周围，也不可用刀划身。
They are not to have their hair cut off for the dead, or the hair on their chins cut short, or make cuts in their flesh.

要归神为圣，不可亵渎神的名，因为耶和华的火祭，就是神的食物，是他们献的，所以他们要成为圣。
Let them be holy to their God and not make the name of their God common; for the fire offerings of the Lord and the bread of their God are offered by them, and they are to be holy.

不可娶妓女或被污的女人为妻，也不可娶被休的妇人为妻，因为祭司是归神为圣。
They may not take as wife a loose or common woman, or one who has been put away by her husband: for the priest is holy to his God.

所以你要使他成圣，因为他奉献你神的食物，你要以他为圣，因为我使你们成圣的耶和华是圣的。
And he is to be holy in your eyes, for by him the bread of your God is offered; he is to be holy in your eyes, for I the Lord, who make you holy, am holy.

祭司的女儿若行淫辱没自己，就辱没了父亲，必用火将她焚烧。
And if the daughter of a priest makes herself common and by her loose behaviour puts shame on her father, let her be burned with fire.

在弟兄中作大祭司，头上倒了膏油，又承接圣职，穿了圣衣的，不可蓬头散发，也不可撕裂衣服。
And he who is the chief priest among his brothers, on whose head the holy oil has been put, who is marked out to put on the holy robes, may not let his hair go loose or have his clothing out of order as a sign of sorrow.

不可挨近死尸，也不可为父母沾染自己。
He may not go near any dead body or make himself unclean for his father or his mother;

不可出圣所，也不可亵渎神的圣所，因为神膏油的冠冕在他头上。我是耶和华。
He may not go out of the holy place or make the holy place of his God common; for the crown of the holy oil of his God is on him: I am the Lord.

他要娶处女为妻。
And let him take as his wife one who has not had relations with a man.

寡妇或是被休的妇人，或是被污为妓的女人，都不可娶，只可娶本民中的处女为妻。
A widow, or one whose husband has put her away, or a common woman of loose behaviour, may not be the wife of a priest; but let him take a virgin from among his people.

不可在民中辱没他的儿女，因为我是叫他成圣的耶和华。
And he may not make his seed unclean among his people, for I the Lord have made him holy.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你告诉亚伦说，你世世代代的后裔，凡有残疾的，都不可近前来献他神的食物。
Say to Aaron, If a man of your family, in any generation, is damaged in body, let him not come near to make the offering of the bread of his God.

因为凡有残疾的，无论是瞎眼的，瘸腿的，塌鼻子的，肢体有余的，
For any man whose body is damaged may not come near: one who is blind, or has not the use of his legs, or one who has a broken nose or any unnatural growth,

折脚折手的，
Or a man with broken feet or hands,

驼背的，矮矬的，眼睛有毛病的，长癣的，长疥的，或是损坏肾子的，都不可近前来。
Or one whose back is bent, or one who is unnaturally small, or one who has a damaged eye, or whose skin is diseased, or whose sex parts are damaged;

祭司亚伦的后裔，凡有残疾的，都不可近前来，将火祭献给耶和华。他有残疾，不可近前来献神的食物。
No man of the offspring of Aaron whose body is damaged in any way may come near to give the fire offerings of the Lord: he is damaged, he may not come near to make the offerings.

神的食物，无论是圣的，至圣的，他都可以吃。
He may take of the bread of God, the holy and the most holy;

但不可进到幔子前，也不可就近坛前，因为他有残疾，免得亵渎我的圣所。我是叫他成圣的耶和华。
But he may not go inside the veil or come near the altar, because he is damaged; and he may not make my holy places common; for I the Lord have made them holy.

于是，摩西晓谕亚伦和亚伦的子孙，并以色列众人。
These are the words which Moses said to Aaron and to his sons and to all the children of Israel.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐亚伦和他子孙说，要远离以色列人所分别为圣，归给我的圣物，免得亵渎我的圣名。我是耶和华。
Give orders to Aaron and to his sons to keep themselves separate from the holy things of the children of Israel which they give to me, and not to make my holy name common: I am the Lord,

你要对他们说，你们世世代代的后裔，凡身上有污秽，亲近以色列人所分别为圣，归耶和华圣物的，那人必在我面前剪除。我是耶和华。
Say to them, If any man of all your seed through all your generations, being unclean, comes near the holy things which the children of Israel make holy to the Lord, he will be cut off from before me: I am the Lord.

亚伦的后裔，凡长大麻疯的，或是有漏症的，不可吃圣物，直等他洁净了。无论谁摸那因死尸不洁净的物（物或作人），或是遗精的人，
No man of the seed of Aaron who is a leper, or who has a flow from his body, may take of the holy food till he is clean. And any man touching anything which is unclean because of the dead, or any man whose seed goes from him;

或是摸什么使他不洁净的爬物，或是摸那使他不洁净的人（不拘那人有什么不洁净），
Or anyone touching any unclean thing which goes flat on the earth, or someone by whom he may be made unclean in any way whatever;

摸了这些人，物的，必不洁净到晚上，若不用水洗身，就不可吃圣物。
Any person touching any such unclean thing will be unclean till evening, and may not take of the holy food till his flesh has been bathed in water;

日落的时候，他就洁净了，然后可以吃圣物，因为这是他的食物。
And when the sun has gone down he will be clean; and after that he may take part in the holy food, because it is his bread.

自死的或是被野兽撕裂的，他不可吃，因此污秽自己。我是耶和华。
That which comes to a natural death, or is attacked by beasts, he may not take as food, for it will make him unclean: I am the Lord.

所以他们要守我所吩咐的，免得轻忽了，因此担罪而死。我是叫他们成圣的耶和华。
So then, let them keep what I have put into their care, for fear that sin may come on them because of it, so causing their death because they have made it common: I am the Lord, who make them holy.

凡外人不可吃圣物，寄居在祭司家的，或是雇工人，都不可吃圣物。
No outside person may take of the holy food, or one living as a guest in the priest's house, or a servant working for payment.

倘若祭司买人，是他的钱买的，那人就可以吃圣物，生在他家的人也可以吃。
But any person for whom the priest has given money, to make him his, may take of it with him; and those who come to birth in his house may take of his bread.

祭司的女儿若嫁外人，就不可吃举祭的圣物。
And if the daughter of a priest is married to an outside person she may not take of the holy things which are lifted up as offerings.

但祭司的女儿若是寡妇，或是被休的，没有孩子，又归回父家，与她青年一样，就可以吃她父亲的食物，只是外人不可吃。
But if a priest's daughter is a widow, or parted from her husband, and has no child, and has come back to her father's house as when she was a girl, she may take of her father's bread; but no outside person may do so.

若有人误吃了圣物，要照圣物的原数加上五分之一交给祭司。
And if a man takes the holy food in error, he will have to give the holy thing back to the priest, with the addition of a fifth part.

祭司不可亵渎以色列人所献给耶和华的圣物，
And they may not make common the holy things which the children of Israel give to the Lord,

免得他们在吃圣物上自取罪孽，因为我是叫他们成圣的耶和华。
So causing sin to come on them when they take their holy things for food: I am the Lord who make them holy.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕亚伦和他子孙，并以色列众人说，以色列家中的人，或在以色列中寄居的，凡献供物，无论是所许的愿，是甘心献的，就是献给耶和华作燔祭的，
Say to Aaron and to his sons and to all the children of Israel, If any man of the children of Israel, or of another nation living in Israel, makes an offering, given because of an oath or freely given to the Lord for a burned offering;

要将没有残疾的公牛，或是绵羊，或是山羊献上，如此方蒙悦纳。
So that it may be pleasing to the Lord, let him give a male, without any mark, from among the oxen or the sheep or the goats.

凡有残疾的，你们不可献上，因为这不蒙悦纳。
But anything which has a mark you may not give; it will not make you pleasing to the Lord.

凡从牛群或是羊群中，将平安祭献给耶和华，为要还特许的愿，或是作甘心献的，所献的必纯全无残疾的才蒙悦纳。
And whoever makes a peace-offering to the Lord, in payment of an oath or as a free offering, from the herd or the flock, if it is to be pleasing to the Lord, let it be free from any mark or damage.

瞎眼的，折伤的，残废的，有瘤子的，长癣的，长疥的都不可献给耶和华，也不可在坛上作为火祭献给耶和华。
Anything blind or broken or damaged or having any disease or any mark on it may not be offered to the Lord; you may not make an offering of it by fire on the altar to the Lord.

无论是公牛是绵羊羔，若肢体有余的，或是缺少的，只可作甘心祭献上，用以还愿，却不蒙悦纳。
An ox or a lamb which has more or less than its natural parts, may be given as a free offering; but it will not be taken in payment of an oath.

肾子损伤的，或是压碎的，或是破裂的，或是骟了的，不可献给耶和华，在你们的地上也不可这样行。
An animal which has its sex parts damaged or crushed or broken or cut, may not be offered to the Lord; such a thing may not be done anywhere in your land.

这类的物，你们从外人的手，一样也不可接受作你们神的食物献上，因为这些都有损坏，有残疾，不蒙悦纳。
And from one who is not an Israelite you may not take any of these for an offering to the Lord; for they are unclean, there is a mark on them, and the Lord will not be pleased with them.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

才生的公牛，或是绵羊或是山羊，七天当跟着母，从第八天以后，可以当供物蒙悦纳，作为耶和华的火祭。
When an ox or a sheep or a goat is given birth, let it be with its mother for seven days; and after the eighth day it may be taken as an offering made by fire to the Lord.

无论是母牛是母羊，不可同日宰母和子。
A cow or a sheep may not be put to death with its young on the same day.

你们献感谢祭给耶和华，要献得可蒙悦纳。
And when you make an offering of praise to the Lord, make it in a way which is pleasing to him.

要当天吃，一点不可留到早晨。我是耶和华。
Let it be used for food on the same day; do not keep any part of it till the morning: I am the Lord.

你们要谨守遵行我的诫命。我是耶和华。
So then, keep my orders and do them: I am the Lord.

你们不可亵渎我的圣名，我在以色列人中，却要被尊为圣。我是叫你们成圣的耶和华，
And do not make my holy name common; so that it may be kept holy by the children of Israel: I am the Lord who make you holy,

把你们从埃及地领出来，作你们的神。我是耶和华。
Who took you out of the land of Egypt that I might be your God: I am the Lord.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，耶和华的节期，你们要宣告为圣会的节期。
Say to the children of Israel, These are the fixed feasts of the Lord, which you will keep for holy meetings: these are my feasts.

六日要作工，第七日是圣安息日，当有圣会，你们什么工都不可作。这是在你们一切的住处向耶和华守的安息日。
On six days work may be done; but the seventh day is a special day of rest, a time for worship; you may do no sort of work: it is a Sabbath to the Lord wherever you may be living.

耶和华的节期，就是你们到了日期要宣告为圣会的，乃是这些。
These are the fixed feasts of the Lord, the holy days of worship which you will keep at their regular times.

正月十四日，黄昏的时候，是耶和华的逾越节。
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at nightfall, is the Lord's Passover;

这月十五日是向耶和华守的无酵节，你们要吃无酵饼七日。
And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread; for seven days let your food be unleavened bread.

第一日当有圣会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。
On the first day you will have a holy meeting; you may do no sort of field-work.

要将火祭献给耶和华七日。第七日是圣会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。
And every day for seven days you will give a burned offering to the Lord; and on the seventh day there will be a holy meeting; you may do no field-work.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们到了我赐给你们的地，收割庄稼的时候，要将初熟的庄稼一捆带给祭司。
Say to the children of Israel, When you have come to the land which I will give you, and have got in the grain from its fields, take some of the first-fruits of the grain to the priest;

他要把这一捆在耶和华面前摇一摇，使你们得蒙悦纳。祭司要在安息日的次日把这捆摇一摇。
And let the grain be waved before the Lord, so that you may be pleasing to him; on the day after the Sabbath let it be waved by the priest.

摇这捆的日子，你们要把一岁没有残疾的公绵羊羔献给耶和华为燔祭。
And on the day of the waving of the grain, you are to give a male lamb of the first year, without any mark, for a burned offering to the Lord.

同献的素祭，就是调油的细面伊法十分之二，作为馨香的火祭，献给耶和华。同献的奠祭，要酒一欣四分之一。
And let the meal offering with it be two tenth parts of an ephah of the best meal mixed with oil, an offering made by fire to the Lord for a sweet smell; and the drink offering with it is to be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.

无论是饼，是烘的子粒，是新穗子，你们都不可吃，直等到把你们献给神的供物带来的那一天才可以吃。这在你们一切的住处作为世世代代永远的定例。
And you may take no bread or dry grain or new grain for food till the very day on which you have given the offering for your God: this is a rule for ever through all your generations wherever you are living.

你们要从安息日的次日，献禾捆为摇祭的那日算起，要满了七个安息日。
And let seven full weeks be numbered from the day after the Sabbath, the day when you give the grain for the wave offering;

到第七个安息日的次日，共计五十天，又要将新素祭献给耶和华。
Let fifty days be numbered, to the day after the seventh Sabbath; then you are to give a new meal offering to the Lord.

要从你们的住处取出细面伊法十分之二，加酵，烤成两个摇祭的饼，当作初熟之物献给耶和华。
Take from your houses two cakes of bread, made of a fifth part of an ephah of the best meal, cooked with leaven, to be waved for first-fruits to the Lord.

又要将一岁，没有残疾的羊羔七只，公牛犊一只，公绵羊两只，和饼一同奉上。这些与同献的素祭和奠祭要作为燔祭献给耶和华，就是作馨香的火祭献给耶和华。
And with the bread, take seven lambs of the first year, without any marks, and one ox and two male sheep, to be a burned offering to the Lord, with their meal offering and their drink offerings, an offering of a sweet smell made by fire to the Lord.

你们要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭，两只一岁的公绵羊羔为平安祭。
And you are to give one male goat for a sin-offering and two male lambs of the first year for peace-offerings.

祭司要把这些和初熟麦子作的饼一同作摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，这是献与耶和华为圣物归给祭司的。
And these will be waved by the priest, with the bread of the first-fruits, for a wave offering to the Lord, with the two lambs: they will be holy to the Lord for the priest.

当这日，你们要宣告圣会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。这在你们一切的住处作为世世代代永远的定例。
And on the same day, let it be given out that there will be a holy meeting for you: you may do no field-work on that day: it is a rule for ever through all your generations wherever you are living.

在你们的地收割庄稼，不可割尽田角，也不可拾取所遗落的，要留给穷人和寄居的。我是耶和华你们的神。
And when you get in the grain from your land, do not let all the grain at the edges of the field be cut, and do not take up the grain which has been dropped in the field; let that be for the poor, and for the man from another country: I am the Lord your God.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，七月初一，你们要守为圣安息日，要吹角作纪念，当有圣会。
Say to the children of Israel, In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, let there be a special day of rest for you, a day of memory, marked by the blowing of horns, a meeting for worship.

什么劳碌的工都不可作，要将火祭献给耶和华。
Do no field-work and give to the Lord an offering made by fire.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

七月初十是赎罪日，你们要守为圣会，并要刻苦己心，也要将火祭献给耶和华。
The tenth day of this seventh month is the day for the taking away of sin; let it be a holy day of worship; you are to keep from pleasure, and give to the Lord an offering made by fire.

当这日，什么工都不可作，因为是赎罪日，要在耶和华你们的神面前赎罪。
And on that day you may do no sort of work, for it is a day of taking away sin, to make you clean before the Lord your God.

当这日，凡不刻苦己心的，必从民中剪除。
For any person, whoever he may be, who takes his pleasure on that day will be cut off from his people.

凡这日作什么工的，我必将他从民中除灭。
And if any person, whoever he may be, on that day does any sort of work, I will send destruction on him from among his people.

你们什么工都不可作。这在你们一切的住处作为世世代代永远的定例。
You may not do any sort of work: this is an order for ever through all your generations wherever you may be living.

你们要守这日为圣安息日，并要刻苦己心。从这月初九日晚上到次日晚上，要守为安息日。
Let this be a Sabbath of special rest to you, and keep yourselves from all pleasure; on the ninth day of the month at nightfall from evening to evening, let this Sabbath be kept.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，这七月十五日是住棚节，要在耶和华面前守这节七日。
Say to the children of Israel, On the fifteenth day of this seventh month let the feast of tents be kept to the Lord for seven days.

第一日当有圣会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。
On the first day there will be a holy meeting: do no field-work.

七日内要将火祭献给耶和华。第八日当守圣会，要将火祭献给耶和华。这是严肃会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。
Every day for seven days give an offering made by fire to the Lord; and on the eighth day there is to be a holy meeting, when you are to give an offering made by fire to the Lord; this is a special holy day: you may do no field-work on that day.

这是耶和华的节期，就是你们要宣告为圣会的节期，要将火祭，燔祭，素祭，祭物，并奠祭，各归各日，献给耶和华。
These are the fixed feasts of the Lord, to be kept by you as holy days of worship, for making an offering by fire to the Lord; a burned offering, a meal offering, an offering of beasts, and drink offerings; every one on its special day;

这是在耶和华的安息日以外，又在你们的供物和所许的愿，并甘心献给耶和华的以外。
In addition to the Sabbaths of the Lord, and in addition to the things you give and the oaths you make and the free offerings to the Lord.

你们收藏了地的出产，就从七月十五日起，要守耶和华的节七日。第一日为圣安息，第八日也为圣安息。
But on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have got in all the fruits of the land, you will keep the feast of the Lord for seven days: the first day will be a Sabbath, and the eighth day the same.

第一日要拿美好树上的果子和棕树上的枝子，与茂密树的枝条并河旁的柳枝，在耶和华你们的神面前欢乐七日。
On the first day, take the fruit of fair trees, branches of palm-trees, and branches of thick trees and trees from the riverside, and be glad before the Lord for seven days.

每年七月间，要向耶和华守这节七日。这为你们世世代代永远的定例。
And let this feast be kept before the Lord for seven days in the year: it is a rule for ever from generation to generation; in the seventh month let it be kept.

你们要住在棚里七日，凡以色列家的人都要住在棚里，
For seven days you will be living in tents; all those who are Israelites by birth are to make tents their living-places:

好叫你们世世代代知道，我领以色列人出埃及地的时候曾使他们住在棚里。我是耶和华你们的神。
So that future generations may keep in mind how I gave the children of Israel tents as their living-places when I took them out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.

于是，摩西将耶和华的节期传给以色列人。
And Moses made clear to the children of Israel the orders about the fixed feasts of the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

要吩咐以色列人，把那为点灯捣成的清橄榄油拿来给你，使灯常常点着。
Give orders to the children of Israel to give you clean olive oil for the light, so that a light may be burning at all times,

在会幕中法柜的幔子外，亚伦从晚上到早晨必在耶和华面前经理这灯。这要作你们世世代代永远的定例。
Outside the veil of the ark in the Tent of meeting; let Aaron see that it is burning from evening till morning at all times before the Lord: it is a rule for ever through all your generations.

他要在耶和华面前常收拾精金灯台上的灯。
Let Aaron put the lights in order on the support before the Lord at all times.

你要取细面，烤成十二个饼，每饼用面伊法十分之二。
And take the best meal and make twelve cakes of it, a fifth part of an ephah in every cake.

要把饼摆列两行（行或作摞下同），每行六个，在耶和华面前精金的桌子上。
And put them in two lines, six in a line, on the holy table before the Lord.

又要把净乳香放在每行饼上，作为纪念，就是作为火祭献给耶和华。
And on the lines of cakes put clean sweet-smelling spices, for a sign on the bread, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

每安息日要常摆在耶和华面前，这为以色列人作永远的约。
Every Sabbath day regularly, the priest is to put it in order before the Lord: it is offered for the children of Israel, an agreement made for ever.

这饼是要给亚伦和他子孙的，他们要在圣处吃，为永远的定例，因为在献给耶和华的火祭中是至圣的。
And it will be for Aaron and his sons; they are to take it for food in a holy place: it is the most holy of all the offerings made by fire to the Lord, a rule for ever.

有一个以色列妇人的儿子，他父亲是埃及人，一日闲游在以色列人中。这以色列妇人的儿子和一个以色列人在营里争斗。
And a son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel and had a fight with a man of Israel by the tents;

这以色列妇人的儿子亵渎了圣名，并且咒诅，就有人把他送到摩西那里。（他母亲名叫示罗密，是但支派底伯利的女儿）。
And the son of the Israelite woman said evil against the holy Name, with curses; and they took him to Moses. His mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.

他们把那人收在监里，要得耶和华所指示的话。
And they kept him shut up, till a decision might be given by the mouth of the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

把那咒诅圣名的人带到营外。叫听见的人都放手在他头上，全会众就要用石头打死他。
Take the curser outside the tent-circle; and let all in whose hearing the words were said put their hands on his head, and let him be stoned by all the people.

你要晓谕以色列人说，凡咒诅神的，必担当他的罪。
And say to the children of Israel, As for any man cursing God, his sin will be on his head.

那亵渎耶和华名的，必被治死，全会众总要用石头打死他。不管是寄居的是本地人，他亵渎耶和华名的时候，必被治死。
And he who says evil against the name of the Lord will certainly be put to death; he will be stoned by all the people; the man who is not of your nation and one who is an Israelite by birth, whoever says evil against the holy Name is to be put to death.

打死人的，必被治死。
And anyone who takes another's life is certainly to be put to death.

打死牲畜的，必赔上牲畜，以命偿命。
And anyone wounding a beast and causing its death, will have to make payment for it: a life for a life.

人若使他邻舍的身体有残疾，他怎样行，也要照样向他行，
And if a man does damage to his neighbour, as he has done, so let it be done to him;

以伤还伤，以眼还眼，以牙还牙。他怎样叫人的身体有残疾，也要照样向他行。
Wound for wound, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; whatever damage he has done, so let it be done to him.

打死牲畜的，必赔上牲畜，打死人的，必被治死。
He who puts a beast to death will have to make payment for it; he who puts a man to death will himself be put to death.

不管是寄居的是本地人，同归一例。我是耶和华你们的神。
You are to have the same law for a man of another nation living among you as for an Israelite; for I am the Lord your God.

于是，摩西晓谕以色列人，他们就把那咒诅圣名的人带到营外，用石头打死。以色列人就照耶和华所吩咐摩西的行了。
And Moses said these words to the children of Israel, and they took the man who had been cursing outside the tent-circle and had him stoned. The children of Israel did as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

耶和华在西乃山对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses on Mount Sinai,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们到了我所赐你们那地的时候，地就要向耶和华守安息。
Say to the children of Israel, When you come into the land which I will give you, let the land keep a Sabbath to the Lord.

六年要耕种田地，也要修理葡萄园，收藏地的出产。
For six years put seed into your land, and for six years give care to your vines and get in the produce of them;

第七年，地要守圣安息，就是向耶和华守的安息，不可耕种田地，也不可修理葡萄园。
But let the seventh year be a Sabbath of rest for the land, a Sabbath to the Lord; do not put seed into your land or have your vines cut.

遗落自长的庄稼不可收割，没有修理的葡萄树也不可摘取葡萄。这年，地要守圣安息。
That which comes to growth of itself may not be cut, and the grapes of your uncared-for vines may not be taken off; let it be a year of rest for the land.

地在安息年所出的，要给你和你的仆人，婢女，雇工人，并寄居的外人当食物。
And the Sabbath of the land will give food for you and your man-servant and your woman-servant and those working for payment, and for those of another country who are living among you;

这年的土产也要给你的牲畜和你地上的走兽当食物。
And for your cattle and the beasts on the land; all the natural increase of the land will be for food.

你要计算七个安息年，就是七七年。这便为你成了七个安息年，共是四十九年。
And let seven Sabbaths of years be numbered to you, seven times seven years; even the days of seven Sabbaths of years, that is forty-nine years;

当年七月初十日，你要大发角声，这日就是赎罪日，要在遍地发出角声。
Then let the loud horn be sounded far and wide on the tenth day of the seventh month; on the day of taking away sin let the horn be sounded through all your land.

第五十年，你们要当作圣年，在遍地给一切的居民宣告自由。这年必为你们的禧年，各人要归自己的产业，各归本家。
And let this fiftieth year be kept holy, and say publicly that everyone in the land is free from debt: it is the Jubilee, and every man may go back to his heritage and to his family.

第五十年要作为你们的禧年。这年不可耕种，地中自长的，不可收割，没有修理的葡萄树也不可摘取葡萄。
Let this fiftieth year be the Jubilee: no seed may be planted, and that which comes to growth of itself may not be cut, and the grapes may not be taken from the uncared-for vines.

因为这是禧年，你们要当作圣年，吃地中自出的土产。
For it is the Jubilee, and it is holy to you; your food will be the natural increase of the field.

这禧年，你们各人要归自己的地业。
In this year of Jubilee, let every man go back to his heritage.

你若卖什么给邻舍，或是从邻舍的手中买什么，彼此不可亏负。
And in the business of trading goods for money, do no wrong to one another.

你要按禧年以后的年数向邻舍买，他也要按年数的收成卖给你。
Let your exchange of goods with your neighbours have relation to the number of years after the year of Jubilee, and the number of times the earth has given her produce.

年岁若多，要照数加添价值，年岁若少，要照数减去价值，因为他照收成的数目卖给你。
If the number of years is great, the price will be increased, and if the number of years is small, the price will be less, for it is the produce of a certain number of years which the man is giving you.

你们彼此不可亏负，只要敬畏你们的神，因为我是耶和华你们的神。
And do no wrong, one to another, but let the fear of your God be before you; for I am the Lord your God.

我的律例，你们要遵行，我的典章，你们要谨守，就可以在那地上安然居住。
So keep my rules and my decisions and do them, and you will be safe in your land.

地必出土产，你们就要吃饱，在那地上安然居住。
And the land will give her fruit, and you will have food in full measure and be safe in the land.

你们若说，这第七年我们不耕种，也不收藏土产，吃什么呢？
And if you say, Where will our food come from in the seventh year, when we may not put in seed, or get in the increase

我必在第六年将我所命的福赐给你们，地便生三年的土产。
Then I will send my blessing on you in the sixth year, and the land will give fruit enough for three years.

第八年，你们要耕种，也要吃陈粮，等到第九年出产收来的时候，你们还吃陈粮。
And in the eighth year you will put in your seed, and get your food from the old stores, till the fruit of the ninth year is ready.

地不可永卖，因为地是我的，你们在我面前是客旅，是寄居的。
No exchange of land may be for ever, for the land is mine, and you are as my guests, living with me for a time.

在你们所得为业的全地，也要准人将地赎回。
Wherever there is property in land, the owner is to have the right of getting it back.

你的弟兄（弟兄指本国人说下同）若渐渐穷乏，卖了几分地业，他至近的亲属就要来把弟兄所卖的赎回。
If your brother becomes poor, and has to give up some of his land for money, his nearest relation may come and get back that which his brother has given up.

若没有能给他赎回的，他自己渐渐富足，能够赎回，
And if he has no one to get it back for him, and later he himself gets wealth and has enough money to get it back;

就要算出卖地的年数，把余剩年数的价值还那买主，自己便归回自己的地业。
Then let him take into account the years from the time when he gave it up, and make up the loss for the rest of the years to him who took it, and so get back his property.

倘若不能为自己得回所卖的，仍要存在买主的手里直到禧年，到了禧年，地业要出买主的手，自己便归回自己的地业。
But if he is not able to get it back for himself, then it will be kept by him who gave a price for it, till the year of Jubilee; and in that year it will go back to its first owner and he will have his property again.

人若卖城内的住宅，卖了以后，一年之内可以赎回，在一整年，必有赎回的权柄。
And if a man gives his house in a walled town for money, he has the right to get it back for the space of a full year after he has given it up.

若在一整年之内不赎回，这城内的房屋就定准永归买主，世世代代为业，在禧年也不得出买主的手。
And if he does not get it back by the end of the year, then the house in the town will become the property of him who gave the money for it, and of his children for ever; it will not go from him in the year of Jubilee.

但房屋在无城墙的村庄里，要看如乡下的田地一样，可以赎回，到了禧年，都要出买主的手。
But houses in small unwalled towns will be the same as property in the country; they may be got back, and they will go back to their owners in the year of Jubilee.

然而利未人所得为业的城邑，其中的房屋，利未人可以随时赎回。
But the houses in the towns of the Levites may be got back by the Levites at any time.

若是一个利未人不将所卖的房屋赎回，是在所得为业的城内，到了禧年就要出买主的手，因为利未人城邑的房屋是他们在以色列人中的产业。
And if a Levite does not give money to get back his property, his house in the town which was exchanged for money will come back to him in the year of Jubilee. For the houses of the towns of the Levites are their property among the children of Israel.

只是他们各城郊野之地不可卖，因为是他们永远的产业。
But the land on the outskirts of their towns may not be exchanged for money, for it is their property for ever.

你的弟兄在你那里若渐渐贫穷，手中缺乏，你就要帮补他，使他与你同住，像外人和寄居的一样。
And if your brother becomes poor and is not able to make a living, then you are to keep him with you, helping him as you would a man from another country who is living among you.

不可向他取利，也不可向他多要，只要敬畏你的神，使你的弟兄与你同住。
Take no interest from him, in money or in goods, but have the fear of your God before you, and let your brother make a living among you.

你借钱给他，不可向他取利，借粮给他，也不可向他多要。
Do not take interest on the money which you let him have or on the food which you give him.

我是耶和华你们的神，曾领你们从埃及地出来，为要把迦南地赐给你们，要作你们的神。
I am the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt to give you the land of Canaan, that I might be your God.

你的弟兄若在你那里渐渐穷乏，将自己卖给你，不可叫他像奴仆服事你。
And if your brother becomes poor and gives himself to you for money, do not make use of him like a servant who is your property;

他要在你那里像雇工人和寄居的一样，要服事你直到禧年。
But let him be with you as a servant working for payment, till the year of Jubilee;

到了禧年，他和他儿女要离开你，一同出去归回本家，到他祖宗的地业那里去。
Then he will go out from you, he and his children with him, and go back to his family and to the property of his fathers.

因为他们是我的仆人，是我从埃及地领出来的，不可卖为奴仆。
For they are my servants whom I took out from the land of Egypt; they may not become the property of another.

不可严严地辖管他，只要敬畏你的神。
Do not be a hard master to him, but have the fear of God before you.

至于你的奴仆，婢女，可以从你四围的国中买。
But you may get servants as property from among the nations round about; from them you may take men-servants and women-servants.

并且那寄居在你们中间的外人和他们的家属，在你们地上所生的，你们也可以从其中买人，他们要作你们的产业。
And in addition, you may get, for money, servants from among the children of other nations who are living with you, and from their families which have come to birth in your land; and these will be your property.

你们要将他们遗留给你们的子孙为产业，要永远从他们中间拣出奴仆，只是你们的弟兄以色列人，你们不可严严地辖管。
And they will be your children's heritage after you, to keep as their property; they will be your servants for ever; but you may not be hard masters to your countrymen, the children of Israel.

住在你那里的外人，或是寄居的，若渐渐富足，你的弟兄却渐渐穷乏，将自己卖给那外人，或是寄居的，或是外人的宗族，
And if one from another nation living among you gets wealth, and your countryman, at his side, becomes poor and gives himself for money to the man from another nation or to one of his family;

卖了以后，可以将他赎回。无论是他的弟兄，
After he has given himself he has the right to be made free, for a price, by one of his brothers,

或伯叔，伯叔的儿子，本家的近支，都可以赎他。他自己若渐渐富足，也可以自赎。
Or his father's brother, or the son of his father's brother, or any near relation; or if he gets money, he may make himself free.

他要和买主计算，从卖自己的那年起，算到禧年，所卖的价值照着年数多少，好像工人每年的工价。
And let the years be numbered from the time when he gave himself to his owner till the year of Jubilee, and the price given for him will be in relation to the number of years, on the scale of the payment of a servant.

若缺少的年数多，就要按着年数从买价中偿还他的赎价。
If there is still a long time, he will give back, on account of it, a part of the price which was given for him.

若到禧年只缺少几年，就要按着年数和买主计算，偿还他的赎价。
And if there is only a short time, he will take account of it with his master, and in relation to the number of years he will give back the price of making him free.

他和买主同住，要像每年雇的工人，买主不可严严地辖管他。
And he will be with him as a servant working for payment year by year; his master is not to be cruel to him before your eyes.

他若不这样被赎，到了禧年，要和他的儿女一同出去。
And if he is not made free in this way, he will go out in the year of Jubilee, he and his children with him.

因为以色列人都是我的仆人，是我从埃及地领出来的。我是耶和华你们的神。
For the children of Israel are servants to me; they are my servants whom I took out of the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God.

你们不可作什么虚无的神像，不可立雕刻的偶像或是柱像，也不可在你们的地上安什么錾成的石像，向它跪拜，因为我是耶和华你们的神。
Do not make images of false gods, or put up an image cut in stone or a pillar or any pictured stone in your land, to give worship to it; for I am the Lord your God.

你们要守我的安息日，敬我的圣所。我是耶和华。
Keep my Sabbaths and give honour to my holy place: I am the Lord.

你们若遵行我的律例，谨守我的诫命，
If you are guided by my rules, and keep my laws and do them,

我就给你们降下时雨，叫地生出土产，田野的树木结果子。
Then I will give you rain at the right time, and the land will give her increase and the trees of the field will give their fruit;

你们打粮食要打到摘葡萄的时候，摘葡萄要摘到撒种的时候，并且要吃得饱足，在你们的地上安然居住。
And the crushing of the grain will overtake the cutting of the grapes, and the cutting of the grapes will overtake the planting of the seed, and there will be bread in full measure, and you will be living in your land safely.

我要赐平安在你们的地上，你们躺卧，无人惊吓。我要叫恶兽从你们的地上息灭，刀剑也必不经过你们的地。
And I will give you peace in the land, and you will take your rest and no one will give you cause for fear; and I will put an end to all evil beasts in the land, and no sword of war will go through your land.

你们要追赶仇敌，他们必倒在你们刀下。
And you will put to flight those who are against you, and they will be put to death by your swords.

你们五个人要追赶一百人，一百人要追赶一万人，仇敌必倒在你们刀下。
Then five of you will put to flight a hundred, and a hundred of you will put to flight ten thousand, and all who are against you will be put to death by your swords.

我要眷顾你们，使你们生养众多，也要与你们坚定所立的约。
And I will have pleasure in you and make you fertile and greater in number; and I will keep my agreement with you.

你们要吃陈粮，又因新粮挪开陈粮。
And old stores long kept will be your food, and you will take out the old because of the new;

我要在你们中间立我的帐幕，我的心也不厌恶你们。
And I will put my holy House among you, and my soul will not be turned away from you in disgust.

我要在你们中间行走，我要作你们的神，你们要作我的子民。
And I will be present among you and will be your God and you will be my people.

我是耶和华你们的神，曾将你们从埃及地领出来，使你们不作埃及人的奴仆，我也折断你们所负的轭，叫你们挺身而走。
I am the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt so that you might not be servants to them; by me the cords of your yoke were broken and I made you go upright.

你们若不听从我，不遵行我的诫命，
But if you do not give ear to me, and do not keep all these my laws;

厌弃我的律例，厌恶我的典章，不遵行我一切的诫命，背弃我的约，
And if you go against my rules and if you have hate in your souls for my decisions and you do not do all my orders, but go against my agreement;

我待你们就要这样，我必命定惊惶，叫眼目干瘪，精神消耗的痨病热病辖制你们。你们也要白白地撒种，因为仇敌要吃你们所种的。
This will I do to you: I will put fear in your hearts, even wasting disease and burning pain, drying up the eyes and making the soul feeble, and you will get no profit from your seed, for your haters will take it for food.

我要向你们变脸，你们就要败在仇敌面前。恨恶你们的，必辖管你们，无人追赶，你们却要逃跑。
And my face will be turned from you, and you will be broken before those who are against you, and your haters will become your rulers, and you will go in flight when no man comes after you.

你们因这些事若还不听从我，我就要为你们的罪加七倍惩罚你们。
And if, even after these things, you will not give ear to me, then I will send you punishment seven times more for your sins.

我必断绝你们因势力而有的骄傲，又要使覆你们的天如铁，载你们的地如铜。
And the pride of your strength will be broken, and I will make your heaven as iron and your earth as brass;

你们要白白地劳力，因为你们的地不出土产，其上的树木也不结果子。
And your strength will be used up without profit; for your land will not give her increase and the trees of the field will not give their fruit.

你们行事若与我反对，不肯听从我，我就要按你们的罪加七倍降灾与你们。
And if you still go against me and will not give ear to me, I will put seven times more punishments on you because of your sins.

我也要打发野地的走兽到你们中间，抢吃你们的儿女，吞灭你们的牲畜，使你们的人数减少，道路荒凉。
I will let loose the beasts of the field among you, and they will take away your children and send destruction on your cattle, so that your numbers will become small and your roads become waste.

你们因这些事若仍不改正归我，行事与我反对，
And if by these things you will not be turned to me, but still go against me;

我就要行事与你们反对，因你们的罪击打你们七次。
Then I will go against you, and I will give you punishment, I myself, seven times for all your sins.

我又要使刀剑临到你们，报复你们背约的仇，聚集你们在各城内，降瘟疫在你们中间，也必将你们交在仇敌的手中。
And I will send a sword on you to give effect to the punishment of my agreement; and when you come together into your towns I will send disease among you and you will be given up into the hands of your haters.

我要折断你们的杖，就是断绝你们的粮。那时，必有十个女人在一个炉子给你们烤饼，按分量秤给你们，你们要吃，也吃不饱。
When I take away your bread of life, ten women will be cooking bread in one oven, and your bread will be measured out by weight; you will have food but never enough.

你们因这一切的事若不听从我，却行事与我反对，
And if, after all this, you do not give ear to me, but go against me still,

我就要发烈怒，行事与你们反对，又因你们的罪惩罚你们七次。
Then my wrath will be burning against you, and I will give you punishment, I myself, seven times for your sins.

并且你们要吃儿子的肉，也要吃女儿的肉。
Then you will take the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your daughters for food;

我又要毁坏你们的丘坛，砍下你们的日像，把你们的尸首扔在你们偶像的身上，我的心也必厌恶你们。
And I will send destruction on your high places, overturning your perfume altars, and will put your dead bodies on your broken images, and my soul will be turned from you in disgust.

我要使你们的城邑变为荒凉，使你们的众圣所成为荒场，我也不闻你们馨香的香气。
And I will make your towns waste and send destruction on your holy places; I will take no pleasure in the smell of your sweet perfumes;

我要使地成为荒场，住在其上的仇敌就因此诧异。
And I will make your land a waste, a wonder to your haters living in it.

我要把你们散在列邦中，我也要拔刀追赶你们。你们的地要成为荒场，你们的城邑要变为荒凉。
And I will send you out in all directions among the nations, and my sword will be uncovered against you, and your land will be without any living thing, and your towns will be made waste.

你们在仇敌之地居住的时候，你们的地荒凉要享受众安息，正在那时候，地要歇息，享受安息。
Then will the land take pleasure in its Sabbaths while it is waste and you are living in the land of your haters; then will the land have rest.

地多时为荒场，就要多时歇息，地这样歇息，是你们住在其上的安息年所不能得的。
All the days while it is waste will the land have rest, such rest as it never had in your Sabbaths, when you were living in it.

至于你们剩下的人，我要使他们在仇敌之地心惊胆怯。叶子被风吹的响声，要追赶他们，他们要逃避，像人逃避刀剑，无人追赶，却要跌倒。
And as for the rest of you, I will make their hearts feeble in the land of their haters, and the sound of a leaf moved by the wind will send them in flight, and they will go in flight as from the sword, falling down when no one comes after them;

无人追赶，他们要彼此撞跌，像在刀剑之前。你们在仇敌面前也必站立不住。
Falling on one another, as before the sword, when no one comes after them; you will give way before your haters.

你们要在列邦中灭亡，仇敌之地要吞吃你们。
And death will overtake you among strange nations, and the land of your haters will be your destruction.

你们剩下的人必因自己的罪孽和祖宗的罪孽在仇敌之地消灭。
And those of you who are still living will be wasting away in their sins in the land of your haters; in the sins of their fathers they will be wasting away.

他们要承认自己的罪和他们祖宗的罪，就是干犯我的那罪，并且承认自己行事与我反对，
And they will have grief for their sins and for the sins of their fathers, when their hearts were untrue to me, and they went against me;

我所以行事与他们反对，把他们带到仇敌之地。那时，他们未受割礼的心若谦卑了，他们也服了罪孽的刑罚，
So that I went against them and sent them away into the land of their haters: if then the pride of their hearts is broken and they take the punishment of their sins,

我就要记念我与雅各所立的约，与以撒所立的约，与亚伯拉罕所立的约，并要记念这地。
Then I will keep in mind the agreement which I made with Jacob and with Isaac and with Abraham, and I will keep in mind the land.

他们离开这地，地在荒废无人的时候就要享受安息。并且他们要服罪孽的刑罚，因为他们厌弃了我的典章，心中厌恶了我的律例。
And the land, while she is without them, will keep her Sabbaths; and they will undergo the punishment of their sins, because they were turned away from my decisions and in their souls was hate for my laws.

虽是这样，他们在仇敌之地，我却不厌弃他们，也不厌恶他们，将他们尽行灭绝，也不背弃我与他们所立的约，因为我是耶和华他们的神。
But for all that, when they are in the land of their haters I will not let them go, or be turned away from them, or give them up completely; my agreement with them will not be broken, for I am the Lord their God.

我却要为他们的缘故记念我与他们先祖所立的约。他们的先祖是我在列邦人眼前，从埃及地领出来的，为要作他们的神。我是耶和华。
And because of them I will keep in mind the agreement which I made with their fathers, whom I took out of the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations, to be their God: I am the Lord.

这些律例，典章，和法度是耶和华与以色列人在西乃山借着摩西立的。
These are the rules, decisions, and laws, which the Lord made between himself and the children of Israel in Mount Sinai, by the hand of Moses.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，人还特许的愿，被许的人要按你所估的价值归给耶和华。
Say to the children of Israel, If a man makes a special oath, you will give your decision as to the value of the persons for the Lord.

你估定的，从二十岁到六十岁的男人，要按圣所的平，估定价银五十舍客勒。
And you will put the value of a male from twenty years to sixty years old at fifty shekels of silver, by the scale of the holy place.

若是女人，你要估定三十舍客勒。
And if it is a female, the value will be thirty shekels.

若是从五岁到二十岁，男子你要估定二十舍客勒，女子估定十舍客勒。
And if the person is from five to twenty years old, the value will be twenty shekels for a male, and ten for a female.

若是从一月到五岁，男子你要估定五舍客勒，女子估定三舍客勒。
And if the person is from one month to five years old, then the value for a male will be five shekels of silver, and for a female three shekels.

若是从六十岁以上，男人你要估定十五舍客勒，女人估定十舍客勒。
And for sixty years old and over, for a male the value will be fifteen shekels, and for a female, ten.

他若贫穷，不能照你所估定的价，就要把他带到祭司面前，祭司要按许愿人的力量估定他的价。
But if he is poorer than the value which you have put on him, then let him be taken to the priest, and the priest will put a value on him, such as it is possible for him to give.

所许的若是牲畜，就是人献给耶和华为供物的，凡这一类献给耶和华的，都要成为圣。
And if it is a beast of which men make offerings to the Lord, whatever any man gives of such to the Lord will be holy.

人不可改换，也不可更换，或是好的换坏的，或是坏的换好的。若以牲畜更换牲畜，所许的与所换的都要成为圣。
It may not be changed in any way, a good given for a bad, or a bad for a good; if one beast is changed for another, the two will be holy.

若牲畜不洁净，是不可献给耶和华为供物的，就要把牲畜安置在祭司面前。
And if it is any unclean beast, of which offerings are not made to the Lord, then let him take the beast before the priest;

祭司就要估定价值，牲畜是好是坏，祭司怎样估定，就要以怎样为是。
And let the priest put a value on it, if it is good or bad; whatever value the priest puts on it, so will it be.

他若一定要赎回，就要在你所估定的价值以外加上五分之一。
But if he has a desire to get it back for himself, let him give a fifth more than your value.

人将房屋分别为圣，归给耶和华，祭司就要估定价值。房屋是好是坏，祭司怎样估定，就要以怎样为定。
And if a man has given his house as holy to the Lord, then the priest will put a value on it, if it is good or bad; as the priest gives decision so will the value be fixed.

将房屋分别为圣的人，若要赎回房屋，就必在你所估定的价值以外加上五分之一，房屋仍旧归他。
And if the owner has a desire to get back his house, let him give a fifth more than your value, and it will be his.

人若将承受为业的几分地分别为圣，归给耶和华，你要按这地撒种多少估定价值，若撒大麦一贺梅珥，要估价五十舍客勒。
And if a man gives to the Lord part of the field which is his property, then let your value be in relation to the seed which is planted in it; a measure of barley grain will be valued at fifty shekels of silver.

他若从禧年将地分别为圣，就要以你所估定的价为定。
If he gives his field from the year of Jubilee, the value will be fixed by your decision.

倘若他在禧年以后将地分别为圣，祭司就要按着未到禧年所剩的年数推算价值，也要从你所估的减去价值。
But if he gives his field after the year of Jubilee, the amount of the money will be worked out by the priest in relation to the number of years till the coming year of Jubilee, and the necessary amount will be taken off your value.

将地分别为圣的人若定要把地赎回，他便要在你所估的价值以外加上五分之一，地就准定归他。
And if the man who has given the field has a desire to get it back, let him give a fifth more than the price at which it was valued and it will be his.

他若不赎回那地，或是将地卖给别人，就再不能赎了。
But if he has no desire to get it back, or if he has given it for a price to another man, it may not be got back again.

但到了禧年，那地从买主手下出来的时候，就要归耶和华为圣，和永献的地一样，要归祭司为业。
But the field, when it becomes free at the year of Jubilee, will be holy to the Lord, as a field given under oath: it will be the property of the priest.

他若将所买的一块地，不是承受为业的，分别为圣归给耶和华，
And if a man gives to the Lord a field which he has got for money from another, which is not part of his heritage;

祭司就要将你所估的价值给他推算到禧年。当日，他要以你所估的价银为圣，归给耶和华。
Then the value fixed by you up to the year of Jubilee will be worked out for him by the priest, and in that day he will give the amount of your value as holy to the Lord.

到了禧年，那地要归卖主，就是那承受为业的原主。
In the year of Jubilee the field will go back to him from whom he got it, that is, to him whose heritage it was.

凡你所估定的价银都要按着圣所的平，二十季拉为一舍客勒。
And let all your values be based on the shekel of the holy place, that is, twenty gerahs to the shekel.

惟独牲畜中头生的，无论是牛是羊，既归耶和华，谁也不可再分别为圣，因为这是耶和华的。
But a man may not give by oath to the Lord the first-fruits of cattle which are offered to the Lord: if it is an ox or a sheep it is the Lord's.

若是不洁净的牲畜生的，就要按你所估定的价值加上五分之一赎回，若不赎回，就要按你所估定的价值卖了。
And if it is an unclean beast, then the owner of it may give money to get it back, in agreement with the value fixed by you, by giving a fifth more; or if it is not taken back, let it be given for money in agreement with your valuing.

但一切永献的，就是人从他所有永献给耶和华的，无论是人，是牲畜，是他承受为业的地，都不可卖，也不可赎。凡永献的是归给耶和华为至圣。
But nothing which a man has given completely to the Lord, out of all his property, of man or beast, or of the land which is his heritage, may be given away or got back in exchange for money; anything completely given is most holy to the Lord.

凡从人中当灭的都不可赎，必被治死。
Any man given completely to the Lord may not be got back: he is certainly to be put to death.

地上所有的，无论是地上的种子是树上的果子，十分之一是耶和华的，是归给耶和华为圣的。
And every tenth part of the land, of the seed planted, or of the fruit of trees, is holy to the Lord.

人若要赎这十分之一的什么物，就要加上五分之一。
And if a man has a desire to get back any of the tenth part which he has given, let him give a fifth more.

凡牛群羊群中，一切从杖下经过的，每第十只要归给耶和华为圣。
And a tenth part of the herd and of the flock, whatever goes under the rod of the valuer, will be holy to the Lord.

不可问是好是坏，也不可更换，若定要更换，所更换的与本来的牲畜都要成为圣，不可赎回。
He may not make search to see if it is good or bad, or make any changes in it; and if he makes exchange of it for another, the two will be holy; he will not get them back again.

这就是耶和华在西乃山为以色列人所吩咐摩西的命令。
These are the orders which the Lord gave to Moses for the children of Israel in Mount Sinai.

ose heritage it was.

凡你所估定的价银都要按着圣所的平，二十季拉为一舍客勒。
And let all your values be based on the shekel of the holy place, that is, twenty gerahs to the shekel.

惟独牲畜中头生的，无论是牛是羊，既归耶和华，谁也不可再分别为圣，因为这是耶和华的。
But a man may not give by oath to the Lord the first-fruits of cattle which are offered to the Lord: if it is an ox or a sheep it is the Lord's.

若是不洁净的牲畜生的，就要按你所估定的价值加上五分之一赎回，若不赎回，就要按你所估定的价值卖了。
And if it is an unclean beast, then the owner of it may give money to get it back, in agreement with the value fixed by you, by giving a fifth more; or if it is not taken back, let it be given for money in agreement with your valuing.

但一切永献的，就是人从他所有永献给耶和华的，无论是人，是牲畜，是他承受为业的地，都不可卖，也不可赎。凡永献的是归给耶和华为至圣。
But nothing which a man has given completely to the Lord, out of all his property, of man or beast, or of the land which is his heritage, may be given away or got back in exchange for money; anything completely given is most holy to the Lord.

凡从人中当灭的都不可赎，必被治死。
Any man given completely to the Lord may not be got back: he is certainly to be put to death.

地上所有的，无论是地上的种子是树上的果子，十分之一是耶和华的，是归给耶和华为圣的。
And every tenth part of the land, of the seed planted, or of the fruit of trees, is holy to the Lord.

人若要赎这十分之一的什么物，就要加上五分之一。
And if a man has a desire to get back any of the tenth part which he has given, let him give a fifth more.

凡牛群羊群中，一切从杖下经过的，每第十只要归给耶和华为圣。
And a tenth part of the herd and of the flock, whatever goes under the rod of the valuer, will be holy to the Lord.

不可问是好是坏，也不可更换，若定要更换，所更换的与本来的牲畜都要成为圣，不可赎回。
He may not make search to see if it is good or bad, or make any changes in it; and if he makes exchange of it for another, the two will be holy; he will not get them back again.

这就是耶和华在西乃山为以色列人所吩咐摩西的命令。
These are the orders which the Lord gave to Moses for the children of Israel in Mount Sinai.

