历代志下 Chronicles


大卫的儿子所罗门国位坚固。耶和华他的神与他同在，使他甚为尊大。
And Solomon, the son of David, made himself strong in his kingdom, and the Lord his God was with him, and made him very great.

所罗门吩咐以色列众人，就是千夫长，百夫长，审判官，首领与族长都来。
And Solomon sent word to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds and to the judges and to every chief in all Israel, heads of their families.

所罗门和会众都往基遍的丘坛去，因那里有神的会幕，就是耶和华仆人摩西在旷野所制造的。
Then Solomon, and all the men of Israel with him, went to the high place at Gibeon, because the Tent of meeting of God, which Moses, the servant of the Lord, had made in the waste land, was there.

只是神的约柜，大卫已经从基列耶琳搬到他所预备的地方，因他曾在耶路撒冷为约柜支搭了帐幕，
But the ark of God had been moved by David from Kiriath-jearim to the place which he had made ready for it, for he had put up a tent for it at Jerusalem.

并且户珥的孙子，乌利的儿子比撒列所造的铜坛也在基遍耶和华的会幕前。所罗门和会众都就近坛前。
And the altar of brass which Bezalel, the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, was there before the Tent of the Lord; and Solomon and all the people went to give worship there.

所罗门上到耶和华面前会幕的铜坛那里，献一千牺牲为燔祭。
And Solomon went up there to the brass altar before the Lord at the Tent of meeting, offering on it a thousand burned offerings.

当夜，神向所罗门显现，对他说，你愿我赐你什么，你可以求。
In that night God came to Solomon in a vision, and said to him, Say what I am to give you.

所罗门对神说，你曾向我父大卫大施慈爱，使我接续他作王。
And Solomon said to God, Great was your mercy to David my father, and you have made me king in his place.

耶和华神阿，现在求你成就向我父大卫所应许的话。因你立我作这民的王，他们如同地上尘沙那样多。
Now, O Lord God, let your word to David my father come true; for you have made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in number.

求你赐我智慧聪明，我好在这民前出入。不然，谁能判断这众多的民呢？
Give me now wisdom and knowledge, so that I may go out and come in before this people: for who is able to be the judge of this great people of yours?

神对所罗门说，我已立你作我民的王。你既有这心意，并不求资财，丰富，尊荣，也不求灭绝那恨你之人的性命，又不求大寿数，只求智慧聪明好判断我的民。
And God said to Solomon, Because this was in your heart, and you did not make request for money, property, or honour, or for the destruction of your haters, or for long life; but you have made request for wisdom and knowledge for yourself, so that you may be the judge of my people over whom I have made you king:

我必赐你智慧聪明，也必赐你资财，丰富，尊荣。在你以前的列王都没有这样，在你以后也必没有这样的。
Wisdom and knowledge are given to you; and I will give you wealth and honour, such as no king has had before you or ever will have after you.

于是，所罗门从基遍丘坛会幕前回到耶路撒冷，治理以色列人。
So Solomon went back from the high place at Gibeon, from before the Tent of meeting, to Jerusalem; and he was king over Israel.

所罗门聚集战车马兵，有战车一千四百辆，马兵一万二千名，安置在屯车的城邑和耶路撒冷，就是王那里。
And Solomon got together war-carriages and horsemen; he had one thousand, four hundred carriages and twelve thousand horsemen, which he kept, some in the carriage-towns and some with the king at Jerusalem.

王在耶路撒冷使金银多如石头，香柏木多如高原的桑树。
And the king made silver and gold as common as stones in Jerusalem, and cedar like the sycamore-trees of the lowland in number.

所罗门的马是从埃及带来的，是王的商人一群一群按着定价买来的。
And Solomon's horses came out of Egypt; the king's traders got them from Kue at a price.

他们从埃及买来的车，每辆价银七百舍客勒，马每匹一百五十舍客勒。赫人诸王和亚兰诸王所买的车马，也是按这价值经他们手买来的。
A war-carriage might be got from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty: they got them at the same rate for all the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram.

所罗门定意要为耶和华的名建造殿宇，又为自己的国建造宫室。
Now it was Solomon's purpose to put up a house for the name of the Lord and a house for himself as king.

所罗门就挑选七万扛抬的，八万在山上凿石头的，三千六百督工的。
And Solomon had seventy thousand men numbered for transport, and eighty thousand for cutting stone in the mountains, and three thousand, six hundred as overseers.

所罗门差人去见推罗王希兰，说，你曾运香柏木与我父大卫建宫居住，求你也这样待我。
And Solomon sent to Huram, king of Tyre, saying, As you did for my father David, sending him cedar-trees for the building of his house,

我要为耶和华我神的名建造殿宇，分别为圣献给他，在他面前焚烧美香，常摆陈设饼，每早晚，安息日，月朔，并耶和华我们神所定的节期献燔祭。这是以色列人永远的定例。
See! I am building a house for the name of the Lord my God, to be made holy to him, where perfumes of sweet spices will be burned before him, and the holy bread will be placed at all times, and burned offerings will be offered morning and evening, on the Sabbaths and at the new moons, and on the regular feasts of the Lord our God. This is a law for ever to Israel.

我所要建造的殿宇甚大。因为我们的神至大，超乎诸神。
And the house which I am building is to be great, for our God is greater than all gods.

天和天上的天，尚且不足他居住的，谁能为他建造殿宇呢？我是谁。能为他建造殿宇吗？不过在他面前烧香而已。
But who may have strength enough to make a house for him, seeing that the heaven and the heaven of heavens are not wide enough to be his resting-place? who am I then to make a house for him? But I am building it only for the burning of perfume before him.

现在求你差一个巧匠来，就是善用金，银，铜，铁，和紫色，朱红色，蓝色线，并精于雕刻之工的巧匠，与我父大卫在犹大和耶路撒冷所预备的巧匠一同作工。
So now send me an expert worker in gold and silver and brass and iron? in purple and red and blue, and in the cutting of all sorts of ornament, to be with the expert workmen who are here in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom my father David got together.

又求你从利巴嫩运些香柏木，松木，檀香木到我这里来，因我知道你的仆人善于砍伐利巴嫩的树木。我的仆人也必与你的仆人同工。
And send me cedar-trees, cypress-trees and sandal-wood from Lebanon, for, to my knowledge, your servants are expert wood-cutters in Lebanon; and my servants will be with yours,

这样，可以给我预备许多的木料，因我要建造的殿宇高大出奇。
To get trees for me in great numbers, for the house which I am building is to be great and a wonder.

你的仆人砍伐树木，我必给他们打好了的小麦二万歌珥，大麦二万歌珥，酒二万吧特，油二万吧特。
And I will give as food to your servants, the wood-cutters, twenty thousand measures of grain, and twenty thousand measures of barley and twenty thousand measures of wine and twenty thousand measures of oil.

推罗王希兰写信回答所罗门说，耶和华因为爱他的子民，所以立你作他们的王。
Then Huram, king of Tyre, sent Solomon an answer in writing, saying, Because of his love for his people the Lord has made you king over them.

又说，创造天地的耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的。他赐给大卫王一个有智慧的儿子，使他有谋略聪明，可以为耶和华建造殿宇，又为自己的国建造宫室。
And Huram said, Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, maker of heaven and earth, who has given to David the king a wise son, full of wisdom and good sense, to be the builder of a house for the Lord and a house for himself as king.

现在我打发一个精巧有聪明的人去，他是我父亲希兰所用的，
And now I am sending you a wise and expert man, Huram who is as my father,

是但支派一个妇人的儿子。他父亲是推罗人，他善用金，银，铜，铁，石，木，和紫色，蓝色，朱红色线与细麻制造各物，并精于雕刻，又能想出各样的巧工。请你派定这人，与你的巧匠和你父，我主大卫的巧匠一同做工。
The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, whose father was a man of Tyre, an expert worker in gold and silver and brass and iron, in stone and wood, in purple and blue and fair linen and red, trained in the cutting of every sort of ornament and the invention of every sort of design; let him be given a place among your expert workmen and those of my lord, your father David.

我主所说的小麦，大麦，酒，油，愿我主运来给众仆人。
So now let my lord send to his servants the grain and the oil and the wine as my lord has said;

我们必照你所需用的，从利巴嫩砍伐树木，扎成筏子，浮海运到约帕。你可以从那里运到耶路撒冷。
And we will have wood cut from Lebanon, as much as you have need of, and will send it to you on flat boats by sea to Joppa, and from there you may take it up to Jerusalem.

所罗门仿照他父大卫数点住在以色列地所有寄居的外邦人，共有十五万三千六百名。
Then Solomon took the number of all the men from strange lands who were living in Israel, as his father David had done; there were a hundred and fifty-three thousand, six hundred.

使七万人扛抬材料，八万人在山上凿石头，三千六百人督理工作。
Seventy thousand he put to the work of transport, eighty thousand to cutting stone in the mountains, and three thousand, six hundred as overseers to put the people to work.

所罗门就在耶路撒冷，耶和华向他父大卫显现的摩利亚山上，就是耶布斯人阿珥楠的禾场上，大卫所指定的地方预备好了，开工建造耶和华的殿。
Then Solomon made a start at building the house of the Lord on Mount Moriah in Jerusalem, where the Lord had been seen by his father David, in the place which David had made ready in the grain-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

所罗门作王第四年二月初二日开工建造。
The building was started in the second month in the fourth year of his rule.

所罗门建筑神殿的根基，乃是这样，长六十肘，宽二十肘，都按着古时的尺寸。
And Solomon put the base of the house of God in position; by the older measure it was sixty cubits long and twenty cubits wide.

殿前的廊子长二十肘，与殿的宽窄一样，高一百二十肘。里面贴上精金。
And the covered way in front of the house was twenty cubits long, as wide as the house, and a hundred and twenty cubits high, all plated inside with the best gold.

大殿的墙都用松木板遮蔽，又贴了精金，上面雕刻棕树和链子。
And the greater house was roofed with cypress-wood, plated with the best gold and ornamented with designs of palm-trees and chains.

又用宝石装饰殿墙，使殿华美。所用的金子都是巴瓦音的金子。
And the house was made beautiful with stones of great value, and the gold was gold of Parvaim.

又用金子贴殿和殿的栋梁，门槛，墙壁，门扇。墙上雕刻基路伯。
All the house was plated with gold, the supports, the steps, the walls and the doors; and the walls were ornamented with designs of winged ones.

又建造至圣所，长二十肘，与殿的宽窄一样，宽也是二十肘。贴上精金，共用金子六百他连得。
And he made the most holy place; it was twenty cubits long, and twenty cubits wide, like the greater house, and was plated all over with the best gold; six hundred talents were used for it.

金钉重五十舍客勒。楼房都贴上金子。
And fifty shekels weight of gold was used for the nails. He had all the higher rooms plated with gold.

在至圣所按造像的法子造两个基路伯，用金子包裹。
And in the most holy place he made images of two winged beings, covering them with gold.

两个基路伯的翅膀共长二十肘。这基路伯的一个翅膀长五肘，挨着殿这边的墙。那一个翅膀也长五肘，与那基路伯翅膀相接。
Their outstretched wings were twenty cubits across; one wing, five cubits long, touching the wall of the house, and the other, of the same size, meeting the wing of the other winged one.

那基路伯的一个翅膀长五肘，挨着殿那边的墙。那一个翅膀也长五肘，与这基路伯的翅膀相接。
And in the same way, the wings of the other, five cubits long, were stretched out, one touching the wall and the other meeting the wing of the first winged one.

两个基路伯张开翅膀，共长二十肘，面向外殿而立。
Their outstretched wings were twenty cubits across; they were placed upright on their feet, facing the inner part of the house.

又用蓝色，紫色，朱红色线和细麻织幔子，在其上绣出基路伯来。
And he made the veil of blue and purple and red, of the best linen, worked with winged ones.

在殿前造了两根柱子，高三十五肘。每柱顶高五肘。
And in front of the house he made two pillars, thirty-five cubits high, with crowns on the tops of them, five cubits high.

又照圣所内链子的样式作链子，安在柱顶上。又作一百石榴，安在链子上。
And he made chains, like neck ornaments, and put them on the tops of the pillars, and a hundred apples on the chains.

将两根柱子立在殿前，一根在右边，一根在左边。右边的起名叫雅斤，左边的起名叫波阿斯。
He put up the pillars in front of the Temple, one on the right side and one on the left, naming the one on the right Jachin and that on the left Boaz.

他又制造一座铜坛，长二十肘，宽二十肘，高十肘。
Then he made a brass altar, twenty cubits long, twenty cubits wide and ten cubits high.

又铸一个铜海，样式是圆的，高五肘，径十肘，围三十肘。
And he made the great water-vessel of metal, round in form, measuring ten cubits across from edge to edge; it was five cubits high and thirty cubits round.

海周围有野瓜的样式，每肘十瓜，共有两行，是铸海的时候铸上的（野瓜原文作牛）。
And under it was a design of flowers all round it, ten to a cubit, circling the water-vessel in two lines; they were made from liquid metal at the same time as the water-vessel.

有十二只铜牛驮海，三只向北，三只向西，三只向南，三只向东。海在牛上，牛尾向内。
It was supported on twelve oxen, three facing to the north, three to the west, three to the south, and three to the east, the water-vessel resting on top of them; their back parts were all turned to the middle of it.

海厚一掌，边如杯边，又如百合花，可容三千吧特。
It was as thick as a man's open hand, and the edge of it was curved like the edge of a cup, like a lily flower; it would take three thousand baths.

又制造十个盆，五个放在右边，五个放在左边，献燔祭所用之物都洗在其内。但海是为祭司沐浴的。
And he made ten washing-vessels, putting five on the right side and five on the left; such things as were used in making the burned offering were washed in them; but the great water-vessel was to be used by the priests for washing themselves.

他又照所定的样式造十个金灯台放在殿里，五个在右边，五个在左边。
And he made the ten gold supports for the lights, as directions had been given for them, and he put them in the Temple, five on the right side and five on the left.

又造十张桌子放在殿里，五张在右边，五张在左边。又造一百个金碗。
He made ten tables, and put them in the Temple, five on the right side and five on the left. And he made a hundred gold basins.

又建立祭司院和大院，并院门，用铜包裹门扇。
Then he made the open space for the priests, and the great open space and its doors, plating the doors with brass.

将海安在殿门的右边，就是南边。
He put the great water-vessel on the right side of the house to the east, facing south.

户兰又造了盆，铲，碗。这样，他为所罗门王作完了神殿的工。
And Huram made all the pots and the spades and the basins. So he came to the end of all the work he did for King Solomon in the house of God:

所造的就是两根柱子和柱上两个如球的顶，并两个盖柱顶的网子，
The two pillars, and the two crowns on the tops of the pillars, and the network covering the two cups of the crowns on the tops of the pillars;

和四百石榴，安在两个网子上，每网两行盖着两个柱上如球的顶。
And the four hundred apples for the network, two lines of apples for the network covering the two cups of the crowns on the pillars.

盆座和其上的盆，
And he made the ten bases and the ten washing-vessels which were on the bases;

海和海下的十二只牛，
The great water-vessel with the twelve oxen under it.

盆，铲子，肉锸子，与耶和华殿里的一切器皿，都是巧匠户兰用光亮的铜为所罗门王造成的，
All the pots and the spades and the meat-hooks and their vessels, which Huram, who was as his father, made for King Solomon for the house of the Lord, were of polished brass.

是在约旦平原疏割和撒利但中间借胶泥铸成的。
The king made them of liquid metal in the lowland of Jordan, in the soft earth between Succoth and Zeredah.

所罗门制造的这一切甚多，铜的轻重无法可查。
So Solomon made all these vessels, a very great store of them, and the weight of the brass used was not measured.

所罗门又造神殿里的金坛和陈设饼的桌子，
And Solomon made all the vessels used in the house of God, the gold altar and the tables on which the holy bread was placed,

并精金的灯台和灯盏，可以照例点在内殿前。
And the supports for the lights with their lights, to be burning in the regular way in front of the inmost room, of the best gold;

灯台上的花和灯盏，并蜡剪都是金的，且是纯金的。
The flowers and the vessels for the lights and the instruments used for them, were all of gold; it was the best gold.

又用精金制造镊子，盘子，调羹，火鼎。至于殿门和至圣所的门扇，并殿的门扇，都是金子妆饰的。
The scissors and the basins and the spoons and the fire-trays, of the best gold; and the inner doors of the house, opening into the most holy place, and the doors of the Temple, were all of gold.

所罗门作完了耶和华殿的一切工，就把他父大卫分别为圣的金银和器皿都带来，放在神殿的府库里。
So all the work which Solomon did for the house of the Lord was complete. And Solomon took the holy things which David his father had given, the silver and the gold and all the vessels, and put them in the store-houses of the house of God.

那时，所罗门将以色列的长老，各支派的首领，并以色列的族长招聚到耶路撒冷，要把耶和华的约柜从大卫城就是锡安运上来。
Then Solomon sent for all the responsible men of Israel, all the chiefs of the tribes and the heads of families of the children of Israel, to come to Jerusalem and take the ark of the Lord's agreement up out of the town of David, which is Zion.

于是以色列众人在七月节前都聚集到王那里。
And all the men of Israel came together to the king at the feast in the seventh month.

以色列众长老来到，利未人便抬起约柜。
All the responsible men of Israel came, and the Levites took up the ark.

祭司利未人将约柜运上来，又将会幕和会幕的一切圣器具都带上来。
They took up the ark and the Tent of meeting and all the holy vessels which were in the Tent; all these the priests, the Levites, took up.

所罗门王和聚集到他那里的以色列全会众都在约柜前献牛羊为祭，多得不可胜数。
And King Solomon and all the men of Israel who had come together there with him, were before the ark, making offerings of sheep and oxen more than might be numbered.

祭司将耶和华的约柜抬进内殿，就是至圣所，放在两个基路伯的翅膀底下。
And the priests took the ark of the Lord's agreement and put it in its place, in the inner room of the house, in the most holy place, under the wings of the winged ones.

基路伯张着翅膀在约柜之上，遮掩约柜和抬柜的杠。
For their wings were outstretched over the place where the ark was, covering the ark and its rods.

这杠甚长，杠头在内殿前可以看见，在殿外却不能看见，直到如今还在那里。
The rods were so long that their ends were seen from the holy place before the inmost room; but they were not seen from outside; and there they are to this day.

约柜里惟有两块石版，就是以色列人出埃及后，耶和华与他们立约的时候，摩西在何烈山所放的。除此以外，并无别物。
Nothing was in the ark but the two flat stones which Moses put there at Horeb, where the Lord made an agreement with the children of Israel when they came out of Egypt.

当时，在那里所有的祭司都已自洁，并不分班供职。
Now when the priests had come out of the holy place, (for all the priests who were present had made themselves holy, not keeping to their divisions;

他们出圣所的时候，歌唱的利未人亚萨，希幔，耶杜顿，和他们的众子众弟兄都穿细麻布衣服，站在坛的东边，敲钹，鼓瑟，弹琴，同着他们有一百二十个祭司吹号。
And the Levites who made the music, all of them, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and brothers, robed in fair linen, were in their places with their brass and corded instruments at the east side of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests blowing horns;)

吹号的，歌唱的都一齐发声，声合为一，赞美感谢耶和华。吹号，敲钹，用各种乐器，扬声赞美耶和华说，耶和华本为善，他的慈爱永远长存。那时，耶和华的殿有云充满，
And when the players on horns, and those who made melody in song, with one voice were sounding the praise and glory of the Lord; with loud voices and with wind instruments, and brass and corded instruments of music, praising the Lord and saying, He is good; his mercy is unchanging for ever: then the house was full of the cloud of the glory of the Lord,

甚至祭司不能站立供职，因为耶和华的荣光充满了神的殿。
So that the priests were not able to keep their places to do their work because of the cloud; for the house of God was full of the glory of the Lord.

那时，所罗门说，耶和华曾说他必住在幽暗之处。
Then Solomon said, O Lord, to the sun you have given the heaven for a living-place, but your living-place was not seen by men,

但我已经建造殿宇作你的居所，为你永远的住处。
So I have made for you a living-place, a house in which you may be for ever present.

王转脸为以色列会众祝福，以色列会众就都站立。
Then, turning his face about, the king gave a blessing to all the men of Israel; and they were all on their feet together.

所罗门说，耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的。因他亲口向我父大卫所应许的，也亲手成就了。
And he said, Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, who himself gave his word to my father David, and with his strong hand has made his word come true, saying,

他说，自从我领我民出埃及地以来，我未曾在以色列众支派中选择一城建造殿宇为我名的居所，也未曾拣选一人作我民以色列的君。
From the day when I took my people out of the land of Egypt, no town in all the tribes of Israel has been marked out by me for the building of a house for the resting-place of my name; and I took no man to be a ruler over my people Israel;

但选择耶路撒冷为我名的居所，又拣选大卫治理我民以色列。
But now I have made selection of Jerusalem, that my name might be there, and of David, to be over my people Israel.

所罗门说，我父大卫曾立意要为耶和华以色列神的名建殿，
Now it was in the heart of my father David to put up a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.

耶和华却对我父大卫说，你立意要为我的名建殿，这意思甚好。
But the Lord said to David my father, You did well to have in your heart the desire to make a house for my name:

只是你不可建殿，惟你所生的儿子必为我名建殿。
But you yourself will not be the builder of the house; but your son, the offspring of your body, he it is who will put up a house for my name.

现在耶和华成就了他所应许的话，使我接续我父大卫坐以色列的国位，是照耶和华所说的，又为耶和华以色列神的名建造了殿。
And the Lord has kept his word; for I have taken my father David's place on the seat of the kingdom of Israel, as the Lord gave his word; and I have made the house for the name of the Lord the God of Israel.

我将约柜安置在其中，柜内有耶和华的约，就是他与以色列人所立的约。
And there I have put the ark, in which is the agreement of the Lord, which he made with the people of Israel.

所罗门当着以色列会众，站在耶和华的坛前，举起手来，
Then he took his place in front of the altar of the Lord, all the men of Israel being present,

所罗门曾造一个铜台，长五肘，宽五肘，高三肘，放在院中。就站在台上，当着以色列的会众跪下，向天举手，
(For Solomon had made a brass stage, five cubits long, five cubits wide and three cubits high, and had put it in the middle of the open space; on this he took his place and went down on his knees before all the meeting of Israel, stretching out his hands to heaven.)

说，耶和华以色列的神阿，天上地下没有神可比你的。你向那尽心行在你面前的仆人守约施慈爱。
And he said, O Lord, the God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven or on earth; keeping faith and mercy unchanging for your servants, while they go in your ways with all their hearts;

向你仆人我父大卫所应许的话现在应验了。你亲口应许，亲手成就，正如今日一样。
For you have kept the word which you gave to your servant David, my father; with your mouth you said it and with your hand you have made it come true this day.

耶和华以色列的神阿，你所应许你仆人我父大卫的话说，你的子孙若谨慎自己的行为，遵守我的律法，象你在我面前所行的一样，就不断人坐以色列的国位。现在求你应验这话。
So now, O Lord, the God of Israel, let your word to your servant David, my father, come true, when you said, You will never be without a man to take his place before me on the seat of the kingdom of Israel; if only your children give attention to their ways, walking in my law, as you have done before me.

耶和华以色列的神阿，求你成就向你仆人大卫所应许的话。
So now, O Lord, the God of Israel, make your word come true which you said to your servant David.

神果真与世人同住在地上吗？看哪，天和天上的天尚且不足你居住的，何况我所建的这殿呢？
But is it truly possible that God may be housed with men on earth? see, heaven and the heaven of heavens are not wide enough to be your resting-place: how much less this house which I have made:

惟求耶和华我的神垂顾仆人的祷告祈求，俯听仆人在你面前的祈祷呼吁。
Still, let your heart be turned to the prayer of your servant and to his prayer for grace, O Lord my God, and give ear to the cry and the prayer which your servant makes before you;

愿你昼夜看顾这殿，就是你应许立为你名的居所。求你垂听仆人向此处祷告的话。
That your eyes may be open to this house day and night, to this place of which you have said that you would put your name there; to give ear to the prayer which your servant may make, turning to this place.

你仆人和你民以色列向此处祈祷的时候，求你从天上你的居所垂听，垂听而赦免。
And give ear to the prayers of your servant and of your people Israel, when they make their prayers, turning to this place; give ear from heaven your living-place; and hearing have mercy.

人若得罪邻舍，有人叫他起誓，他来到这殿，在你的坛前起誓，
If a man does wrong to his neighbour and has to take an oath, and comes before your altar to take his oath in this house:

求你从天上垂听，判断你的仆人，定恶人有罪，照他所行的报应在他头上。定义人有理，照他的义赏赐他。
Then let your ear be open in heaven, and be the judge of your servants, giving punishment to the wrongdoer, so that his sin may come on his head; and, by your decision, keeping from evil him who has done no wrong.

你的民以色列若得罪你，败在仇敌面前，又回心转意承认你的名，在这殿里向你祈求祷告，
And if your people Israel are overcome in war, because of their sin against you; if they are turned to you again, honouring your name, making prayers and requesting your grace in this house:

求你从天上垂听，赦免你民以色列的罪，使他们归回你赐给他们和他们列祖之地。
Then give ear from heaven, and let the sin of your people Israel have forgiveness, and take them back again to the land which you gave to them and to their fathers.

你的民因得罪你，你惩罚他们，使天闭塞不下雨，他们若向此处祷告，承认你的名，离开他们的罪，
When heaven is shut up and there is no rain, because of their sin against you: if they make prayers with their faces turned to this place, honouring your name and turning away from their sin when you send trouble on them:

求你在天上垂听，赦免你仆人和你民以色列的罪，将当行的善道指教他们，且降雨在你的地，就是你赐给你民为业之地。
Then give ear from heaven, so that the sin of your servants and the sin of your people Israel may have forgiveness, when you make clear to them the good way in which they are to go; and send rain on your land which you have given to your people for their heritage.

国中若有饥荒，瘟疫，旱风，霉烂，蝗虫，蚂蚱，或有仇敌犯境，围困城邑，无论遭遇什么灾祸疾病，
If there is no food in the land, if there is disease, if the fruits of the earth are damaged by heat or water, locust or worm; if their towns are shut in by their attackers: whatever trouble or whatever disease there may be:

你的民以色列，或是众人，或是一人，自觉灾祸甚苦，向这殿举手，无论祈求什么，祷告什么，
Whatever prayer or request for your grace is made by any man, or by all your people Israel, whatever his trouble may be, whose hands are stretched out to this house:

求你从天上你的居所垂听赦免。你是知道人心的，要照各人所行的待他们（惟有你知道世人的心），
Then give ear from heaven your living-place, answering with forgiveness, and give to every man, whose secret heart is open to you, the reward of all his ways; (for you, and you only, have knowledge of the hearts of the children of men;)

使他们在你赐给我们列祖之地上一生一世敬畏你，遵行你的道。
So that they may give you worship, walking in your ways, as long as they are living in the land which you gave to our fathers.

论到不属你民以色列的外邦人，为你的大名和大能的手，并伸出来的膀臂，从远方而来，向这殿祷告，
And as for the man from a strange land, who is not of your people Israel but comes from a far country because of the glory of your name and your strong hand and your outstretched arm; when he comes to make his prayer, turning to this house:

求你从天上你的居所垂听，照着外邦人所祈求的而行，使天下万民都认识你的名，敬畏你，象你的民以色列一样，又使他们知道我建造的这殿是称为你名下的。
Then give ear from heaven your living-place, and give him his desire, whatever it may be; so that all the peoples of the earth may have knowledge of your name, worshipping you as do your people Israel, and may see that this house which I have made is truly named by your name.

你的民若奉你的差遣，无论往何处去与仇敌争战，向你所选择的城与我为你名所建造的殿祷告，
If your people go out to war against their attackers, by whatever way you may send them, if they make their prayers to you turning their faces to this town of yours and to this house which I have put up for your name:

求你从天上垂听他们的祷告祈求，使他们得胜。
Then give ear from heaven to their prayer and their cry for grace, and see right done to them.

你的民若得罪你（世上没有不犯罪的人），你向他们发怒，将他们交给仇敌掳到或远或近之地。
If they do wrong against you, (for no man is without sin,) and you are angry with them, and give them up into the power of those who are fighting against them, so that they take them away prisoners to a land far off or near;

他们若在掳到之地想起罪来，回心转意，恳求你说，我们有罪了，我们悖逆了，我们作恶了。
And if they take thought, in the land where they are prisoners, turning again to you, crying out in prayer to you in that land, and saying, We are sinners, we have done wrong, we have done evil;

他们若在掳到之地尽心尽性归服你，又向自己的地，就是你赐给他们列祖之地和你所选择的城，并我为你名所建造的殿祷告，
If with all their heart and soul they are turned again to you, in the land where they are prisoners, the land where they have been taken, and make their prayers, turning their eyes to their land which you gave to their fathers, and to the town which you took for yourself, and the house which I have made for your name:

求你从天上你的居所垂听你民的祷告祈求，为他们伸冤，赦免他们的过犯。
Then give ear from heaven your living-place to their prayer and their cry, and see right done to them, answering with forgiveness your people who have done wrong against you.

我的神阿，现在求你睁眼看，侧耳听在此处所献的祷告。
Now, O my God, may your eyes be open and your ears awake to the prayers made in this place.

耶和华神阿，求你起来，和你有能力的约柜同入安息之所。耶和华神阿，愿你的祭司披上救恩。愿你的圣民蒙福欢乐。
Up! now, O Lord God, come back to your resting-place, you and the ark of your strength: let your priests, O Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and let your saints be glad in what is good.

耶和华神阿，求你不要厌弃你的受膏者，要记念向你仆人大卫所施的慈爱。
O Lord God, let him whom you have taken for yourself never be given up by you: keep in mind your mercies to David your servant.

所罗门祈祷已毕，就有火从天上降下来，烧尽燔祭和别的祭。耶和华的荣光充满了殿。
Now when Solomon's prayers were ended, fire came down from heaven, burning up all the offerings; and the house was full of the glory of the Lord.

因耶和华的荣光充满了耶和华殿，所以祭司不能进殿。
And the priests were not able to go into the house of the Lord, for the Lord's house was full of the glory of the Lord.

那火降下，耶和华的荣光在殿上的时候，以色列众人看见，就在铺石地俯伏叩拜，称谢耶和华说，耶和华本为善，他的慈爱永远长存。
And all the children of Israel were looking on when the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord was on the house; and they went down on their knees, with their faces to the earth, worshipping and praising the Lord, and saying, He is good; for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

王和众民在耶和华面前献祭。
Then the king and all the people made offerings before the Lord.

所罗门王用牛二万二千，羊十二万献祭。这样，王和众民为神的殿行奉献之礼。
King Solomon made an offering of twenty-two thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people kept the feast of the opening of the house of God.

祭司侍立，各供其职。利未人也拿着耶和华的乐器，就是大卫王造出来，借利未人颂赞耶和华的。（他的慈爱永远长存。）祭司在众人面前吹号，以色列人都站立。
And the priests were in their places, and the Levites with their instruments of music for the Lord's song, which David the king had made for the praise of the Lord whose mercy is unchanging for ever, when David gave praise by their hand; and the priests were sounding horns before them; and all Israel were on their feet.

所罗门因他所造的铜坛容不下燔祭，素祭，和脂油，便将耶和华殿前院子当中分别为圣，在那里献燔祭和平安祭牲的脂油。
Then Solomon made holy the middle of the open square in front of the house of the Lord, offering the burned offerings there, and the fat of the peace-offerings; for there was not room on the brass altar which Solomon had made for all the burned offerings and the meal offerings and the fat.

那时所罗门和以色列众人，就是从哈马口直到埃及小河，所有的以色列人都聚集成为大会，守节七日。
So Solomon kept the feast at that time for seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great meeting, for the people had come together from the way into Hamath and from as far as the river of Egypt.

第八日设立严肃会，行奉献坛的礼七日，守节七日。
And on the eighth day they had a holy meeting; the offerings for making the altar holy went on for seven days, and the feast for seven days.

七月二十三日，王遣散众民。他们因见耶和华向大卫和所罗门与他民以色列所施的恩惠，就都心中喜乐，各归各家去了。
And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month, he sent the people away to their tents, full of joy and glad in their hearts, because of all the good which the Lord had done to David and to Solomon and to Israel his people.

所罗门造成了耶和华殿和王宫。在耶和华殿和王宫凡他心中所要作的，都顺顺利利地作成了。
So Solomon came to the end of building the house of the Lord and the king's house; and everything which it was in his mind to make in the house of the Lord and for himself had been well done.

夜间耶和华向所罗门显现，对他说，我已听了你的祷告，也选择这地方作为祭祀我的殿宇。
Now the Lord came to Solomon in a vision by night, and said to him, I have given ear to your prayer, and have taken this place for myself as a house where offerings are to be made.

我若使天闭塞不下雨，或使蝗虫吃这地的出产，或使瘟疫流行在我民中，
If, at my word, heaven is shut up, so that there is no rain, or if I send locusts on the land for its destruction, or if I send disease on my people;

这称为我名下的子民，若是自卑，祷告，寻求我的面，转离他们的恶行，我必从天上垂听，赦免他们的罪，医治他们的地。
If my people, on whom my name is named, make themselves low and come to me in prayer, searching for me and turning from their evil ways; then I will give ear from heaven, overlooking their sin, and will give life again to their land.

我必睁眼看，侧耳听在此处所献的祷告。
Now my eyes will be open and my ears awake to the prayers made in this place.

现在我已选择这殿，分别为圣，使我的名永在其中，我的眼，我的心也必常在那里。
For I have taken this house for myself and made it holy, so that my name may be there for ever; and my eyes and my heart will be there at all times.

你若在我面前效法你父大卫所行的，遵行我一切所吩咐你的，谨守我的律例典章，
And as for you, if you will go on your way before me as David your father did, doing whatever I have given you orders to do and keeping my laws and my decisions:

我就必坚固你的国位，正如我与你父大卫所立的约，说，你的子孙必不断人作以色列的王。
Then I will make strong the seat of your kingdom, as I gave my word to David your father, saying, You will never be without a man to be ruler in Israel.

倘若你们转去丢弃我指示你们的律例诫命，去事奉敬拜别神，
But if you are turned away from me, and do not keep my orders and my laws which I have put before you, but go and make yourselves servants to other gods, giving them worship:

我就必将以色列人从我赐给他们的地上拔出根来，并且我为己名所分别为圣的殿也必舍弃不顾，使他在万民中作笑谈，被讥诮。
Then I will have this people uprooted out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have made holy for my name, I will put away from before my eyes, and make it an example and a word of shame among all peoples.

这殿虽然甚高，将来经过的人必惊讶说，耶和华为何向这地和这殿如此行呢？
And this house will become a mass of broken walls, and everyone who goes by will be overcome with wonder, and will say, Why has the Lord done so to this land and to this house?

人必回答说，是因此地的人离弃耶和华他们列祖的神，就是领他们出埃及地的神，去亲近别神，敬拜事奉他，所以耶和华使这一切灾祸临到他们。
And their answer will be, Because they were turned away from the Lord, the God of their fathers, who took them out of the land of Egypt, and took for themselves other gods and gave them worship and became their servants: that is why he has sent all this evil on them.

所罗门建造耶和华殿和王宫，二十年才完毕了。
Now at the end of twenty years, in which time Solomon had put up the house of the Lord and a house for himself,

以后所罗门重新修筑希兰送给他的那些城邑，使以色列人住在那里。
He took in hand the building up of the towns which Huram had given him, causing the children of Israel to make living-places for themselves there.

所罗门往哈马琐巴去，攻取了那地方。
And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah and overcame it.

所罗门建造旷野里的达莫，又建造哈马所有的积货城，
And he put up the buildings of Tadmor in the waste land, and of all the store-towns in Hamath;

又建造上伯和仑，下伯和仑作为保障，都有墙，有门，有闩。
And of Beth-horon the higher and the lower, walled towns with walls and doorways and locks;

又建造巴拉和所有的积货城，并屯车辆马兵的城，与耶路撒冷，利巴嫩，以及自己治理的全国中所愿意建造的。
And of Baalath, and all the store-towns which Solomon had, and the towns where he kept his war-carriages and his horse men, and everything which it was his pleasure to put up in Jerusalem and in Lebanon and in all the land under his rule.

至于国中所剩下不属以色列人的赫人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人，
As for all the rest of the Hittites and the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the Jebusites, who were not of Israel:

就是以色列人未曾灭绝的，所罗门挑取他们的后裔作服苦的奴仆，直到今日。
Their men who were still living in the land, and whom the children of Israel had not put an end to, these Solomon put to forced work, as is done to this day;

惟有以色列人，所罗门不使他们当奴仆作工，乃是作他的战士，军长的统领，车兵长，马兵长。
But Solomon did not make use of the children of Israel as servants for his work; they were men of war, his chiefs and his captains, and captains of his war-carriages and his horsemen.

所罗门王有二百五十督工的，监管工人。
Now these were the chief men in authority whom King Solomon had: two hundred and fifty of them, in authority over the people.

所罗门将法老的女儿带出大卫城，上到为她建造的宫里。因所罗门说，耶和华约柜所到之处都为圣地，所以我的妻不可住在以色列王大卫的宫里。
Then Solomon made Pharaoh's daughter come up from the town of David to the house which he had made for her; for he said, I will not have my wife living in the house of David, king of Israel, because those places where the ark of the Lord has come are holy.

所罗门在耶和华的坛上，就是在廊子前他所筑的坛上，与耶和华献燔祭。
Then Solomon made burned offerings to the Lord on the altar of the Lord which he had put up in front of the covered way,

又遵着摩西的吩咐在安息日，月朔，并一年三节，就是除酵节，七七节，住棚节，献每日所当献的祭。
Offering every day what had been ordered by Moses, on the Sabbaths and at the new moon and at the regular feasts three times a year, that is at the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of weeks, and the feast of tents.

所罗门照着他父大卫所定的例，派定祭司的班次，使他们各供己事，又使利未人各尽其职，赞美耶和华，在祭司面前作每日所当作的。又派守门的按着班次看守各门，因为神人大卫是这样吩咐的。
And he gave the divisions of the priests their places for their work, as ordered by his father David, and to the Levites he gave their work of praise and waiting on the priests, to do what was needed day by day; and he gave the door-keepers their places in turn at every door; for so David, the man of God, had given orders.

王所吩咐众祭司和利未人的，无论是管府库或办别的事，他们都不违背。
All the orders given by the king to the priests and Levites, in connection with any business or stores, were done with care.

所罗门建造耶和华的殿，从立根基直到成功的日子，工料俱备。这样，耶和华的殿全然完毕。
And all the work of Solomon was complete, from the day when he put the base of the Lord's house in position, till Solomon had come to the end of building the Lord's house.

那时，所罗门往以东地靠海的以旬迦别和以禄去。
Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber and to Eloth by the sea in the land of Edom.

希兰差遣他的臣仆，将船只和熟悉泛海的仆人送到所罗门那里。他们同着所罗门的仆人到了俄斐，得了四百五十他连得金子，运到所罗门王那里。
And Huram sent him, by his servants, ships and experienced seamen, who went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir and came back with four hundred and fifty talents of gold, which they took to King Solomon.

示巴女王听见所罗门的名声，就来到耶路撒冷，要用难解的话试问所罗门。跟随她的人甚多，又有骆驼驮着香料，宝石，和许多金子。她来见了所罗门，就把心里所有的对所罗门都说出来。
Now the queen of Sheba, hearing great things of Solomon, came to Jerusalem to put his wisdom to the test with hard questions; and with her came a very great train, and camels weighted down with spices, and great stores of gold and jewels: and when she came to Solomon she had talk with him of everything in her mind.

所罗门将她所问的都答上了，没有一句不明白，不能答的。
And Solomon gave her answers to all her questions; there was no secret which he did not make clear to her.

示巴女王见所罗门的智慧和他所建造的宫室，
And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house which he had made,

席上的珍馐美味，群臣分列而坐，仆人两旁侍立，以及他们的衣服装饰，酒政，和酒政的衣服装饰，又见他上耶和华殿的台阶，就诧异得神不守舍，
And the food at his table, and all his servants seated there, and those who were waiting on him in their places, and their robes, and his wine-servants and their robes, and the burned offerings which he made in the house of the Lord, there was no more spirit in her.

对王说，我在本国里所听见论到你的事和你的智慧实在是真的。
And she said to the king, The account which was given to me in my country of your acts and your wisdom was true.

我先不信那些话，及至我来亲眼见了，才知道你的大智慧。人所告诉我的，还不到一半。你的实迹越过我所听见的名声。
But I had no faith in what was said about you, till I came and saw for myself; and truly, word was not given me of half your great wisdom; you are much greater than they said.

你的群臣，你的仆人常侍立在你面前听你智慧的话是有福的。
Happy are your wives and happy these your servants whose place is ever before you, hearing your words of wisdom.

耶和华你的神是应当称颂的。他喜悦你，使你坐他的国位，为耶和华你的神作王。因为你的神爱以色列人，要永远坚立他们，所以立你作他们的王，使你秉公行义。
Praise be to the Lord your God whose pleasure it was to put you on the seat of his kingdom to be king for the Lord your God: because, in his love for Israel, it was the purpose of your God to make them strong for ever, he made you king over them, to be their judge in righteousness.

于是示巴女王将一百二十他连得金子和宝石，与极多的香料送给所罗门王。她送给王的香料，以后再没有这样的。
And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and a great store of spices and jewels: never had such spices been seen as the queen of Sheba gave to Solomon.

希兰的仆人和所罗门的仆人从俄斐运了金子来，也运了檀香木（或作乌木。下同）和宝石来。
And the servants of Huram and the servants of Solomon, in addition to gold from Ophir, came back with sandal-wood and jewels.

王用檀香木为耶和华殿和王宫作台，又为歌唱的人作琴瑟。犹大地从来没有见过这样的。
And with the sandal-wood the king made steps for the house of the Lord and for the king's house, and instruments of music for the makers of melody; never before had such been seen in the land of Judah.

所罗门王按示巴女王所带来的，还她礼物，另外照她一切所要所求的，都送给她。于是女王和她臣仆转回本国去了。
And King Solomon gave the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she made request for, in addition to what she had taken to the king. So she went back to her country with her servants.

所罗门每年所得的金子共有六百六十六他连得，
Now the weight of gold which came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents;

另外还有商人所进的金子，并且亚拉伯诸王与属国的省长都带金银给所罗门。
And in addition to what he got from traders of different sorts, all the kings of Arabia and the rulers of the country gave gold and silver to Solomon.

所罗门王用锤出来的金子打成挡牌二百面，每面用金子六百舍客勒。
And King Solomon made two hundred body-covers of hammered gold, every one having six hundred shekels of gold in it.

又用锤出来的金子打成盾牌三百面，每面用金子三百舍客勒，都放在利巴嫩林宫里。
And he made three hundred smaller body-covers of hammered gold, using three hundred shekels of gold for every cover, and the king put them in the house of the Woods of Lebanon.

王用象牙制造一个大宝座，用精金包裹。
Then the king made a great ivory seat, plated with the best gold.

宝座有六层台阶，又有金脚凳，与宝座相连。宝座两旁有扶手，靠近扶手有两个狮子站立。
There were six steps up to it, and a foot-rest of gold fixed to it, and arms on the two sides of the seat, with two lions at the side of the arms.

六层台阶上有十二个狮子站立，每层有两个，左边一个，右边一个。在列国中没有这样作的。
And twelve lions were placed on one side and on the other side on the six steps: there was nothing like it in any kingdom.

所罗门王一切的饮器都是金的，利巴嫩林宫里的一切器皿都是精金的。所罗门年间，银子算不了什么。
All King Solomon's drinking-vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the Woods of Lebanon were of the best gold: no one gave a thought to silver in the days of Solomon.

因为王的船只与希兰的仆人一同往他施去。他施船只三年一次装载金，银，象牙，猿猴，孔雀回来。
For the king had Tarshish-ships sailing with the servants of Huram: once every three years the Tarshish-ships came back with gold and silver, ivory and monkeys and peacocks.

所罗门王的财宝与智慧胜过天下的列王。
And King Solomon was greater than all the kings of the earth in wealth and in wisdom.

普天下的王都求见所罗门，要听神赐给他智慧的话。
And all the kings of the earth came to see Solomon and to give ear to his wisdom, which God had put into his heart.

他们各带贡物，就是金器，银器，衣服，军械，香料，骡马，每年有一定之例。
And everyone took with him an offering, vessels of silver and vessels of gold, and robes, and coats of metal, and spices, and horses and beasts for transport, regularly year by year.

所罗门有套车的马四千棚，有马兵一万二千，安置在屯车的城邑和耶路撒冷，就是王那里。
Solomon had four thousand buildings for his horses and his war-carriages, and twelve thousand horsemen whom he kept, some in the carriage-towns and some with the king in Jerusalem.

所罗门统管诸王，从大河到非利士地，直到埃及的边界。
And he was ruler over all the kings from the River to the land of the Philistines, as far as the limit of Egypt.

王在耶路撒冷使银子多如石头，香柏木多如高原的桑树。
The king made silver as common as stones in Jerusalem and cedars like the sycamore-trees of the lowlands in number.

有人从埃及和各国为所罗门赶马群来。
They got horses for Solomon from Egypt and from every land.

所罗门其余的事，自始至终，不都写在先知拿单的书上和示罗人亚希雅的预言书上，并先见易多论尼八儿子耶罗波安的默示书上吗？
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not recorded in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the words of Ahijah the prophet of Shiloh, and in the visions of Iddo the seer about Jeroboam, the son of Nebat?

所罗门在耶路撒冷作以色列众人的王共四十年。
Solomon was king over Israel in Jerusalem for forty years.

所罗门与他列祖同睡，葬在他父大卫城里。他儿子罗波安接续他作王。
And Solomon went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in the town of David his father; and Rehoboam his son became king in his place.

罗波安往示剑去，因为以色列人都到了示剑，要立他作王。
And Rehoboam went to Shechem, where all Israel had come together to make him king.

尼八的儿子耶罗波安先前躲避所罗门王，逃往埃及，住在那里。他听见这事，就从埃及回来。
And when Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, had news of it, (for he was in Egypt where he had gone in flight from King Solomon,) he came back from Egypt.

以色列人打发人去请他，他就和以色列众人来见罗波安，对他说，
And they sent for him; and Jeroboam and all Israel came to Rehoboam and said,

你父亲使我们负重轭作苦工，现在求你使我们作的苦工负的重轭轻松些，我们就事奉你。
Your father put a hard yoke on us: if you will make the conditions under which your father kept us down less cruel, and the weight of the yoke he put on us less hard, then we will be your servants.

罗波安对他们说，第三日再来见我吧。民就去了。
And he said to them, Come to me again after three days. So the people went away.

罗波安之父所罗门在世的日子，有侍立在他面前的老年人，罗波安王和他们商议，说，你们给我出个什么主意，我好回覆这民。
Then King Rehoboam took the opinion of the old men who had been with Solomon his father when he was living, and said, In your opinion, what answer am I to give to this people?

老年人对他说，王若恩待这民，使他们喜悦，用好话回覆他们，他们就永远作王的仆人。
And they said to him, If you are kind to this people, pleasing them and saying good words to them, then they will be your servants for ever.

王却不用老年人给他出的主意，就和那些与他一同长大，在他面前侍立的少年人商议，
But he gave no attention to the opinion of the old men, but went to the young men of his generation who were waiting before him.

说，这民对我说，你父亲使我们负重轭，求你使我们轻松些。你们给我出个什么主意，我好回覆他们。
And he said to them, What is your opinion? What answer are we to give to this people who have said to me, Make less the weight of the yoke which your father put on us?

那同他长大的少年人说，这民对王说，你父亲使我们负重轭，求你使我们轻松些。王要对他们如此说，我的小拇指比我父亲的腰还粗。
And the young men of his generation said to him, This is the answer to give to the people who came to you saying, Your father put a hard yoke on us, but will you make it less; say to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's body;

我父亲使你们负重轭，我必使你们负更重的轭。我父亲用鞭子责打你们，我要用蝎子鞭责打你们。
If my father put a hard yoke on you, I will make it harder: my father gave you punishment with whips, but I will give you blows with snakes.

耶罗波安和众百姓遵着罗波安王所说你们第三日再来见我的那话，第三日他们果然来了。
So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king had given orders, saying, Come to me again on the third day.

罗波安王用严厉的话回覆他们，不用老年人所出的主意，
And the king gave them a rough answer. So King Rehoboam gave no attention to the suggestion of the old men,

照着少年人所出的主意对他们说，我父亲使你们负重轭，我必使你们负更重的轭。我父亲用鞭子责打你们，我要用蝎子鞭责打你们。
But gave them the answer put forward by the young men, saying, My father made your yoke hard, but I will make it harder; my father gave you punishment with whips, but I will give it with snakes.

王不肯依从百姓。这事乃出于神，为要应验耶和华借示罗人亚希雅对尼八儿子耶罗波安所说的话。
So the king did not give ear to the people; for this came about by the purpose of God, so that the Lord might give effect to his word which he had said by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam, the son of Nebat.

以色列众民见王不依从他们，就对王说，我们与大卫有什么分儿呢？与耶西的儿子并没有关涉。以色列人哪，各回各家去吧。大卫家阿，自己顾自己吧。于是，以色列众人都回自己家里去了。
And when all Israel saw that the king would give no attention to them, the people in answer said to the king, What part have we in David? what is our heritage in the son of Jesse? every man to your tents, O Israel; now see to your house, David. So all Israel went to their tents.

惟独住在犹大城邑的以色列人，罗波安仍作他们的王。
But Rehoboam was still king over those of the children of Israel who were living in the towns of Judah.

罗波安王差遣掌管服苦之人的哈多兰往以色列人那里去，以色列人就用石头打死他。罗波安王急忙上车，逃回耶路撒冷去了。
Then Rehoboam sent Adoniram, the overseer of the forced work; and he was stoned to death by all Israel. And King Rehoboam went quickly and got into his carriage to go in flight to Jerusalem.

这样，以色列人背叛大卫家，直到今日。
So Israel was turned away from the family of David to this day.

罗波安来到耶路撒冷，招聚犹大家和便雅悯家，共十八万人，都是挑选的战士，要与以色列人争战，好将国夺回再归自己。
And Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, and got together the men of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand of his best fighting-men, to make war against Israel and get the kingdom back for Rehoboam.

但耶和华的话临到神人示玛雅说，
But the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, the man of God, saying,

你去告诉所罗门的儿子犹大王罗波安和住犹大，便雅悯的以色列众人说，
Say to Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin,

耶和华如此说，你们不可上去与你们的弟兄争战，各归各家去吧。因为这事出于我。众人就听从耶和华的话归回，不去与耶罗波安争战。
The Lord has said, You are not to go to war against your brothers: let every man go back to his house, for this thing is my purpose. So they gave ear to the words of the Lord and were turned back from fighting against Jeroboam.

罗波安住在耶路撒冷，在犹大地修筑城邑，
Now Rehoboam kept in Jerusalem, building walled towns in Judah.

为保障修筑伯利恒，以坦，提哥亚，
He was the builder of Beth-lehem and Etam and Tekoa

伯夙，梭哥，亚杜兰，
And Beth-zur and Soco and Adullam

迦特，玛利沙，西弗，
And Gath and Mareshah and Ziph

亚多莱音，拉吉，亚西加，
And Adoraim and Lachish and Azekah

琐拉，亚雅仑，希伯仑。这都是犹大和便雅悯的坚固城。
And Zorah and Aijalon and Hebron, walled towns in Judah and Benjamin.

罗波安又坚固各处的保障，在其中安置军长，又预备下粮食，油，酒。
And he made the walled towns strong, and he put captains in them and stores of food, oil, and wine.

他在各城里预备盾牌和枪，且使城极其坚固。犹大和便雅悯都归了他。
And in every town he put stores of body-covers and spears, and made them very strong. And Judah and Benjamin were his.

以色列全地的祭司和利未人都从四方来归罗波安。
And the priests and Levites who were in all Israel came together to him from every part of their country.

利未人撇下他们的郊野和产业，来到犹大与耶路撒冷，是因耶罗波安和他的儿子拒绝他们，不许他们供祭司职分事奉耶和华。
For the Levites gave up their living-places and their property, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons had sent them away, not letting them be priests to the Lord;

耶罗波安为丘坛，为鬼魔（原文作公山羊），为自己所铸造的牛犊设立祭司。
And he himself made priests for the high places, and for the images of he-goats and oxen which he had made.

以色列各支派中，凡立定心意寻求耶和华以色列神的，都随从利未人，来到耶路撒冷祭祀耶和华他们列祖的神。
And after them, from all the tribes of Israel, all those whose hearts were fixed and true to the Lord, the God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to make offerings to the Lord, the God of their fathers.

这样，就坚固犹大国，使所罗门的儿子罗波安强盛三年，因为他们三年遵行大卫和所罗门的道。
So they went on increasing the power of the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, strong for three years; and for three years they went in the ways of David and Solomon.

罗波安娶大卫儿子耶利摩的女儿玛哈拉为妻，又娶耶西儿子以利押的女儿亚比孩为妻。
And Rehoboam took as his wife Mahalath, the daughter of Jerimoth, the son of David and of Abihail, the daughter of Eliab, the son of Jesse;

从她生了几个儿子，就是耶乌施，示玛利雅，撒罕。
And she had sons by him, Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham.

后来又娶押沙龙的女儿玛迦（十三章二节作乌列的女儿米该雅），从她生了亚比雅，亚太，细撒，示罗密。
And after her he took Maacah, the daughter of Absalom; and she had Abijah and Attai and Ziza and Shelomith by him.

罗波安娶十八个妻，立六十个妾，生二十八个儿子，六十个女儿。他却爱押沙龙的女儿玛迦，比爱别的妻妾更甚。
Maacah, the daughter of Absalom, was dearer to Rehoboam than all his wives and his servant-wives: (for he had eighteen wives and sixty servant-wives, and was the father of twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters.)

罗波安立玛迦的儿子亚比雅作太子，在他弟兄中为首，因为想要立他接续作王。
Rehoboam made Abijah, the son of Maacah, chief and ruler among his brothers, for it was his purpose to make him king.

罗波安办事精明，使他众子分散在犹大和便雅悯全地各坚固城里，又赐他们许多粮食，为他们多寻妻子。
And in his wisdom he had his sons stationed in every walled town through all the lands of Judah and Benjamin; and he gave them a great store of food, and took wives for them.

罗波安的国坚立，他强盛的时候就离弃耶和华的律法，以色列人也都随从他。
Now when Rehoboam's position as king had been made certain, and he was strong, he gave up the law of the Lord, and all Israel with him.

罗波安王第五年，埃及王示撒上来攻打耶路撒冷，因为王和民得罪了耶和华。
Now in the fifth year of King Rehoboam, Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem, because of their sin against the Lord,

示撒带战车一千二百辆，马兵六万，并且跟从他出埃及的路比人，苏基人，和古实人，多得不可胜数。
With twelve hundred war-carriages and sixty thousand horsemen: and the people who came with him out of Egypt were more than might be numbered: Lubim and Sukkiim and Ethiopians.

他攻取了犹大的坚固城，就来到耶路撒冷。
And he took the walled towns of Judah, and came as far as Jerusalem.

那时，犹大的首领因为示撒就聚集在耶路撒冷。有先知示玛雅去见罗波安和众首领，对他们说，耶和华如此说，你们离弃了我，所以我使你们落在示撒手里。
Now Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam and the chiefs of Judah, who had come together in Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, The Lord has said, Because you have given me up, I have given you up into the hands of Shishak.

于是王和以色列的众首领都自卑说，耶和华是公义的。
Then the chiefs of Israel and the king made themselves low and said, The Lord is upright.

耶和华见他们自卑，耶和华的话就临到示玛雅说，他们既自卑，我必不灭绝他们。必使他们略得拯救，我不借着示撒的手将我的怒气倒在耶路撒冷。
And the Lord, seeing that they had made themselves low, said to Shemaiah, They have made themselves low: I will not send destruction on them, but in a short time I will give them salvation, and will not let loose my wrath on Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.

然而他们必作示撒的仆人，好叫他们知道，服事我与服事外邦人有何分别。
But still they will become his servants, so that they may see how different my yoke is from the yoke of the kingdoms of the lands.

于是，埃及王示撒上来攻取耶路撒冷，夺了耶和华殿和王宫里的宝物，尽都带走，又夺去所罗门制造的金盾牌。
So Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem and took away all the stored wealth of the house of the Lord and the king's house: he took everything away, and with the rest the gold body-covers which Solomon had made.

罗波安王制造铜盾牌代替那金盾牌，交给守王宫门的护卫长看守。
And in their place King Rehoboam had other body-covers made of brass and gave them into the care of the captains of the armed men who were stationed at the door of the king's house.

王每逢进耶和华的殿，护卫兵就拿这盾牌，随后仍将盾牌送回，放在护卫房。
And whenever the king went into the house of the Lord, the armed men went with him taking the body-covers, and then took them back to their room.

王自卑的时候，耶和华的怒气就转消了，不将他灭尽，并且在犹大中间也有善益的事。
And when he made himself low, the wrath of the Lord was turned back from him, and complete destruction did not come on him, for there was still some good in Judah.

罗波安王自强，在耶路撒冷作王。他登基的时候年四十一岁，在耶路撒冷，就是耶和华从以色列众支派中所选择立他名的城，作王十七年。罗波安的母亲名叫拿玛，是亚扪人。
So King Rehoboam made himself strong in Jerusalem and was ruling there. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he became king, and he was ruling for seventeen years in Jerusalem, the town which the Lord had made his out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there; and his mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonite woman.

罗波安行恶，因他不立定心意寻求耶和华。
And he did evil because his heart was not true to the Lord.

罗波安所行的事，自始至终不都写在先知示玛雅和先见易多的史记上吗？罗波安与耶罗波安时常争战。
Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not recorded in the words of Shemaiah the prophet and Iddo the seer? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days.

罗波安与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城里。他儿子亚比雅接续他作王。
And Rehoboam went to rest with his fathers, and was put into the earth in the town of David; and Abijah his son became king in his place.

耶罗波安王十八年，亚比雅登基作犹大王，
In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah became king over Judah.

在耶路撒冷作王三年。他母亲名叫米该亚（米该亚又作玛迦），是基比亚人乌列的女儿。亚比雅常与耶罗波安争战。
He was king in Jerusalem for three years; his mother's name was Maacah, the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.

有一次亚比雅率领挑选的兵四十万摆阵，都是勇敢的战士。耶罗波安也挑选大能的勇士八十万，对亚比雅摆阵。
And Abijah went out to the fight with an army of men of war, four hundred thousand of his best men; and Jeroboam put his forces in line against him, eight hundred thousand of his best men of war.

亚比雅站在以法莲山地中的洗玛脸山上，说，耶罗波安和以色列众人哪，要听我说。
And Abijah took up his position on Mount Zemaraim, in the hill-country of Ephraim, and said, Give ear to me, O Jeroboam and all Israel:

耶和华以色列的神曾立盐约（盐即不废坏的意思），将以色列国永远赐给大卫和他的子孙，你们不知道吗？
Is it not clear to you that the Lord, the God of Israel, gave the rule over Israel to David and to his sons for ever, by an agreement made with salt?

无奈大卫儿子所罗门的臣仆，尼八儿子耶罗波安起来背叛他的主人。
But Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon, the son of David, took up arms against his lord.

有些无赖的匪徒聚集跟从他，逞强攻击所罗门的儿子罗波安。那时罗波安还幼弱，不能抵挡他们。
And certain foolish and good-for-nothing men were joined with him, and made themselves strong against Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, when he was young and untested and not able to keep them back.

现在你们有意抗拒大卫子孙手下所治耶和华的国，你们的人也甚多，你们那里又有耶罗波安为你们所造当作神的金牛犊。
And now it is your purpose to put yourselves against the authority which the Lord has put into the hands of the sons of David, and you are a very great number, and you have with you the gold oxen which Jeroboam made to be your gods.

你们不是驱逐耶和华的祭司亚伦的后裔和利未人吗？不是照着外邦人的恶俗为自己立祭司吗？无论何人牵一只公牛犊，七只公绵羊将自己分别出来，就可作虚无之神的祭司。
And after driving out the priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron and the Levites, have you not made priests for yourselves as the people of other lands do? so that anyone who comes to make himself priest by offering an ox or seven sheep, may be a priest of those who are no gods.

至于我们，耶和华是我们的神，我们并没有离弃他。我们有事奉耶和华的祭司，都是亚伦的后裔，并有利未人各尽其职，
But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not been turned away from him; we have priests who do the work of the Lord, even the sons of Aaron and the Levites in their places;

每日早晚向耶和华献燔祭，烧美香，又在精金的桌子上摆陈设饼。又有金灯台和灯盏，每晚点起，因为我们遵守耶和华我们神的命。惟有你们离弃了他。
By whom burned offerings and perfumes are sent up in smoke before the Lord every morning and every evening; and they put out the holy bread on its table and the gold support for the lights with its lights burning every evening; for we keep the orders given to us by the Lord our God, but you have gone away from him.

率领我们的是神，我们这里也有神的祭司拿号向你们吹出大声。以色列人哪，不要与耶和华你们列祖的神争战，因你们必不能亨通。
And now God is with us at our head, and his priests with their loud horns sounding against you. O children of Israel, do not make war on the Lord, the God of your fathers, for it will not go well for you.

耶罗波安却在犹大人的后头设伏兵。这样，以色列人在犹大人的前头，伏兵在犹大人的后头。
But Jeroboam had put some of his men to make a surprise attack on them from the back, so some were facing Judah and others were stationed secretly at their back.

犹大人回头观看，见前后都有敌兵，就呼求耶和华，祭司也吹号。
And Judah, turning their faces, saw that they were being attacked in front and at the back; and they gave a cry for help to the Lord, while the priests were sounding their horns.

于是犹大人呐喊。犹大人呐喊的时候，神就使耶罗波安和以色列众人败在亚比雅与犹大人面前。
And the men of Judah gave a loud cry; and at their cry, God put fear into Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.

以色列人在犹大人面前逃跑，神将他们交在犹大人手里。
And the children of Israel went in flight before Judah, and God gave them up into their hands.

亚比雅和他的军兵大大杀戮以色列人，以色列人仆倒死亡的精兵有五十万。
And Abijah and his people put them to death with great destruction: five hundred thousand of the best of Israel were put to the sword.

那时，以色列人被制伏了，犹大人得胜，是因倚靠耶和华他们列祖的神。
So at that time the children of Israel were overcome, and the children of Judah got the better of them, because they put their faith in the Lord, the God of their fathers.

亚比雅追赶耶罗波安，攻取了他的几座城，就是伯特利和属伯特利的镇市，耶沙拿和属耶沙拿的镇市，以法拉音（或作以弗伦）和属以法拉音的镇市。
And Abijah went after Jeroboam and took some of his towns, Beth-el with its small towns and Jeshanah with its small towns and Ephron with its small towns.

亚比雅在世的时候，耶罗波安不能再强盛。耶和华攻击他，他就死了。
And Jeroboam did not get back his power again in the life-time of Abijah; and the Lord sent death on him.

亚比雅却渐渐强盛，娶妻妾十四个，生了二十二个儿子，十六个女儿。
But Abijah became great, and had fourteen wives, and became the father of twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.

亚比雅其余的事和他的言行都写在先知易多的传上。
And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways and his sayings, are recorded in the account of the prophet Iddo.

亚比雅与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城里。他儿子亚撒接续他作王。亚撒年间，国中太平十年。
So Abijah went to rest with his fathers, and they put him into the earth in the town of David, and Asa his son became king in his place; in his time the land was quiet for ten years.

亚撒行耶和华他神眼中看为善为正的事，
And Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God;

除掉外邦神的坛和丘坛，打碎柱像，砍下木偶，
For he took away the altars of strange gods and the high places, and had the upright stones broken and the wood pillars cut down;

吩咐犹大人寻求耶和华他们列祖的神，遵行他的律法，诫命。
And he made Judah go after the Lord, the God of their fathers, and keep his laws and his orders.

又在犹大各城邑除掉丘坛和日像，那时国享太平。
And he took away the high places and the sun-images from all the towns of Judah; and the kingdom was quiet under his rule.

又在犹大建造了几座坚固城。国中太平数年，没有战争，因为耶和华赐他平安。
He made walled towns in Judah, for the land was quiet and there were no wars in those years, because the Lord had given him rest.

他对犹大人说，我们要建造这些城邑，四围筑墙，盖楼，安门，作闩。地还属我们，是因寻求耶和华我们的神。我们既寻求他，他就赐我们四境平安。于是建造城邑，诸事亨通。
He said to Judah, Let us make these towns, building walls round them with towers and doors and locks. The land is still ours, because we have been true to the Lord our God; we have been true to him and he has given us rest on every side. So they went on building and all went well for them.

亚撒的军兵，出自犹大拿盾牌拿枪的三十万人。出自便雅悯拿盾牌拉弓的二十八万人。这都是大能的勇士。
And Asa had an army of three hundred thousand men of Judah armed with body-covers and spears, and two hundred and eighty thousand of Benjamin armed with body-covers and bows; all these were men of war.

有古实王谢拉率领军兵一百万，战车三百辆，出来攻击犹大人，到了玛利沙。
And Zerah the Ethiopian, with an army of a million, and three hundred war-carriages, came out against them to Mareshah.

于是亚撒出去与他迎敌，就在玛利沙的洗法谷彼此摆阵。
And Asa went out against him, and they put their forces in position in the valley north of Mareshah.

亚撒呼求耶和华他的神说，耶和华阿，惟有你能帮助软弱的，胜过强盛的。耶和华我们的神阿，求你帮助我们。因为我们仰赖你，奉你的名来攻击这大军。耶和华阿，你是我们的神，不要容人胜过你。
And Asa made prayer to the Lord his God and said, Lord, you only are able to give help against the strong to him who has no strength; come to our help, O Lord our God, for our hope is in you, and in your name we have come out against this great army. O Lord, you are our God; let not man's power be greater than yours.

于是耶和华使古实人败在亚撒和犹大人面前，古实人就逃跑了。
So the Lord sent fear on the Ethiopians before Asa and Judah; and the Ethiopians went in flight.

亚撒和跟随他的军兵追赶他们，直到基拉耳。古实人被杀的甚多，不能再强盛，因为败在耶和华与他军兵面前。犹大人就夺了许多财物，
And Asa and the people who were with him went after them as far as Gerar; and so great was the destruction among the Ethiopians that they were not able to get their army together again, for they were broken before the Lord and before his army; and they took away a great amount of their goods.

又打破基拉耳四围的城邑。耶和华使其中的人都甚恐惧。犹大人又将所有的城掳掠一空，因其中的财物甚多，
And they overcame all the towns round Gerar, because the Lord sent fear on them; and they took away their goods from the towns, for there were stores of wealth in them.

又毁坏了群畜的圈，夺取许多的羊和骆驼，就回耶路撒冷去了。
And they made an attack on the tents of the owners of the cattle, and took away great numbers of sheep and camels and went back to Jerusalem.

神的灵感动俄德的儿子亚撒利雅。
And the spirit of God came on Azariah, the son of Oded;

他出来迎接亚撒，对他说，亚撒和犹大，便雅悯众人哪，要听我说，你们若顺从耶和华，耶和华必与你们同在。你们若寻求他，就必寻见。你们若离弃他，他必离弃你们。
And he came face to face with Asa and said to him, Give ear to me, Asa and all Judah and Benjamin: the Lord is with you while you are with him; if your heart's desire is for him, he will be near you, but if you give him up, he will give you up.

以色列人不信真神，没有训诲的祭司，也没有律法，已经好久了。
Now for a long time Israel has been without the true God, and without a teaching priest and without the law;

但他们在急难的时候归向耶和华以色列的神，寻求他，他就被他们寻见。
But when in their trouble they were turned to the Lord, the God of Israel, searching after him, he let their search be rewarded.

那时，出入的人不得平安，列国的居民都遭大乱。
In those times there was no peace for him who went out or for him who came in, but great trouble was on all the people of the lands.

这国攻击那国，这城攻击那城，互相破坏，因为神用各样灾难扰乱他们。
And they were broken by divisions, nation against nation and town against town, because God sent all sorts of trouble on them.

现在你们要刚强，不要手软，因你们所行的必得赏赐。
But be you strong and let not your hands be feeble, for your work will be rewarded.

亚撒听见这话和俄德儿子先知亚撒利雅的预言，就壮起胆来，在犹大，便雅悯全地，并以法莲山地所夺的各城，将可憎之物尽都除掉，又在耶和华殿的廊前重新修筑耶和华的坛。
And Asa, hearing these words of Azariah, the son of Oded the prophet, took heart and put away all the disgusting things out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the towns which he had taken from the hill-country of Ephraim; and he made new again the altar of the Lord in front of the covered way of the Lord's house.

又招聚犹大，便雅悯的众人，并他们中间寄居的以法莲人，玛拿西人，西缅人。有许多以色列人归降亚撒，因见耶和华他的神与他同在。
And he got together all Judah and Benjamin and those of Ephraim and Manasseh and Simeon who were living with them; for numbers of them came to him out of Israel when they saw that the Lord his God was with him.

亚撒十五年三月，他们都聚集在耶路撒冷。
So they came together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the rule of Asa.

当日他们从所取的掳物中，将牛七百只，羊七千只献给耶和华。
And that day they made offerings to the Lord of the things they had taken in war, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.

他们就立约，要尽心尽性地寻求耶和华他们列祖的神。
And they made an agreement to be true to the Lord, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and all their soul;

凡不寻求耶和华以色列神的，无论大小，男女，必被治死。
And that anyone, small or great, man or woman, who was not true to the Lord, the God of Israel, would be put to death.

他们就大声欢呼，吹号吹角，向耶和华起誓。
And they made an oath to the Lord, with a loud voice, sounding wind-instruments and horns.

犹大众人为所起的誓欢喜。因他们是尽心起誓，尽意寻求耶和华，耶和华就被他们寻见，且赐他们四境平安。
And all Judah was glad because of the oath, for they had taken it with all their heart, turning to the Lord with all their desire; and he was with them and gave them rest on every side.

亚撒王贬了他祖母玛迦太后的位，因她造了可憎的偶像亚舍拉。亚撒砍下她的偶像，捣得粉碎，烧在汲沦溪边。
And Asa would not let Maacah, his mother, be queen, because she had made a disgusting image for Asherah; and Asa had her image cut down and broken up and burned by the stream Kidron.

只是丘坛还没有从以色列中废去，然而亚撒的心一生诚实。
But the high places were not taken away out of Israel; but still the heart of Asa was true to the Lord all his life.

亚撒将他父所分别为圣，与自己所分别为圣的金银和器皿都奉到神的殿里。
He took into the house of God all the things which his father had made holy and those which he himself had made holy, silver and gold and vessels.

从这时直到亚撒三十五年，都没有争战的事。
And there was no more war till the thirty-fifth year of the rule of Asa.

亚撒三十六年，以色列王巴沙上来攻击犹大，修筑拉玛，不许人从犹大王亚撒那里出入。
In the thirty-sixth year of the rule of Asa, Baasha, king of Israel, went up against Judah, building Ramah so that no one was able to go out or in to Asa, king of Judah.

于是亚撒从耶和华殿和王宫的府库里拿出金银来，送与住大马色的亚兰王便哈达，说，
Then Asa took silver and gold out of the stores of the Lord's house and of the king's store-house, and sent to Ben-hadad, king of Aram, at Damascus, saying,

你父曾与我父立约，我与你也要立约。现在我将金银送给你，求你废掉你与以色列王巴沙所立的约，使他离开我。
Let there be an agreement between me and you as there was between my father and your father: see, I have sent you silver and gold; go and put an end to your agreement with Baasha, king of Israel, so that he may give up attacking me.

便哈达听从亚撒王的话，派军长去攻击以色列的城邑。他们就攻破以云，但，亚伯玛音，和拿弗他利一切的积货城。
And Ben-hadad did as King Asa said, and sent the captains of his armies against the towns of Israel, attacking Ijon and Dan and Abel-maim, and all the store-towns of Naphtali.

巴沙听见就停工，不修筑拉玛了。
Then Baasha, hearing of it, put a stop to the building of Ramah, and let his work come to an end.

于是亚撒王率领犹大众人，将巴沙修筑拉玛所用的石头，木头都运去，用以修筑迦巴和米斯巴。
Then King Asa, with all Judah, took away the stones and wood with which Baasha was building Ramah, and he made use of them for building Geba and Mizpah.

那时，先见哈拿尼来见犹大王亚撒，对他说，因你仰赖亚兰王，没有仰赖耶和华你的神，所以亚兰王的军兵脱离了你的手。
At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa, king of Judah, and said to him, Because you have put your faith in the king of Aram and not in the Lord your God, the army of the king of Aram has got away out of your hands.

古实人，路比人的军队不是甚大吗？战车马兵不是极多吗？只因你仰赖耶和华，他便将他们交在你手里。
Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubim a very great army, with war-carriages and horsemen more than might be numbered? but because your faith was in the Lord, he gave them up into your hands.

耶和华的眼目遍察全地，要显大能帮助向他心存诚实的人。你这事行得愚昧。此后，你必有争战的事。
For the eyes of the Lord go this way and that, through all the earth, letting it be seen that he is the strong support of those whose hearts are true to him. In this you have done foolishly, for from now you will have wars.

亚撒因此恼恨先见，将他囚在监里。那时亚撒也虐待一些人民。
Then Asa was angry with the seer, and put him in prison, burning with wrath against him because of this thing. And at the same time Asa was cruel to some of the people.

亚撒所行的事，自始至终都写在犹大和以色列诸王记上。
Now the acts of Asa, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

亚撒作王三十九年，他脚上有病，而且甚重。病的时候没有求耶和华，只求医生。
In the thirty-ninth year of his rule, Asa had a very bad disease of the feet; but he did not go to the Lord for help in his disease, but to medical men.

他作王四十一年而死，与他列祖同睡，
So Asa went to rest with his fathers, and death came to him in the forty-first year of his rule.

葬在大卫城自己所凿的坟墓里，放在床上，其床堆满各样馨香的香料，就是按作香的作法调和的香料，又为他烧了许多的物件。
And they put him into the resting-place which he had made for himself in the town of David, in a bed full of sweet perfumes of all sorts of spices, made by the perfumer's art, and they made a great burning for him.

亚撒的儿子约沙法接续他作王，奋勇自强，防备以色列人，
And Jehoshaphat his son became king in his place, and made himself strong against Israel.

安置军兵在犹大一切坚固城里，又安置防兵在犹大地和他父亚撒所得以法莲的城邑中。
He put forces in all the walled towns of Judah, and responsible chiefs in the land of Judah and in the towns of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.

耶和华与约沙法同在。因为他行他祖大卫初行的道，不寻求巴力，
And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he went in the early ways of his father, not turning to the Baals,

只寻求他父亲的神，遵行他的诫命，不效法以色列人的行为。
But turning to the God of his father and keeping his laws, and not doing as Israel did.

所以耶和华坚定他的国，犹大众人给他进贡。约沙法大有尊荣资财。
So the Lord made his kingdom strong; and all Judah gave offerings to Jehoshaphat, and he had great wealth and honour.

他高兴遵行耶和华的道，并且从犹大除掉一切丘坛和木偶。
His heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord; and he went so far as to take away the high places and the wood pillars out of Judah.

他作王第三年，就差遣臣子便亥伊勒，俄巴底，撒迦利雅，拿坦业，米该亚往犹大各城去教训百姓。
In the third year of his rule he sent Benhail and Obadiah and Zechariah and Nethanel and Micaiah, his captains, as teachers into the towns of Judah;

同着他们有利未人示玛雅，尼探雅，西巴第雅，亚撒黑，示米拉末，约拿单，亚多尼雅，多比雅，驼巴多尼雅，又有祭司以利沙玛，约兰同着他们。
And with them, Shemaiah and Nethaniah and Zebadiah and Asahel and Shemiramoth and Jehonathan and Adonijah and Tobijah and Tob-adonijah, the Levites; and Elishama and Jehoram the priests.

他们带着耶和华的律法书，走遍犹大各城教训百姓。
And they gave teaching in Judah and had the book of the law of the Lord with them; they went through all the towns of Judah teaching the people.

耶和华使犹大四围的列国都甚恐惧，不敢与约沙法争战。
And the fear of the Lord was on all the kingdoms of the lands round Judah, so that they made no wars against Jehoshaphat.

有些非利士人与约沙法送礼物，纳贡银。亚拉伯人也送他公绵羊七千七百只，公山羊七千七百只。
And some of the Philistines took offerings to Jehoshaphat, and made him payments of silver; and the Arabians gave him flocks, seven thousand, seven hundred sheep, and seven thousand, seven hundred he-goats.

约沙法日渐强大，在犹大建造营寨和积货城。
Jehoshaphat became greater and greater, and made strong towers and store-towns in Judah.

他在犹大城邑中有许多工程，又在耶路撒冷有战士，就是大能的勇士。
He had much property in the towns of Judah; he had forces of armed men, great and strong, in Jerusalem.

他们的数目，按着宗族，记在下面，犹大族的，千夫长押拿为首率领大能的勇士三十万。
This is the number of them, listed by their families, the captains of thousands of Judah: Adnah, the captain, and with him three hundred thousand men of war;

其次是，千夫长约哈难率领大能的勇士二十八万。
Second to him Jehohanan, the captain, and with him two hundred and eighty thousand;

其次是细基利的儿子亚玛斯雅，他为耶和华牺牲自己，率领大能的勇士二十万。
After him Amasiah, the son of Zichri, who freely gave himself to the Lord, and with him two hundred thousand men of war;

便雅悯族，是大能的勇士以利雅大率领，拿弓箭和盾牌的二十万。
And the captains of Benjamin: Eliada, a great man of war, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bows and body-covers;

其次是，约萨拔率领预备打仗的十八万。
And after him Jehozabad, and with him a hundred and eighty thousand trained for war.

这都是伺候王的，还有王在犹大全地坚固城所安置的不在其内。
These were the men who were waiting on the king, in addition to those placed by the king in the walled towns through all Judah.

约沙法大有尊荣资财，就与亚哈结亲。
Now Jehoshaphat had great wealth and honour, and his son was married to Ahab's daughter.

过了几年，他下到撒玛利亚去见亚哈。亚哈为他和跟从他的人宰了许多牛羊，劝他与自己同去攻取基列的拉末。
And after some years he went down to Samaria to see Ahab. And Ahab made a feast for him and the people who were with him, putting to death great numbers of sheep and oxen; and he got Jehoshaphat to go with him to Ramoth-gilead.

以色列王亚哈问犹大王约沙法说，你肯同我去攻取基列的拉末吗？他回答说，你我不分彼此，我的民与你的民一样，必与你同去争战。
For Ahab, king of Israel, said to Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, Will you go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he said, I am as you are, and my people as your people; we will be with you in the war.

约沙法对以色列王说，请你先求问耶和华。
Then Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Let us now get directions from the Lord.

于是以色列王招聚先知四百人，问他们说，我们上去攻取基列的拉末可以不可以。他们说，可以上去，因为神必将那城交在王的手里。
So the king of Israel got together all the prophets, four hundred men, and said to them, Am I to go to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And they said, Go up: for God will give it into the hands of the king.

约沙法说，这里不是还有耶和华的先知，我们可以求问他吗？
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there no other prophet of the Lord here from whom we may get directions?

以色列王对约沙法说，还有一个人，是音拉的儿子米该雅。我们可以托他求问耶和华，只是我恨他。因为他指着我所说的预言，不说吉语，常说凶言。约沙法说，王不必这样说。
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, There is still one man by whom we may get directions from the Lord, but I have no love for him, because he has never been a prophet of good to me, but only of evil: he is Micaiah, the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

以色列王就召了一个太监来，说，你快去将音拉的儿子米该雅召来。
Then the king of Israel sent for one of his unsexed servants and said, Go quickly and come back with Micaiah, the son of Imla.

以色列王和犹大王约沙法在撒玛利亚城门前的空场上，各穿朝服坐在位上，所有的先知都在他们面前说预言。
Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, were seated on their seats of authority, dressed in their robes, by the doorway into Samaria; and all the prophets were acting as prophets before them.

基拿拿的儿子西底家造了两个铁角，说，耶和华如此说，你要用这角抵触亚兰人，直到将他们灭尽。
And Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, made himself iron horns and said, The Lord says, Pushing back the Aramaeans with these, you will put an end to them completely.

所有的先知也都这样预言说，可以上基列的拉末去，必然得胜，因为耶和华必将那城交在王的手中。
And all the prophets said the same thing, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and it will go well for you, for the Lord will give it into the hands of the king.

那去召米该雅的使者对米该雅说，众先知一口同音地都向王说吉言，你不如与他们说一样的话，也说吉言。
Now the servant who had gone to get Micaiah said to him, See now, all the prophets with one voice are saying good things to the king; so let your words be like theirs, and say good things.

米该雅说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，我的神说什么，我就说什么。
And Micaiah said, By the living Lord, whatever the Lord says to me I will say.

米该雅到王面前，王问他说，米该雅阿，我们上去攻取基列的拉末可以不可以。他说，可以上去，必然得胜，敌人必交在你们手里。
When he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, are we to go to Ramoth-gilead to make war or not? And he said, Go up, and it will go well for you; and they will be given up into your hands.

王对他说，我当嘱咐你几次，你才奉耶和华的名向我说实话呢？
And the king said to him, Have I not, again and again, put you on your oath to say nothing to me but what is true in the name of the Lord?

米该雅说，我看见以色列众民散在山上，如同没有牧人的羊群一般。耶和华说，这民没有主人，他们可以平平安安地各归各家去。
Then he said, I saw all Israel wandering on the mountains like sheep without a keeper; and the Lord said, These have no master: let them go back, every man to his house in peace.

以色列王对约沙法说，我岂没有告诉你，这人指着我所说的预言，不说吉语，单说凶言吗？
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not say that he would not be a prophet of good to me, but of evil?

米该雅说，你们要听耶和华的话。我看见耶和华坐在宝座上，天上的万军侍立在他左右。
Then he said, Give ear now to the word of the Lord: I saw the Lord seated on his seat of power, and all the army of heaven in their places, at his right hand and at his left.

耶和华说，谁去引诱以色列王亚哈上基列的拉末去阵亡呢？这个就这样说，那个就那样说。
And the Lord said, How may Ahab, king of Israel, be tricked into going up to Ramoth-gilead to his death? And one said one thing and one another.

随后，有一个神灵出来，站在耶和华面前说，我去引诱他。耶和华问他说，你用何法呢？
Then a spirit came forward and took his place before the Lord and said, I will get him to do it by a trick. And the Lord said to him, How?

他说，我去，要在他众先知口中作谎言的灵。耶和华说，这样，你必能引诱他，你去如此行吧。
And he said, I will go out and be a spirit of deceit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord said, Your trick will have its effect on him: go out and do so.

现在耶和华使谎言的灵入了你这些先知的口，并且耶和华已经命定降祸与你。
And now, see, the Lord has put a spirit of deceit in the mouth of these prophets of yours; and the Lord has said evil against you.

基拿拿的儿子西底家前来打米该雅的脸，说，耶和华的灵从哪里离开我与你说话呢？
Then Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah, came near and gave Micaiah a blow on the side of his face, saying, Where is the spirit of the Lord whose word is in you?

米该雅说，你进严密的屋子藏躲的那日，就必看见了。
And Micaiah said, Truly, you will see on that day when you go into an inner room to keep yourself safe.

以色列王说，将米该雅带回，交给邑宰亚们和王的儿子约阿施，说，
And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah and send him back to Amon, the ruler of the town, and to Joash, the king's son;

王如此说，把这个人下在监里，使他受苦，吃不饱喝不足，等候我平平安安地回来。
And say, By the king's order this man is to be put in prison, and given prison food till I come back in peace.

米该雅说，你若能平安回来，那就是耶和华没有借我说这话了。又说，众民哪，你们都要听。
And Micaiah said, If you come back at all in peace, the Lord has not sent his word by me.

以色列王和犹大王约沙法上基列的拉末去了。
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, went up to Ramoth-gilead.

以色列王对约沙法说，我要改装上阵，你可以仍穿王服。于是以色列王改装，他们就上阵去了。
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will make a change in my clothing, so that I do not seem to be the king, and will go into the fight; but do you put on your robes. So the king of Israel made a change in his dress, and they went to the fight.

先是亚兰王吩咐车兵长说，他们的兵将，无论大小，你们都不可与他们争战，只要与以色列王争战。
Now the king of Aram had given orders to the captains of his war-carriages, saying, Make no attack on small or great, but only on the king of Israel.

车兵长看见约沙法便说，这必是以色列王，就转过去与他争战。约沙法一呼喊，耶和华就帮助他，神又感动他们离开他。
So when the captains of the war-carriages saw Jehoshaphat, they said, It is the king of Israel. And turning about, they came round him, but Jehoshaphat gave a cry, and the Lord came to his help, and God sent them away from him.

车兵长见不是以色列王，就转去不追他了。
Now when the captains of the war-carriages saw that he was not the king of Israel, they went back from going after him.

有一人随便开弓，恰巧射入以色列王的甲缝里。王对赶车的说，我受了重伤，你转过车来，拉我出阵吧。
And a certain man sent an arrow from his bow without thought of its direction, and gave the king of Israel a wound where his breastplate was joined to his clothing; so he said to the driver of his war-carriage, Go to one side and take me away out of the army, for I am badly wounded.

那日阵势越战越猛，以色列王勉强站在车上抵挡亚兰人，直到晚上。约在日落的时候，王就死了。
But the fight became more violent while the day went on; and the king of Israel was supported in his war-carriage facing the Aramaeans till the evening; and by sundown he was dead.

犹大王约沙法平平安安地回耶路撒冷，到宫里去了。
And Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, went back to his house in Jerusalem in peace.

先见哈拿尼的儿子耶户出来迎接约沙法王，对他说，你岂当帮助恶人，爱那恨恶耶和华的人呢？因此耶和华的忿怒临到你。
And Jehu, the son of Hanani the seer, went to King Jehoshaphat and said to him, Is it right for you to go to the help of evil-doers, loving the haters of the Lord? because of this, the wrath of the Lord has come on you.

然而你还有善行，因你从国中除掉木偶，立定心意寻求神。
But still there is some good in you, for you have put away the wood pillars out of the land, and have given your heart to the worship of God.

约沙法住在耶路撒冷，以后又出巡民间，从别是巴直到以法莲山地，引导民归向耶和华他们列祖的神。
And Jehoshaphat was living in Jerusalem; and he went out again among the people, from Beer-sheba to the hill-country of Ephraim, guiding them back to the Lord, the God of their fathers.

又在犹大国中遍地的坚固城里设立审判官，
And he put judges through all the land, in every walled town of Judah,

对他们说，你们办事应当谨慎。因为你们判断不是为人，乃是为耶和华。判断的时候，他必与你们同在。
And said to the judges, Take care what you do, for you are judging not for man but for the Lord, and he is with you in the decisions you give.

现在你们应当敬畏耶和华，谨慎办事。因为耶和华我们的神没有不义，不偏待人，也不受贿赂。
So now let the fear of the Lord be in you; do your work with care; for in the Lord our God there is no evil, or respect for high position, or taking of payment to do wrong.

约沙法从利未人和祭司，并以色列族长中派定人，在耶路撒冷为耶和华判断，听民间的争讼，就回耶路撒冷去了。
Then in Jerusalem he gave authority to certain of the Levites and the priests and the heads of families of Israel to give decisions for the Lord, and in the causes of those living in Jerusalem.

约沙法嘱咐他们说，你们当敬畏耶和华，忠心诚实办事。
And he gave them their orders, saying, You are to do your work in the fear of the Lord, in good faith and with a true heart.

住在各城里你们的弟兄，若有争讼的事来到你们这里，或为流血，或犯律法，诫命，律例，典章，你们要警戒他们，免得他们得罪耶和华，以致他的忿怒临到你们和你们的弟兄。这样行，你们就没有罪了。
And if any cause comes before you from your brothers living in their towns, where the death punishment is in question, or where there are questions of law or order, or rules or decisions, make them take care that they are not in the wrong before the Lord, so that wrath may not come on you and on your brothers; do this and you yourselves will not be in the wrong.

凡属耶和华的事，有大祭司亚玛利雅管理你们。凡属王的事，有犹大支派的族长以实玛利的儿子西巴第雅管理你们。在你们面前有利未人作官长。你们应当壮胆办事，愿耶和华与善人同在。
And now, Amariah, the chief priest, is over you in all questions to do with the Lord; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the head of the family of Judah, in everything to do with the king's business; and the Levites will be overseers for you. Be strong to do the work; and may the Lord be with the upright.

此后，摩押人和亚扪人，又有米乌尼人，一同来攻击约沙法。
Now after this, the children of Moab and the children of Ammon, and with them some of the Meunim, made war against Jehoshaphat.

有人来报告约沙法说，从海外亚兰（亚兰又作以东）那边有大军来攻击你，如今他们在哈洗逊他玛，就是隐基底。
And they came to Jehoshaphat with the news, saying, A great army is moving against you from Edom across the sea; and now they are in Hazazon-tamar (which is En-gedi).

约沙法便惧怕，定意寻求耶和华，在犹大全地宣告禁食。
Then Jehoshaphat, in his fear, went to the Lord for directions, and gave orders all through Judah for the people to go without food.

于是犹大人聚会，求耶和华帮助。犹大各城都有人出来寻求耶和华。
And Judah came together to make prayer for help from the Lord; from every town of Judah they came to give worship to the Lord.

约沙法就在犹大和耶路撒冷的会中，站在耶和华殿的新院前，
And Jehoshaphat took his place in the meeting of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the Lord in front of the new open space,

说，耶和华我们列祖的神阿，你不是天上的神吗？你不是万邦万国的主宰吗？在你手中有大能大力，无人能抵挡你。
And said, O Lord, the God of our fathers, are you not God in heaven? are you not ruler over all the kingdoms of the nations? and in your hands are power and strength so that no one is able to keep his place against you.

我们的神阿，你不是曾在你民以色列人面前驱逐这地的居民，将这地赐给你朋友亚伯拉罕的后裔永远为业吗？
Did you not, O Lord our God, after driving out the people of this land before your people Israel, give it to the seed of Abraham, your friend, for ever?

他们住在这地，又为你的名建造圣所，说，
And they made it their living-place, building there a holy house for your name, and saying,

倘有祸患临到我们，或刀兵灾殃，或瘟疫饥荒，我们在急难的时候，站在这殿前向你呼求，你必垂听而拯救，因为你的名在这殿里。
If evil comes on us, the sword, or punishment, or disease, or need of food, we will come to this house and to you, (for your name is in this house,) crying to you in our trouble, and you will give us salvation in answer to our cry.

从前以色列人出埃及地的时候，你不容以色列人侵犯亚扪人，摩押人，和西珥山人，以色列人就离开他们，不灭绝他们。
And now, see, the children of Ammon and Moab and the people of Mount Seir, whom you kept Israel from attacking when they came out of Egypt, so that turning to one side they did not send destruction on them:

看哪，他们怎样报复我们，要来驱逐我们出离你的地，就是你赐给我们为业之地。
See now, how as our reward they have come to send us out of your land which you have given us as our heritage.

我们的神阿，你不惩罚他们吗？因为我们无力抵挡这来攻击我们的大军，我们也不知道怎样行，我们的眼目单仰望你。
O our God, will you not be their judge? for our strength is not equal to this great army which is coming against us; and we are at a loss what to do: but our eyes are on you.

犹大众人和他们的婴孩，妻子，儿女都站在耶和华面前。
And all Judah were waiting before the Lord, with their little ones, their wives, and their children.

那时，耶和华的灵在会中临到利未人亚萨的后裔玛探雅的玄孙，耶利的曾孙，比拿雅的孙子，撒迦利雅的儿子雅哈悉。
Then, before all the meeting, the spirit of the Lord came on Jahaziel, the son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah, a Levite and one of the family of Asaph;

他说，犹大众人，耶路撒冷的居民，和约沙法王，你们请听。耶和华对你们如此说，不要因这大军恐惧惊惶。因为胜败不在乎你们，乃在乎神。
And he said, Give ear, O Judah, and you people of Jerusalem, and you, King Jehoshaphat: the Lord says to you, Have no fear and do not be troubled on account of this great army; for the fight is not yours but God's.

明日你们要下去迎敌，他们是从洗斯坡上来，你们必在耶鲁伊勒旷野前的谷口遇见他们。
Go down against them tomorrow: see, they are coming up by the slope of Ziz; at the end of the valley, before the waste land of Jeruel, you will come face to face with them.

犹大和耶路撒冷人哪，这次你们不要争战，要摆阵站着，看耶和华为你们施行拯救。不要恐惧，也不要惊惶。明日当出去迎敌，因为耶和华与你们同在。
There will be no need for you to take up arms in this fight; put yourselves in position, and keep where you are, and you will see the salvation of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: have no fear and do not be troubled: go out against them tomorrow, for the Lord is with you.

约沙法就面伏于地，犹大众人和耶路撒冷的居民也俯伏在耶和华面前，叩拜耶和华。
Then Jehoshaphat went down with his face to the earth, and all Judah and the people of Jerusalem gave worship to the Lord, falling down before him.

哥辖族和可拉族的利未人都起来，用极大的声音赞美耶和华以色列的神。
And the Levites, the children of the Kohathites and the Korahites, got to their feet and gave praise to the Lord, the God of Israel, with a loud voice.

次日清早，众人起来往提哥亚的旷野去。出去的时候，约沙法站着说，犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民哪，要听我说，信耶和华你们的神就必立稳。信他的先知就必亨通。
And early in the morning they got up and went out to the waste land of Tekoa: and when they were going out, Jehoshaphat took his station and said to them, Give ear to me, O Judah and you people of Jerusalem: have faith in the Lord your God and you will be safe; have faith in his prophets and all will go well for you.

约沙法既与民商议了，就设立歌唱的人，颂赞耶和华，使他们穿上圣洁的礼服，走在军前赞美耶和华说，当称谢耶和华，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And after discussion with the people, he put in their places those who were to make melody to the Lord, praising him in holy robes, while they went at the head of the army, and saying, May the Lord be praised, for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

众人方唱歌赞美的时候，耶和华就派伏兵击杀那来攻击犹大人的亚扪人，摩押人，和西珥山人，他们就被打败了。
And at the first notes of song and praise the Lord sent a surprise attack against the children of Ammon and Moab and the people of Mount Seir, who had come against Judah; and they were overcome.

因为亚扪人和摩押人起来，击杀住西珥山的人，将他们灭尽。灭尽住西珥山的人之后，他们又彼此自相击杀。
And the children of Ammon and Moab made an attack on the people of Mount Seir with a view to their complete destruction; and when they had put an end to the people of Seir, everyman's hand was turned against his neighbour for his destruction.

犹大人来到旷野的望楼，向那大军观看，见尸横遍地，没有一个逃脱的。
And Judah came to the watchtower of the waste land, and looking in the direction of the army, they saw only dead bodies stretched on the earth; no living man was to be seen.

约沙法和他的百姓就来收取敌人的财物，在尸首中见了许多财物，珍宝，他们剥脱下来的多得不可携带。因为甚多，直收取了三日。
And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take their goods from them, they saw beasts in great numbers, and wealth and clothing and things of value, more than they were able to take away; all this they took for themselves, and they were three days getting it away, there was so much.

第四日众人聚集在比拉迦（就是称颂的意思）谷，在那里称颂耶和华。因此那地方名叫比拉迦谷，直到今日。
On the fourth day they all came together in the Valley of Blessing, and there they gave blessing to the Lord; for which cause that place has been named the Valley of Blessing to this day.

犹大人和耶路撒冷人都欢欢喜喜地回耶路撒冷，约沙法率领他们。因为耶和华使他们战胜仇敌，就欢喜快乐。
Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem went back, with Jehoshaphat at their head, coming back to Jerusalem with joy; for the Lord had made them glad over their haters.

他们弹琴，鼓瑟，吹号来到耶路撒冷，进了耶和华的殿。
So they came to Jerusalem with corded instruments and wind-instruments into the house of the Lord.

列邦诸国听见耶和华战败以色列的仇敌，就甚惧怕。
And the fear of God came on all the kingdoms of the lands, when they had news of how the Lord made war on those who came against Israel.

这样，约沙法的国得享太平，因为神赐他四境平安。
So the kingdom of Jehoshaphat was quiet, for the Lord gave him rest on every side.

约沙法作犹大王，登基的时候年三十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十五年。他母亲名叫阿苏巴，乃示利希的女儿。
And Jehoshaphat was king over Judah: he was thirty-five years old when he became king, and he was ruling for twenty-five years in Jerusalem: his mother's name was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.

约沙法效法他父亚撒所行的，不偏左右，行耶和华眼中看为正的事。
He went in the ways of his father Asa, not turning away, but doing right in the eyes of the Lord.

只是丘坛还没有废去，百姓也没有立定心意归向他们列祖的神。
The high places, however, were not taken away, and the hearts of the people were still not true to the God of their fathers.

约沙法其余的事，自始至终都写在哈拿尼的儿子耶户的书上，也载入以色列诸王记上。
Now as for the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, they are recorded in the words of Jehu, the son of Hanani, which were put in the book of the kings of Israel.

此后，犹大王约沙法与以色列王亚哈谢交好。亚哈谢行恶太甚。
After this Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, became friends with Ahaziah, king of Israel, who did much evil:

二王合伙造船要往他施去，遂在以旬迦别造船。
Together they made ships to go to Tarshish, building them in Ezion-geber.

那时玛利沙人，多大瓦的儿子以利以谢向约沙法预言说，因你与亚哈谢交好，耶和华必破坏你所造的。后来那船果然破坏，不能往他施去了。
Then the word of Eliezer the prophet, the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah, came against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because you have let yourself be joined with Ahaziah, the Lord has sent destruction on your works. And the ships were broken and were not able to go to Tarshish.

约沙法与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城他列祖的坟地里。他儿子约兰接续他作王。
And Jehoshaphat went to rest with his fathers, and his body was put into the earth in the town of David. And Jehoram his son became king in his place.

约兰有几个兄弟，就是约沙法的儿子亚撒利雅，耶歇，撒迦利雅，亚撒利雅，米迦勒，示法提雅。这都是犹大王约沙法的儿子。
And he had brothers, sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariah, Michael, and Shephatiah; all these were sons of Jehoshaphat, king of Israel.

他们的父亲将许多金银，财宝，和犹大地的坚固城赐给他们。但将国赐给约兰，因为他是长子。
And their father gave them much silver and gold and things of great value, as well as walled towns in Judah; but the kingdom he gave to Jehoram, because he was the oldest.

约兰兴起坐他父的位，奋勇自强，就用刀杀了他的众兄弟和以色列的几个首领。
Now when Jehoram had taken his place over his father's kingdom, and had made his position safe, he put all his brothers to death with the sword, as well as some of the princes of Israel.

约兰登基的时候年三十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王八年。
Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he became king; and he was ruling in Jerusalem for eight years.

他行以色列诸王的道，与亚哈家一样。因他娶了亚哈的女儿为妻，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事。
He went in the ways of the kings of Israel, and did as the family of Ahab did, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife; and he did evil in the eyes of the Lord.

耶和华却因自己与大卫所立的约，不肯灭大卫的家，照他所应许的，永远赐灯光与大卫和他的子孙。
But it was not the Lord's purpose to send destruction on the family of David, because of the agreement he had made with David, when he said he would give to him and to his sons a light for ever.

约兰年间，以东人背叛犹大，脱离他的权下，自己立王。
In his time Edom made themselves free from the rule of Judah, and took a king for themselves.

约兰就率领军长和所有的战车，夜间起来，攻击围困他的以东人和车兵长。
Then Jehoram went over with his captains and all his war-carriages ... made an attack by night on the Edomites, whose forces were all round him ... on the captains of the war-carriages.

这样，以东人背叛犹大，脱离他的权下，直到今日。那时，立拿人也背叛了，因为约兰离弃耶和华他列祖的神。
So Edom made themselves free from the rule of Judah, to this day: and at the same time Libnah made itself free from his rule; because he was turned away from the Lord, the God of his fathers.

他又在犹大诸山建筑丘坛，使耶路撒冷的居民行邪淫，诱惑犹大人。
And more than this, he made high places in the mountains of Judah, teaching the people of Jerusalem to go after false gods, and guiding Judah away from the true way.

先知以利亚达信与约兰说，耶和华你祖大卫的神如此说，因为你不行你父约沙法和犹大王亚撒的道，
And a letter came to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, The Lord, the God of your father David, says, Because you have not kept to the ways of your father Jehoshaphat or the ways of Asa, king of Judah,

乃行以色列诸王的道，使犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民行邪淫，像亚哈家一样，又杀了你父家比你好的诸兄弟。
But have gone in the way of the kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the people of Jerusalem go after false gods, as the family of Ahab did: and because you have put to death your father's sons, your brothers, who were better than yourself:

故此，耶和华降大灾与你的百姓和你的妻子，儿女，并你一切所有的。
Now, truly, the Lord will send a great destruction on your people and your children and your wives and everything which is yours:

你的肠子必患病，日加沉重，以致你的肠子坠落下来。
And you yourself will undergo the cruel pains of a disease in your stomach, so that day by day your inside will be falling out because of the disease.

以后，耶和华激动非利士人和靠近古实的亚拉伯人来攻击约兰。
Then the Philistines and the Arabians, who are by Ethiopia, were moved by the Lord to make war on Jehoram;

他们上来攻击犹大，侵入境内，掳掠了王宫里所有的财货和他的妻子，儿女，除了他小儿子约哈斯（又名亚哈谢）之外，没有留下一个儿子。
And they came up against Judah, forcing a way into it, and took away all the goods in the king's house, as well as his sons and his wives; so that he had no son but only Jehoahaz, the youngest.

这些事以后，耶和华使约兰的肠子患不能医治的病。
And after all this the Lord sent on him a disease of the stomach from which it was impossible for him to be made well.

他患此病缠绵日久，过了二年，肠子坠落下来，病重而死。他的民没有为他烧什么物件，像从前为他列祖所烧的一样。
And time went on, and after two years, his inside falling out because of the disease, he came to his death in cruel pain. And his people made no burning for him like the burning made for his fathers.

约兰登基的时候年三十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王八年。他去世无人思慕，众人葬他在大卫城，只是不在列王的坟墓里。
He was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for eight years: and at his death he was not regretted; they put his body into the earth in the town of David, but not in the resting-place of the kings.

耶路撒冷的居民立约兰的小儿子亚哈谢接续他作王。因为跟随亚拉伯人来攻营的军兵曾杀了亚哈谢的众兄长。这样，犹大王约兰的儿子亚哈谢作了王。
And the people of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, his youngest son, king in his place, for the band of men who came with the Arabians to the army had put all the older sons to death. So Ahaziah, the son of Jehoram, became king.

亚哈谢登基的时候年四十二岁（列王下八章二十六节作二十二岁），在耶路撒冷作王一年。他母亲名叫亚他利雅，是暗利的孙女。
Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for one year. His mother's name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri.

亚哈谢也行亚哈家的道。因为他母亲给他主谋，使他行恶。
He went in the ways of the family of Ahab, for his mother was his teacher in evil-doing.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，像亚哈家一样。因他父亲死后有亚哈家的人给他主谋，以致败坏。
And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as the family of Ahab did; for after the death of his father they were his guides to his destruction.

他听从亚哈家的计谋，同以色列王亚哈的儿子约兰往基列的拉末去，与亚兰王哈薛争战。亚兰人打伤了约兰。
Acting on their suggestion, he went with Jehoram, son of Ahab, king of Israel, to make war on Hazael, king of Aram, at Ramoth-gilead: and Joram was wounded by the bowmen.

约兰回到耶斯列，医治在拉末与亚兰王哈薛打仗所受的伤，犹大王约兰的儿子亚撒利雅（即亚哈谢）因为亚哈的儿子约兰病了，就下到耶斯列看望他。
And he went back to Jezreel to get well from the wounds which they had given him at Ramah when he was fighting against Hazael, king of Aram. And Ahaziah, the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to Jezreel to see Jehoram, the son of Ahab, because he was ill.

亚哈谢去见约兰就被害了，这是出乎神。因为他到了，就同约兰出去攻击宁示的孙子耶户。这耶户是耶和华所膏，使他剪除亚哈家的。
Now by the purpose of God, Ahaziah's journey to see Jehoram was the cause of his downfall: for when he came there, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu, the son of Nimshi, who had been marked out by the Lord for the destruction of the family of Ahab.

耶户讨亚哈家罪的时候，遇见犹大的众首领和亚哈谢的众侄子服事亚哈谢，就把他们都杀了。
Now when Jehu was effecting the punishment of the family of Ahab, he came to the princes of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah's brothers, the servants of Ahaziah, and put them to death.

亚哈谢藏在撒玛利亚，耶户寻找他，众人将他拿住，送到耶户那里，就杀了他，将他葬埋。因他们说，他是那尽心寻求耶和华之约沙法的儿子。这样，亚哈谢的家无力保守国权。
And he went in search of Ahaziah; and when they came where he was, (for he was in a secret place in Samaria,) they took him to Jehu and put him to death; then they put his body to rest in the earth, for they said, He is the son of Jehoshaphat, whose heart was true to the Lord. So the family of Ahaziah had no power to keep the kingdom.

亚哈谢的母亲亚他利雅见她儿子死了，就起来剿灭犹大王室。
Now when Athaliah, the mother of Ahaziah, saw that her son was dead, she had all the rest of the seed of the kingdom of Judah put to death.

但王的女儿约示巴将亚哈谢的儿子约阿施从那被杀的王子中偷出来，把他和他的乳母都藏在卧房里。约示巴是约兰王的女儿，亚哈谢的妹子，祭司耶何耶大的妻。她收藏约阿施，躲避亚他利雅，免得被杀。
But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, secretly took Joash, the son of Ahaziah, away from among the king's sons who were put to death, and put him and the woman who took care of him in a bedroom. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of King Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest and sister of Ahaziah, kept him safe from Athaliah, so that she did not put him to death.

约阿施和她们一同藏在神殿里六年。亚他利雅篡了国位。
And she kept him safe with her in the house of God for six years, while Athaliah was ruling the land.

第七年，耶何耶大奋勇自强，将百夫长耶罗罕的儿子亚撒利雅，约哈难的儿子以实玛利，俄备得的儿子亚撒利雅，亚大雅的儿子玛西雅，细基利的儿子以利沙法召来，与他们立约。
In the seventh year, Jehoiada made himself strong, and made an agreement with the captains of hundreds, Azariah, the son of Jeroham, Ishmael, the son of Jehohanan, Azariah, the son of Obed, Maaseiah, the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat, the son of Zichri.

他们走遍犹大，从犹大各城里招聚利未人和以色列的众族长到耶路撒冷来。
And they went through Judah, getting together the Levites and the heads of families in Israel from all the towns of Judah, and they came to Jerusalem.

会众在神殿里与王立约。耶何耶大对他们说，看哪，王的儿子必当作王，正如耶和华指着大卫子孙所应许的话。
And all the people made an agreement with the king in the house of God. And he said to them, Truly, the king's son will be king, as the Lord has said about the sons of David.

又说，你们当这样行，祭司和利未人凡安息日进班的，三分之一要把守各门，
This is what you are to do: let a third of you, of the priests and Levites, who come in on the Sabbath, keep the doors;

三分之一要在王宫，三分之一要在基址门。众百姓要在耶和华殿的院内。
And a third are to be stationed at the king's house; and a third at the doorway of the horses: while all the people are waiting in the open spaces round the house of the Lord.

除了祭司和供职的利未人之外，不准别人进耶和华的殿。惟独他们可以进去，因为他们圣洁。众百姓要遵守耶和华所吩咐的。
But let no one come into the house of the Lord but only the priests and those of the Levites who have work to do there; they may go in for they are holy; but the rest of the people are to keep the orders of the Lord.

利未人要手中各拿兵器，四围护卫王。凡擅入殿宇的，必当治死。王出入的时候，你们当跟随他。
And the Levites are to make a circle round the king, every man being armed; and any man who comes into the house is to be put to death; you are to keep with the king when he comes in and when he goes out.

利未人和犹大众人都照着祭司耶何耶大一切所吩咐的去行，各带所管安息日进班出班的人来，因为祭司耶何耶大不许他们下班。
So the Levites and all Judah did as Jehoiada the priest had given them orders: every one took with him his men, those who were to come in and those who were to go out on the Sabbath; for Jehoiada had not sent away the divisions.

祭司耶何耶大便将神殿里所藏大卫王的枪，盾牌，挡牌交给百夫长，
Then Jehoiada the priest gave to the captains of hundreds the spears and body-covers which had been King David's and which were kept in the house of God.

又分派众民手中各拿兵器，在坛和殿那里，从殿右直到殿左，站在王子的四围。
And he put all the people in position, every man with his instruments of war in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left, by the altar and the house and all round the king.

于是领王子出来，给他戴上冠冕，将律法书交给他，立他作王。耶何耶大和众子膏他，众人说，愿王万岁。
Then they made the king's son come out, and they put the crown on his head and gave him the arm-bands and made him king: and Jehoiada and his sons put the holy oil on him and said, Long life to the king.

亚他利雅听见民奔走赞美王的声音，就到民那里，进耶和华的殿，
Now Athaliah, hearing the noise of the people running and praising the king, came to the people in the house of the Lord:

看见王站在殿门的柱旁，百夫长和吹号的人侍立在王左右，国民都欢乐吹号，又有歌唱的，用各样的乐器领人歌唱赞美。亚他利雅就撕裂衣服，喊叫说，反了。反了。
And looking, she saw the king in his place by the pillar at the doorway, and the captains and the horns by his side; and all the people of the land were giving signs of joy and sounding the horns; and the makers of melody were playing on instruments of music, taking the chief part in the song of praise. Then Athaliah, violently parting her robes, said, Broken faith, broken faith!

祭司耶何耶大带管辖军兵的百夫长出来，吩咐他们说，将她赶到班外，凡跟随她的必用刀杀死。因为祭司说，不可在耶和华殿里杀她。
Then Jehoiada the priest gave orders to the captains of hundreds who had authority over the army, saying, Take her outside the lines, and let anyone who goes after her be put to death with the sword. For the priest said, Let her not be put to death in the house of the Lord.

众兵就闪开，让她去。她走到王宫的马门，便在那里把她杀了。
So they put their hands on her, and she went to the king's house by the doorway of the king's horses; and there she was put to death.

耶何耶大与众民和王立约，都要作耶和华的民。
And Jehoiada made an agreement between the Lord and all the people and the king, that they would be the Lord's people.

于是众民都到巴力庙，拆毁了庙，打碎坛和像，又在坛前将巴力的祭司玛坦杀了。
Then all the people went to the house of Baal and had it pulled down, and its altars and images broken up; and Mattan, the priest of Baal, they put to death before the altars.

耶何耶大派官看守耶和华的殿，是在祭司利未人手下。这祭司利未人是大卫分派在耶和华殿中，照摩西律法上所写的，给耶和华献燔祭，又按大卫所定的例，欢乐歌唱。
And Jehoiada put the work and the care of the house of the Lord into the hands of the priests and the Levites, who had been grouped in divisions by David to make burned offerings to the Lord, as it is recorded in the law of Moses, with joy and song as David had said.

且设立守门的把守耶和华殿的各门，无论为何事，不洁净的人都不准进去。
And he put door-keepers at the doors of the Lord's house, to see that no one who was unclean in any way might come in.

又率领百夫长和贵胄，与民间的官长，并国中的众民，请王从耶和华殿下来，由上门进入王宫，立王坐在国位上。
Then he took the captains of hundreds and the chiefs and the rulers of the people and all the people of the land, and they came down with the king from the house of the Lord through the higher doorway into the king's house, and put the king on the seat of the kingdom.

国民都欢乐，合城都安静。众人已将亚他利雅用刀杀了。
So all the people of the land were glad and the town was quiet, for they had put Athaliah to death with the sword.

约阿施登基的时候年七岁，在耶路撒冷作王四十年。他母亲名叫西比亚，是别是巴人。
Joash was seven years old when he became king, and he was ruling for forty years in Jerusalem: his mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.

祭司耶何耶大在世的时候，约阿施行耶和华眼中看为正的事。
And Joash did what was right in the eyes of the Lord as long as Jehoiada the priest was living.

耶何耶大为他娶了两个妻，并且生儿养女。
And Jehoiada took two wives for him, and he became the father of sons and daughters.

此后，约阿施有意重修耶和华的殿，
Now after this Joash had a desire to put the house of the Lord into good order again;

便召聚众祭司和利未人，吩咐他们说，你们要往犹大各城去，使以色列众人捐纳银子，每年可以修理你们神的殿。你们要急速办理这事。只是利未人不急速办理。
And getting together the priests and Levites, he said to them, Go out into the towns of Judah year by year, and get from all Israel money to keep the house of your God in good condition; and see that this is done without loss of time. The Levites, however, were slow in doing so.

王召了大祭司耶何耶大来，对他说，从前耶和华的仆人摩西，为法柜的帐幕与以色列会众所定的捐项，你为何不叫利未人照这例从犹大和耶路撒冷带来作殿的费用呢？
Then the king sent for Jehoiada, the chief priest, and said to him, Why have you not given the Levites orders that the tax fixed by Moses, the servant of the Lord, and by the meeting of Israel, for the Tent of witness, is to be got in from Judah and Jerusalem and handed over?

因为那恶妇亚他利雅的众子曾拆毁神的殿，又用耶和华殿中分别为圣的物供奉巴力。
For the house of the Lord had been broken up by Athaliah, that evil woman, and her sons; and all its holy things they had given to the Baals.

于是王下令，众人作了一柜，放在耶和华殿的门外，
So at the king's order they made a chest and put it outside the doorway of the house of the Lord.

又通告犹大和耶路撒冷的百姓，要将神仆人摩西在旷野所吩咐以色列人的捐项给耶和华送来。
And an order was sent out through all Judah and Jerusalem that payment was to be made to the Lord of the tax which Moses, the servant of God, had put on Israel in the waste land.

众首领和百姓都欢欢喜喜地将银子送来，投入柜中，直到捐完。
And all the chiefs and all the people came gladly and put their money into the chest, till they had all given.

利未人见银子多了，就把柜抬到王所派的司事面前。王的书记和大祭司的属员来将柜倒空，仍放在原处。日日都是这样，积蓄的银子甚多。
So when the chest was taken to the king's servants by the Levites, and they saw that there was much money in it, the king's scribe and the chief priest's servant took the money out, and put the chest back in its place. They did this day by day, and got together a great amount of money.

王与耶何耶大将银子交给耶和华殿里办事的人，他们就雇了石匠，木匠重修耶和华的殿，又雇了铁匠，铜匠修理耶和华的殿。
Then the king and Jehoiada gave it to those who were responsible for getting the work done on the Lord's house, and with it they got wall-builders and woodworkers and metal-workers to put the house of the Lord in good order again.

工人操作，渐渐修成，将神殿修造得与从前一样，而且甚是坚固。
So the workmen did their work, making good what was damaged and building up the house of God till it was strong and beautiful again.

工程完了，他们就把其余的银子拿到王与耶何耶大面前，用以制造耶和华殿供奉所用的器皿和调羹，并金银的器皿。耶何耶大在世的时候，众人常在耶和华殿里献燔祭。
And when the work was done, they took the rest of the money to the king and Jehoiada, and it was used for making the vessels for the house of the Lord, all the vessels needed for the offerings, the spoons and the vessels of gold and silver. And as long as Jehoiada was living, the regular burned offerings were offered in the house of the Lord.

耶何耶大年纪老迈，日子满足而死。死的时候年一百三十岁，
But Jehoiada became old and full of days, and he came to his end; he was a hundred and thirty years old at the time of his death.

葬在大卫城列王的坟墓里。因为他在以色列人中行善，又事奉神，修理神的殿。
And they put him into his last resting-place in the town of David, among the kings, because he had done good in Israel for God and for his house.

耶何耶大死后，犹大的众首领来朝拜王。王就听从他们。
Now after the death of Jehoiada, the chiefs of Judah came and went down on their faces before the king. Then the king gave ear to them.

他们离弃耶和华他们列祖神的殿，去事奉亚舍拉和偶像。因他们这罪，就有忿怒临到犹大和耶路撒冷。
And they gave up the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and became worshippers of pillars of wood and of the images; and because of this sin of theirs, wrath came on Judah and Jerusalem.

但神仍遣先知到他们那里，引导他们归向耶和华。这先知警戒他们，他们却不肯听。
And the Lord sent them prophets to make them come back to him; and they gave witness against them, but they would not give ear.

那时，神的灵感动祭司耶何耶大的儿子撒迦利亚，他就站在上面对民说，神如此说，你们为何干犯耶和华的诫命，以致不得亨通呢？因为你们离弃耶和华，所以他也离弃你们。
Then the spirit of God came on Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada the priest, and, getting up before the people, he said to them, God has said, Why do you go against the orders of the Lord, so that everything goes badly for you? because you have given up the Lord, he has given you up.

众民同心谋害撒迦利亚，就照王的吩咐，在耶和华殿的院内用石头打死他。
But when they had made a secret design against him, he was stoned with stones, by the king's order, in the outer square of the Lord's house.

这样，约阿施王不想念撒迦利亚的父亲耶何耶大向自己所施的恩，杀了他的儿子。撒迦利亚临死的时候说，愿耶和华鉴察伸冤。
So King Joash did not keep in mind how good Jehoiada his father had been to him, but put his son to death. And in the hour of his death he said, May the Lord see it and take payment!

满了一年，亚兰的军兵上来攻击约阿施，来到犹大和耶路撒冷，杀了民中的众首领，将所掠的财货送到大马色王那里。
Now in the spring, the army of the Aramaeans came up against him; they came against Judah and Jerusalem, putting to death all the great men of the people and sending all the goods they took from them to the king of Damascus.

亚兰的军兵虽来了一小队，耶和华却将大队的军兵交在他们手里，是因犹大人离弃耶和华他们列祖的神，所以借亚兰人惩罚约阿施。
For though the army of Aram was only a small one, the Lord gave a very great army into their hands, because they had given up the Lord, the God of their fathers. So they put into effect the punishment of Joash.

亚兰人离开约阿施的时候，他患重病。臣仆背叛他，要报祭司耶何耶大儿子流血之仇，杀他在床上，葬他在大卫城，只是不葬在列王的坟墓里。
And when they had gone away from him, (for he was broken with disease,) his servants made a secret design against him because of the blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest, and they put him to death on his bed; and they put his body into the earth in the town of David, but not in the resting-place of the kings.

背叛他的是亚扪妇人示米押的儿子撒拔和摩押妇人示米利的儿子约萨拔。
Those who made designs against him were Zabad, the son of Shimeath, an Ammonite woman, and Jehozabad, the son of Shimrith, a Moabite woman.

至于他的众子和他所受的警戒，并他重修神殿的事，都写在列王的传上。他儿子亚玛谢接续他作王。
Now the story of his sons, and all the words said by the prophet against him, and the building up again of the Lord's house, are recorded in the account in the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son became king in his place.

亚玛谢登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十九年。他母亲名叫约耶但，是耶路撒冷人。
Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years; his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

亚玛谢行耶和华眼中看为正的事，只是心不专诚。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, but his heart was not completely true to the Lord.

国一坚定，就把杀他父王的臣仆杀了，
Now when he became strong in the kingdom, he put to death those men who had taken the life of the king his father.

却没有治死他们的儿子，是照摩西律法书上耶和华所吩咐的说，不可因子杀父，也不可因父杀子，各人要为本身的罪而死。
But he did not put their children to death, for he kept the orders of the Lord recorded in the book of the law of Moses, saying, The fathers are not to be put to death for their children or the children for their fathers, but a man is to be put to death for the sin which he himself has done.

亚玛谢招聚犹大人，按着犹大和便雅悯的宗族设立千夫长，百夫长，又数点人数，从二十岁以外，能拿枪拿盾牌出去打仗的精兵共有三十万。
Then Amaziah got all Judah together and put them in order by their families, even all Judah and Benjamin, under captains of thousands and captains of hundreds: and he had those of twenty years old and over numbered, and they came to three hundred thousand of the best fighting-men, trained for war and in the use of the spear and the body-cover.

又用银子一百他连得，从以色列招募了十万大能的勇士。
And for a hundred talents of silver, he got a hundred thousand fighting-men from Israel.

有一个神人来见亚玛谢，对他说，王阿，不要使以色列的军兵与你同去，因为耶和华不与以色列人以法莲的后裔同在。
But a man of God came to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with you; for the Lord is not with Israel, that is, the children of Ephraim.

你若一定要去，就奋勇争战吧。但神必使你败在敌人面前。因为神能助人得胜，也能使人倾败。
But go yourself, and be strong in war; God will not let you go down before those who are fighting against you; for God has power to give help or to send you down before your attackers.

亚玛谢问神人说，我给了以色列军的那一百他连得银子怎么样呢？神人回答说，耶和华能把更多的赐给你。
Then Amaziah said to the man of God, But what is to be done about the hundred talents which I have given for the armed band of Israel? And the man of God in answer said, God is able to give you much more than this.

于是亚玛谢将那从以法莲来的军兵分别出来，叫他们回家去。故此，他们甚恼怒犹大人，气忿忿地回家去了。
So Amaziah, separating the armed band which had come to him from Ephraim, sent them back again; which made them very angry with Judah, and they went back burning with wrath.

亚玛谢壮起胆来，率领他的民到盐谷，杀了西珥人一万。
Then Amaziah took heart, and went out at the head of his people and came to the Valley of Salt, where he put to death ten thousand of the children of Seir;

犹大人又生擒了一万带到山崖上，从那里把他们扔下去，以致他们都摔碎了。
And ten thousand more the children of Israel took living, and made them go up to the top of the rock, pushing them down from the top of the rock so that their bodies were broken by the fall.

但亚玛谢所打发回去，不许一同出征的那些军兵攻打犹大各城，从撒玛利亚直到伯和仑，杀了三千人，抢了许多财物。
But the men of the band which Amaziah sent back and did not take with him to the fight, made attacks on the towns of Judah from Samaria to Beth-horon, putting to death three thousand of their people and taking away a great store of their goods.

亚玛谢杀了以东人回来，就把西珥的神像带回，立为自己的神，在它面前叩拜烧香。
Now when Amaziah came back from the destruction of the Edomites, he took the gods of the children of Seir and made them his gods, worshipping them and burning offerings before them.

因此，耶和华的怒气向亚玛谢发作，就差一个先知去见他，说，这些神不能救它的民脱离你的手，你为何寻求它呢？
And so the wrath of the Lord was moved against Amaziah, and he sent a prophet to him, who said, Why have you gone after the gods of the people who have not given their people salvation from your hands?

先知与王说话的时候，王对他说，谁立你作王的谋士呢？你住口吧。为何找打呢？先知就止住了，又说，你行这事，不听从我的劝戒，我知道神定意要灭你。
But while he was talking to him the king said to him, Have we made you one of the king's government? say no more, or it will be the cause of your death. Then the prophet gave up protesting, and said, It is clear to me that God's purpose is your destruction, because you have done this and have not given ear to my words.

犹大王亚玛谢与群臣商议，就差遣使者去见耶户的孙子，约哈斯的儿子，以色列王约阿施，说，你来，我们二人相见于战场。
Then Amaziah, king of Judah, acting on the suggestion of his servants, sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us have a meeting face to face.

以色列王约阿施差遣使者去见犹大王亚玛谢，说，利巴嫩的蒺藜差遣使者去见利巴嫩的香柏树，说，将你的女儿给我儿子为妻。后来利巴嫩有一个野兽经过，把蒺藜践踏了。
And Joash, king of Israel, sent to Amaziah, king of Judah, saying, The thorn-tree in Lebanon sent to the cedar in Lebanon, saying, Give your daughter to my son for a wife: and a beast from the woodland in Lebanon went by, crushing the thorn under his feet.

你说，看哪，我打败了以东人，你就心高气傲，以致矜夸。你在家里安居就罢了，为何要惹祸使自己和犹大国一同败亡呢？
You say, See, I have overcome Edom; and your heart is lifted up with pride: now keep in your country; why do you make causes of trouble, putting yourself, and Judah with you, in danger of downfall?

亚玛谢却不肯听从。这是出乎神，好将他们交在敌人手里，因为他们寻求以东的神。
But Amaziah gave no attention; and this was the purpose of God, so that he might give them up into the hands of Joash, because they had gone after the gods of Edom.

于是以色列王约阿施上来，在犹大的伯示麦与犹大王亚玛谢相见于战场。
And so Joash, king of Israel, went up; and he and Amaziah, king of Judah, came face to face at Beth-shemesh in Judah.

犹大人败在以色列人面前，各自逃回家里去了。
And Judah was overcome before Israel, and they went in flight, every man to his tent.

以色列王约阿施在伯示麦擒住约哈斯（就是亚哈谢）的孙子，约阿施的儿子，犹大王亚玛谢，将他带到耶路撒冷，又拆毁耶路撒冷的城墙，从以法莲门直到角门，共四百肘。
And Joash, king of Israel, made Amaziah, king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, prisoner at Beth-shemesh, and took him to Jerusalem; and he had the wall of Jerusalem pulled down from the doorway of Ephraim to the doorway in the angle, four hundred cubits.

又将俄别以东所看守神殿里的一切金银和器皿，与王宫里的财宝都拿了去，并带人去为质，就回撒玛利亚去了。
And he took all the gold and silver and all the vessels which were in the house of the Lord, under the care of Obed-edom, and all the wealth from the king's house, as well as those whose lives would be the price of broken faith, and went back to Samaria.

以色列王约哈斯的儿子约阿施死后，犹大王约阿施的儿子亚玛谢又活了十五年。
Amaziah, son of Joash, king of Judah, went on living for fifteen years after the death of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel.

亚玛谢其余的事，自始至终不都写在犹大和以色列诸王记上吗？
Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, are they not recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?

自从亚玛谢离弃耶和华之后，在耶路撒冷有人背叛他，他就逃到拉吉。叛党却打发人到拉吉，将他杀了。
Now from the time when Amaziah gave up worshipping the Lord, they made secret designs against him in Jerusalem; and he went in flight to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him and put him to death there.

人就用马将他的尸首驮回，葬在犹大京城他列祖的坟地里。
And they took his body on horseback and put it into the earth with his fathers in the town of David.

犹大众民立亚玛谢的儿子乌西雅（又名亚撒利雅）接续他父作王，那时他年十六岁。
Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.

亚玛谢与他列祖同睡之后，乌西雅收回以禄仍归犹大，又重新修理。
He was the builder of Eloth, which he got back for Judah after the death of the king.

乌西雅登基的时候年十六岁，在耶路撒冷作王五十二年。他母亲名叫耶可利雅，是耶路撒冷人。
Uzziah was sixteen years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for fifty-two years; his mother's name was Jechiliah of Jerusalem.

乌西雅行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他父亚玛谢一切所行的。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as his father Amaziah had done.

通晓神默示，撒迦利亚在世的时候，乌西雅定意寻求神。他寻求耶和华，神就使他亨通。
He gave himself to searching after God in the days of Zechariah, who made men wise in the fear of God; and as long as he was true to the Lord, God made things go well for him.

他出去攻击非利士人，拆毁了迦特城，雅比尼城，和亚实突城。在非利士人中，在亚实突境内，又建筑了些城。
He went out and made war against the Philistines, pulling down the walls of Gath and Jabneh and Ashdod, and building towns in the country round Ashdod and among the Philistines.

神帮助他攻击非利士人和住在姑珥巴力的亚拉伯人，并米乌尼人。
And God gave him help against the Philistines, and against the Arabians living in Gur-baal, and against the Meunim.

亚扪人给乌西雅进贡。他的名声传到埃及，因他甚是强盛。
The Ammonites gave offerings to Uzziah: and news of him went out as far as the limit of Egypt; for he became very great in power.

乌西雅在耶路撒冷的角门和谷门，并城墙转弯之处，建筑城楼，且甚坚固。
Uzziah made towers in Jerusalem, at the doorway in the angle and at the doorway in the valley and at the turn of the wall, arming them.

又在旷野与高原和平原，建筑望楼，挖了许多井，因他的牲畜甚多。又在山地和佳美之地，有农夫和修理葡萄园的人，因为他喜悦农事。
And he put up towers in the waste land and made places for storing water, for he had much cattle, in the low hills and in the table land; and he had farmers and vine-keepers in the mountains and in the fertile land, for he was a lover of farming.

乌西雅又有军兵，照书记耶利和官长玛西雅所数点的，在王的一个将军哈拿尼雅手下，分队出战。
In addition, Uzziah had an army of fighting-men who went out to war in bands, as they had been listed by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the authority of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.

族长，大能勇士的总数共有二千六百人，
The heads of families, the strong men of war, were two thousand, six hundred.

他们手下的军兵共有三十万七千五百人，都有大能，善于争战，帮助王攻击仇敌。
And under their orders was a trained army of three hundred and seven thousand, five hundred, of great strength in war, helping the king against any who came against him.

乌西雅为全军预备盾牌，枪，盔，甲，弓，和甩石的机弦，
And Uzziah had all these forces armed with body-covers and spears and head-covers and coats of metal and bows and stones for sending from leather bands.

又在耶路撒冷使巧匠作机器，安在城楼和角楼上，用以射箭发石。乌西雅的名声传到远方。因为他得了非常的帮助，甚是强盛。
And in Jerusalem he made machines, the invention of expert men, to be placed on the towers and angles of the walls for sending arrows and great stones. And his name was honoured far and wide; for he was greatly helped till he was strong.

他既强盛，就心高气傲，以致行事邪僻，干犯耶和华他的神，进耶和华的殿，要在香坛上烧香。
But when he had become strong, his heart was lifted up in pride, causing his destruction; and he did evil against the Lord his God; for he went into the Temple of the Lord for the purpose of burning perfumes on the altar of perfumes.

祭司亚撒利雅率领耶和华勇敢的祭司八十人，跟随他进去。
And Azariah the priest went in after him, with eighty of the Lord's priests, who were strong men;

他们就阻挡乌西雅王，对他说，乌西雅阿，给耶和华烧香不是你的事，乃是亚伦子孙承接圣职祭司的事。你出圣殿吧。因为你犯了罪。你行这事，耶和华神必不使你得荣耀。
And they made protests to Uzziah the king, and said to him, The burning of perfumes, Uzziah, is not your business but that of the priests, the sons of Aaron, who have been made holy for this work: go out of the holy place, for you have done wrong, and it will not be to your honour before God.

乌西雅就发怒，手拿香炉要烧香。他向祭司发怒的时候，在耶和华殿中香坛旁众祭司面前，额上忽然发出大麻疯。
Then Uzziah was angry; and he had in his hand a vessel for burning perfume; and while his wrath was bitter against the priests, the mark of the leper's disease came out on his brow, before the eyes of the priests in the house of the Lord by the altar of perfumes.

大祭司亚撒利雅和众祭司观看，见他额上发出大麻疯，就催他出殿。他自己也急速出去，因为耶和华降灾与他。
And Azariah, the chief priest, and all the priests, looking at him, saw the mark of the leper on his brow, and they sent him out quickly and he himself went out straight away, for the Lord's punishment had come on him.

乌西雅王长大麻疯直到死日，因此住在别的宫里，与耶和华的殿隔绝。他儿子约坦管理家事，治理国民。
So King Uzziah was a leper till the day of his death, living separately in his private house; for he was cut off from the house of God; and Jotham his son was ruling over his house, judging the people of the land.

乌西雅其余的事，自始至终都是亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚所记的。
Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, were recorded by Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.

乌西雅与他列祖同睡，葬在王陵的田间他列祖的坟地里。因为人说，他是长大麻疯的。他儿子约坦接续他作王。
So Uzziah went to rest with his fathers; and they put his body into the earth in the field used for the resting-place of the kings, for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son became king in his place.

约坦登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王十六年，他母亲名叫耶路沙，是撒督的女儿。
Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king; and he was ruling in Jerusalem for sixteen years; and his mother's name was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.

约坦行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他父乌西雅一切所行的，只是不入耶和华的殿。百姓还行邪僻的事。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as his father Uzziah had done; but he did not go into the Temple of the Lord. And the people still went on in their evil ways.

约坦建立耶和华殿的上门，在俄斐勒城上多有建造，
He put up the higher doorway of the house of the Lord, and did much building on the wall of the Ophel.

又在犹大山地建造城邑，在树林中建筑营寨和高楼。
In addition, he made towns in the hill-country of Judah, and strong buildings and towers in the woodlands.

约坦与亚扪人的王打仗胜了他们，当年他们进贡银一百他连得，小麦一万歌珥，大麦一万歌珥。第二年，第三年也是这样。
He went to war with the king of the children of Ammon and overcame them. That year, the children of Ammon gave him a hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of grain and ten thousand measures of barley. And the children of Ammon gave him the same amount the second year and the third.

约坦在耶和华他神面前行正道，以致日渐强盛。
So Jotham became strong, because in all his ways he made the Lord his guide.

约坦其余的事和一切争战，并他的行为，都写在以色列和犹大列王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars and his ways, are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

他登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王十六年。
He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for sixteen years.

约坦与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫城里。他儿子亚哈斯接续他作王。
And Jotham went to rest with his fathers, and they put his body into the earth in the town of David; and Ahaz his son became king in his place.

亚哈斯登基的时候年二十岁，在耶路撒冷作王十六年。不像他祖大卫行耶和华眼中看为正的事，
Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he was ruling in Jerusalem for sixteen years; he did not do what was right in the eyes of the Lord, like David his father:

却行以色列诸王的道，又铸造巴力的像，
But he went in the ways of the kings of Israel and made images of metal for the Baals.

并且在欣嫩子谷烧香，用火焚烧他的儿女，行耶和华在以色列人面前所驱逐的外邦人那可憎的事。
More than this, he had offerings burned in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and made his children go through fire, copying the disgusting ways of the nations whom the Lord had sent out of the land before the children of Israel.

并在丘坛上，山冈上，各青翠树下献祭烧香。
And he made offerings and had perfumes burned in the high places and on the hills and under every green tree.

所以，耶和华他的神将他交在亚兰王手里。亚兰王打败他，掳了他许多的民，带到大马色去。神又将他交在以色列王手里，以色列王向他大行杀戮。
So the Lord his God gave him up into the hands of the king of Aram; and they overcame him, and took away a great number of his people as prisoners to Damascus. Then he was given into the hands of the king of Israel, who sent great destruction on him.

利玛利的儿子比加一日杀了犹大人十二万，都是勇士，因为他们离弃了耶和华他们列祖的神。
For Pekah, the son of Remaliah, in one day put to death a hundred and twenty thousand men of Judah, all of them good fighting-men; because they had given up the Lord, the God of their fathers.

有一个以法莲中的勇士，名叫细基利，杀了王的儿子玛西雅和管理王宫的押斯利甘，并宰相以利加拿。
And Zichri, a great fighting-man of Ephraim, put to death Maaseiah, the king's son, and Azrikam, the controller of his house, and Elkanah, who was second in authority to the king.

以色列人掳了他们的弟兄，连妇人带儿女共有二十万，又掠了许多的财物，带到撒玛利亚去了。
And the children of Israel took away as prisoners from their brothers, two hundred thousand, women and sons and daughters, and a great store of their goods, and took them to Samaria.

但那里有耶和华的一个先知，名叫俄德，出来迎接往撒玛利亚去的军兵，对他们说，因为耶和华你们列祖的神恼怒犹大人，所以将他们交在你们手里，你们竟怒气冲天，大行杀戮。
But a prophet of the Lord was there, named Oded; and he went out in front of the army which was coming into Samaria and said to them, Truly, because the Lord, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he gave them up into your hands, and you have put them to death in an outburst of wrath stretching up to heaven.

如今你们又有意强逼犹大人和耶路撒冷人作你们的奴婢，你们岂不也有得罪耶和华你们神的事吗？
And now your purpose is to keep the children of Judah and Jerusalem as men-servants and women-servants under your yoke: but are there no sins against the Lord your God to be seen among yourselves?

现在你们当听我说，要将掳来的弟兄释放回去，因为耶和华向你们已经大发烈怒。
And now give ear to me, and send back the prisoners whom you have taken from your brothers: for the wrath of the Lord is burning against you.

于是，以法莲人的几个族长就是约哈难的儿子亚撒利雅，米实利末的儿子比利家，沙龙的儿子耶希西家，哈得莱的儿子亚玛撒起来拦挡出兵回来的人，
Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah, the son of Johanan, Berechiah, the son of Meshillemoth Jehizkiah, the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, put themselves against those who had come from the war,

对他们说，你们不可带进这被掳的人来。你们想要使我们得罪耶和华，加增我们的罪恶过犯。因为我们的罪过甚大，已经有烈怒临到以色列人了。
And said to them, You are not to let these prisoners come here; for what you are designing to do will be a cause of sin against the Lord to us, making even greater our sin and our wrongdoing, which now are great enough, and his wrath is burning against Israel.

于是带兵器的人将掳来的人口和掠来的财物都留在众首领和会众的面前。
So the armed men gave up the prisoners and the goods they had taken to the heads and the meeting of the people.

以上提名的那些人就站起，使被掳的人前来。其中有赤身的，就从所掠的财物中拿出衣服和鞋来，给他们穿，又给他们吃喝，用膏抹他们。其中有软弱的，就使他们骑驴，送到棕树城耶利哥他们弟兄那里，随后就回撒玛利亚去了。
And those men who have been named went up and took the prisoners, clothing those among them who were uncovered, with things from the goods which had been taken in the war, and putting robes on them and shoes on their feet; and they gave them food and drink and oil for their bodies, and seating all the feeble among them on asses, they took them to Jericho, the town of palm-trees, to their people, and then went back to Samaria.

那时，亚哈斯王差遣人去见亚述诸王，求他们帮助。
At that time King Ahaz sent for help to the king of Assyria.

因为以东人又来攻击犹大，掳掠子民。
For the Edomites had come again, attacking Judah and taking away prisoners.

非利士人也来侵占高原和犹大南方的城邑，取了伯示麦，亚雅仑，基低罗，梭哥和属梭哥的乡村，亭纳和属亭纳的乡村，瑾锁和属瑾锁的乡村，就住在那里。
And the Philistines, forcing their way into the towns of the lowlands and the south of Judah, had taken Beth-shemesh and Aijalon and Gederoth and Soco, with their daughter-towns, as well as Timnah and Gimzo and their daughter-towns, and were living there.

因为以色列王亚哈斯在犹大放肆，大大干犯耶和华，所以耶和华使犹大卑微。
For the Lord made Judah low, because of Ahaz, king of Israel; for he had given up all self-control in Judah, sinning greatly against the Lord.

亚述王提革拉毗尼色上来，却没有帮助他，反倒欺凌他。
Then Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, came to him, but was a cause of trouble and not of strength to him.

亚哈斯从耶和华殿里和王宫中，并首领家内所取的财宝给了亚述王，这也无济于事。
For Ahaz took a part of the wealth from the house of the Lord, and from the house of the king and of the great men, and gave it to the king of Assyria; but it was no help to him.

这亚哈斯王在急难的时候，越发得罪耶和华。
And in the time of his trouble, this same King Ahaz did even more evil against the Lord.

他祭祀攻击他的大马色之神，说，因为亚兰王的神帮助他们，我也献祭与他，他好帮助我。但那些神使他和以色列众人败亡了。
For he made offerings to the gods of Damascus, who were attacking him, and said, Because the gods of the kings of Aram are giving them help, I will make offerings to them so that they may give me help. But they were the cause of his downfall, and of that of all Israel.

亚哈斯将神殿里的器皿都聚了来，毁坏了，且封锁耶和华殿的门。在耶路撒冷各处的拐角建筑祭坛，
And Ahaz got together the vessels of the house of God, cutting up all the vessels of the house of God, and shutting the doors of the Lord's house; and he made altars in every part of Jerusalem.

又在犹大各城建立丘坛，与别神烧香，惹动耶和华他列祖神的怒气。
And in every town of Judah he made high places where perfumes were burned to other gods, awaking the wrath of the Lord, the God of his fathers.

亚哈斯其余的事和他的行为，自始至终都写在犹大和以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of his acts and all his ways, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

亚哈斯与他列祖同睡，葬在耶路撒冷城里，没有送入以色列诸王的坟墓中。他儿子希西家接续他作王。
And Ahaz went to rest with his fathers, and they put his body into the earth in Jerusalem; but they did not put him in the resting-place of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son became king in his place.

希西家登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王二十九年。他母亲名叫亚比雅，是撒迦利雅的女儿。
Hezekiah became king when he was twenty-five years old; and he was king in Jerusalem for twenty-nine years; and his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.

希西家行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他祖大卫一切所行的。
He did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, as his father David had done.

元年正月，开了耶和华殿的门，重新修理。
In the first year of his rule, in the first month, opening the doors of the Lord's house, he made them strong.

他召众祭司和利未人来，聚集在东边的宽阔处，
And he sent for the priests and the Levites, and got them together in the wide place on the east side,

对他们说，利未人哪，当听我说，现在你们要洁净自己，又洁净耶和华你们列祖神的殿，从圣所中除去污秽之物。
And said to them, Give ear to me, O Levites: now make yourselves holy, and make holy the house of the Lord, the God of your fathers, and take away everything unclean from the holy place.

我们列祖犯了罪，行耶和华我们神眼中看为恶的事，离弃他，转脸背向他的居所，
For our fathers have done evil, sinning in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have given him up, turning away their faces from the house of the Lord, and turning their backs on him.

封锁廊门，吹灭灯火，不在圣所中向以色列神烧香，或献燔祭。
The doors of his house have been shut and the lights put out; no perfumes have been burned or offerings made to the God of Israel in his holy place.

因此，耶和华的忿怒临到犹大和耶路撒冷，将其中的人抛来抛去，令人惊骇，嗤笑，正如你们亲眼所见的。
And so the wrath of the Lord has come on Judah and Jerusalem, and he has given them up to be a cause of fear and wonder and shame, as your eyes have seen.

所以我们的祖宗倒在刀下，我们的妻子儿女也被掳掠。
For see, our fathers have been put to death with the sword, and our sons and daughters and wives have been taken away prisoners because of this.

现在我心中有意与耶和华以色列的神立约，好使他的烈怒转离我们。
Now it is my purpose to make an agreement with the Lord, the God of Israel, so that the heat of his wrath may be turned away from us.

我的众子阿，现在不要懈怠。因为耶和华拣选你们站在他面前事奉他，与他烧香。
My sons, take care now: for you have been marked out by the Lord to come before him and to be his servants, burning offerings to him.

于是，利未人哥辖的子孙，亚玛赛的儿子玛哈，亚撒利雅的儿子约珥。米拉利的子孙，亚伯底的儿子基士，耶哈利勒的儿子亚撒利雅。革顺的子孙，薪玛的儿子约亚，约亚的儿子伊甸，
Then the Levites took their places; Mahath, the son of Amasai, and Joel, the son of Azariah, among the Kohathites; and of the sons of Merari, Kish, the son of Abdi, and Azariah, the son of Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah, the son of Zimmah, and Eden, the son of Joah;

以利撒反的子孙申利和耶利。亚萨的子孙撒迦利雅和玛探雅。
And of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah;

希幔的子孙耶歇和示每。耶杜顿的子孙示玛雅和乌薛。
And of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.

起来聚集他们的弟兄，洁净自己，照着王的吩咐，耶和华的命令，进去洁净耶和华的殿。
And they got their brothers together and made themselves holy, and went in, as the king had said by the word of the Lord, to make the house of the Lord clean.

祭司进入耶和华的殿要洁净殿，将殿中所有污秽之物搬到耶和华殿的院内，利未人接去，搬到外头汲沦溪边。
And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the Lord to make it clean, and everything unclean which was to be seen in the Temple of the Lord they took out into the outer square of the Lord's house, and the Levites got it together and took it away to the stream Kidron.

从正月初一日洁净起，初八日到了耶和华的殿廊，用八日的工夫洁净耶和华的殿，到正月十六日才洁净完了。
On the first day of the first month the work of making the house holy was started, and on the eighth day they came to the covered way of the Lord; in eight days they made the Lord's house holy, and on the sixteenth day of the first month the work was done.

于是，他们晋见希西家王，说，我们已将耶和华的全殿和燔祭坛，并坛的一切器皿，陈设饼的桌子，与桌子的一切器皿都洁净了。
Then they went in to King Hezekiah and said, We have made all the house of the Lord clean, as well as the altar of burned offerings with all its vessels, and the table for the holy bread, with all its vessels.

并且亚哈斯王在位犯罪的时候所废弃的器皿，我们预备齐全，且洁净了，现今都在耶和华的坛前。
And all the vessels which were turned out by King Ahaz in his sin while he was king, we have put in order and made holy, and now they are in their places before the altar of the Lord.

希西家王清早起来，聚集城里的首领都上耶和华的殿。
Then Hezekiah the king got up early, and got together the great men of the town, and went up to the house of the Lord.

牵了七只公牛，七只公羊，七只羊羔，七只公山羊，要为国，为殿，为犹大人作赎罪祭。王吩咐亚伦的子孙众祭司，献在耶和华的坛上，
And they took with them seven oxen and seven male sheep and seven lambs and seven he-goats as a sin-offering for the kingdom and for the holy house and for Judah. And he gave orders to the sons of Aaron, the priests, that these were to be offered on the altar of the Lord.

就宰了公牛，祭司接血洒在坛上，宰了公羊，把血洒在坛上，又宰了羊羔，也把血洒在坛上。
So they put the oxen to death and their blood was given to the priests to be drained out against the altar; then they put the male sheep to death, draining out their blood against the altar, and they put the lambs to death, draining out their blood against the altar.

把那作赎罪祭的公山羊牵到王和会众面前，他们就按手在其上。
Then they took the he-goats for the sin-offering, placing them before the king and the meeting of the people, and they put their hands on them:

祭司宰了羊，将血献在坛上作赎罪祭，为以色列众人赎罪，因为王吩咐将燔祭和赎罪祭为以色列众人献上。
And the priests put them to death, and made a sin-offering with their blood on the altar, to take away the sin of all Israel: for the king gave orders that the burned offering and the sin-offering were for all Israel.

王又派利未人在耶和华殿中敲钹，鼓瑟，弹琴，乃照大卫和他先见迦得，并先知拿单所吩咐的，就是耶和华借先知所吩咐的。
Then he put the Levites in their places in the house of the Lord, with brass and corded instruments of music as ordered by David and Gad, the king's seer, and Nathan the prophet: for the order was the Lord's, given by his prophets.

利未人拿大卫的乐器，祭司拿号，一同站立。
So the Levites took their places with David's instruments, and the priests with their horns.

希西家吩咐在坛上献燔祭，燔祭一献，就唱赞美耶和华的歌，用号，并用以色列王大卫的乐器相和。
And Hezekiah gave the word for the burned offering to be offered on the altar. And when the burned offering was started, then the song of the Lord was started, with the blowing of horns and with all the instruments of David, king of Israel.

会众都敬拜，歌唱的歌唱，吹号的吹号，如此直到燔祭献完了。
And all the people gave worship, to the sound of songs and the blowing of horns; and this went on till the burned offering was ended.

献完了祭，王和一切跟随的人都俯伏敬拜。
And at the end of the offering, the king and all who were present with him gave worship with bent heads.

希西家王与众首领又吩咐利未人用大卫和先见亚萨的诗词颂赞耶和华。他们就欢欢喜喜地颂赞耶和华，低头敬拜。
Then King Hezekiah and the captains gave orders to the Levites to give praise to God in the words of David and Asaph the seer. And they made songs of praise with joy, and with bent heads gave worship.

希西家说，你们既然归耶和华为圣，就要前来把祭物和感谢祭奉到耶和华殿里。会众就把祭物和感谢祭奉来，凡甘心乐意的也将燔祭奉来。
Then Hezekiah made answer and said, Now that you have given yourselves to the Lord, come near and take offerings and praise-offerings into the house of the Lord. So all the people took in offerings and praise-offerings: and those whose hearts were moved, took in burned offerings.

会众所奉的燔祭如下，公牛七十只，公羊一百只，羊羔二百只，这都是作燔祭献给耶和华的。
The number of burned offerings which the people took in was seventy oxen, a hundred male sheep, and two hundred lambs: all these were for burned offerings to the Lord.

又有分别为圣之物，公牛六百只，绵羊三千只。
And the holy things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.

但祭司太少，不能剥尽燔祭牲的皮，所以他们的弟兄利未人帮助他们，直等燔祭的事完了，又等别的祭司自洁了。因为利未人诚心自洁，胜过祭司。
There were not enough priests for the work of cutting up all the burned offerings; so their brothers the Levites gave them help till the work was done and the priests had made themselves holy: for the Levites were more upright in heart to make themselves holy than the priests.

燔祭和平安祭牲的脂油，并燔祭同献的奠祭甚多。这样，耶和华殿中的事务俱都齐备了（或作就整顿了）。
And there was a great amount of burned offerings, with the fat of the peace-offerings and the drink offerings for every burned offering. So the work of the Lord's house was put in order.

这事办的甚速，希西家和众民都喜乐，是因神为众民所预备的。
And Hezekiah and all the people were full of joy, because God had made the people ready: for the thing was done suddenly.

希西家差遣人去见以色列和犹大众人，又写信给以法莲和玛拿西人，叫他们到耶路撒冷耶和华的殿，向耶和华以色列的神守逾越节。
Then Hezekiah sent word to all Israel and Judah, and sent letters to Ephraim and Manasseh, requesting them to come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover to the Lord, the God of Israel.

因为王和众首领，并耶路撒冷全会众已经商议，要在二月内守逾越节。
For the king, after discussion with his chiefs and all the body of the people in Jerusalem, had made a decision to keep the Passover in the second month.

正月（原文作那时）间他们不能守。因为自洁的祭司尚不敷用，百姓也没有聚集在耶路撒冷。
It was not possible to keep it at that time, because not enough priests had made themselves holy, and the people had not come together in Jerusalem.

王与全会众都以这事为善。
And the thing was right in the eyes of the king and all the people.

于是定了命令，传遍以色列，从别是巴直到但，使他们都来，在耶路撒冷向耶和华以色列的神守逾越节。因为照所写的例，守这节的不多了（或作因为民许久没有照所写的例守节了）。
So it was ordered that word was to be sent out through all Israel, from Beer-sheba to Dan, that they were to come to keep the Passover to the Lord, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem: because they had not kept it in great numbers in agreement with the law.

驿卒就把王和众首领的信，遵着王命传遍以色列和犹大。信内说，以色列人哪，你们当转向耶和华亚伯拉罕，以撒，以色列的神，好叫他转向你们这脱离亚述王手的余民。
So runners went with letters from the king and his chiefs through all Israel and Judah, by the order of the king, saying, O children of Israel, come back again to the Lord, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, so that he may come again to that small band of you which has been kept safe out of the hands of the kings of Assyria.

你们不要效法你们列祖和你们的弟兄。他们干犯耶和华他们列祖的神，以致耶和华丢弃他们，使他们败亡（或作令人惊骇），正如你们所见的。
Do not be like your fathers and your brothers, who were sinners against the Lord, the God of their fathers, so that he made them a cause of fear, as you see.

现在不要象你们列祖硬着颈项，只要归顺耶和华，进入他的圣所，就是永远成圣的居所。又要事奉耶和华你们的神，好使他的烈怒转离你们。
Now do not be hard-hearted, as your fathers were; but give yourselves to the Lord, and come into his holy place, which he has made his for ever, and be the servants of the Lord your God, so that the heat of his wrath may be turned away from you.

你们若转向耶和华，你们的弟兄和儿女必在掳掠他们的人面前蒙怜恤，得以归回这地，因为耶和华你们的神有恩典，施怜悯。你们若转向他，他必不转脸不顾你们。
For if you come back to the Lord, those who took away your brothers and your children will have pity on them, and let them come back to this land: for the Lord your God is full of grace and mercy, and his face will not be turned away from you if you come back to him.

驿卒就由这城跑到那城，传遍了以法莲，玛拿西，直到西布伦。那里的人却戏笑他们，讥诮他们。
So the runners went from town to town through all the country of Ephraim and Manasseh as far as Zebulun: but they were laughed at and made sport of.

然而亚设，玛拿西，西布伦中也有人自卑，来到耶路撒冷。
However, some of Asher and Manasseh and Zebulun put away their pride and came to Jerusalem.

神也感动犹大人，使他们一心遵行王与众首领凭耶和华之言所发的命令。
And in Judah the power of God gave them one heart to do the orders of the king and the captains, which were taken as the word of the Lord.

二月，有许多人在耶路撒冷聚集，成为大会，要守除酵节。
So a very great number of people came together at Jerusalem to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month.

他们起来，把耶路撒冷的祭坛和烧香的坛尽都除去，抛在汲沦溪中。
And they got to work and took away all the altars in Jerusalem, and they put all the vessels for burning perfumes into the stream Kidron.

二月十四日，宰了逾越节的羊羔。祭司与利未人觉得惭愧，就洁净自己，把燔祭奉到耶和华殿中，
Then on the fourteenth day of the second month they put the Passover lambs to death: and the priests and the Levites were shamed, and made themselves holy and took burned offerings into the house of the Lord.

遵着神人摩西的律法，照例站在自己的地方。祭司从利未人手里接过血来，洒在坛上。
And they took their places in their right order, as it was ordered in the law of Moses, the man of God: the priests draining out on the altar the blood given them by the Levites.

会中有许多人尚未自洁，所以利未人为一切不洁之人宰逾越节的羊羔，使他们在耶和华面前成为圣洁。
For there were still a number of the people there who had not made themselves holy: so the Levites had to put Passover lambs to death for those who were not clean, to make them holy to the Lord.

以法莲，玛拿西，以萨迦，西布伦有许多人尚未自洁，他们却也吃逾越节的羊羔，不合所记录的定例。希西家为他们祷告说，凡专心寻求神，就是耶和华他列祖之神的，虽不照着圣所洁净之礼自洁，求至善的耶和华也饶恕他。
For a great number of the people from Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not made themselves clean, but they took the Passover meal, though not in the right way. For Hezekiah had made prayer for them, saying, May the good Lord have mercy on everyone


Who, with all his heart, is turned to God the Lord, the God of his fathers, even if he has not been made clean after the rules of the holy place.

耶和华垂听希西家的祷告，就饶恕（原文作医治）百姓。
And the Lord gave ear to Hezekiah, and made the people well.

在耶路撒冷的以色列人大大喜乐，守除酵节七日。利未人和祭司用响亮的乐器，日日颂赞耶和华。
So the children of Israel who were present in Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread for seven days with great joy: and the Levites and the priests gave praise to the Lord day by day, making melody to the Lord with loud instruments.

希西家慰劳一切善于事奉耶和华的利未人。于是众人吃节筵七日，又献平安祭，且向耶和华他们列祖的神认罪。
And Hezekiah said kind words to the Levites who were expert in the ordering of the worship of the Lord: so they kept the feast for seven days, offering peace-offerings and praising the Lord, the God of their fathers.

全会众商议，要再守节七日。于是欢欢喜喜地又守节七日。
And by the desire of all the people, the feast went on for another seven days, and they kept the seven days with joy.

犹大王希西家赐给会众公牛一千只，羊七千只为祭物。众首领也赐给会众公牛一千只，羊一万只，并有许多的祭司洁净自己。
For Hezekiah, king of Judah, gave to the people for offerings, a thousand oxen and seven thousand sheep; and the rulers gave a thousand oxen and ten thousand sheep; and a great number of priests made themselves holy.

犹大全会众，祭司，利未人，并那从以色列地来的会众和寄居的人，以及犹大寄居的人，尽都喜乐。
And all the people of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and those who had come from Israel, and men from other lands who had come from Israel or who were living in Judah, were glad with great joy.

这样，在耶路撒冷大有喜乐，自从以色列王大卫儿子所罗门的时候，在耶路撒冷没有这样的喜乐。
So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for nothing like this had been seen in Jerusalem from the time of Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel.

那时，祭司，利未人起来，为民祝福。他们的声音蒙神垂听，他们的祷告达到天上的圣所。
Then the priests and the Levites gave the people a blessing: and the voice of their prayer went up to the holy place of God in heaven.

这事既都完毕，在那里的以色列众人就到犹大的城邑，打碎柱像，砍断木偶，又在犹大，便雅悯，以法莲，玛拿西遍地将丘坛和祭坛拆毁净尽。于是以色列众人各回各城，各归各地。
Now when all this was over, all the men of Israel who were present went out into the towns of Judah, causing the stone pillars to be broken up and the wood pillars to be cut down, pulling down the high places and the altars in all Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Ephraim and Manasseh, till all were gone. Then all the children of Israel went back to their towns, every man to his property.

希西家派定祭司利未人的班次，各按各职献燔祭和平安祭，又在耶和华殿（原文作营）门内事奉，称谢颂赞耶和华。
Then Hezekiah put in order the divisions of the priests and Levites, every man in his division, in relation to his work, for the burned offerings and peace-offerings, and for the ordering of worship and for giving praise at the doors of the Lord's house.

王又从自己的产业中定出分来为燔祭，就是早晚的燔祭和安息日，月朔，并节期的燔祭，都是按耶和华律法上所载的。
And he gave the king's part of his private property for the burned offerings, that is, for the morning and evening offerings, and the offerings for the Sabbath and the new moons and the regular feasts, as it is recorded in the law of the Lord.

又吩咐住耶路撒冷的百姓将祭司，利未人所应得的分给他们，使他们专心遵守耶和华的律法。
In addition, he gave orders to the people of Jerusalem to give to the priests and Levites that part which was theirs by right, so that they might be strong in keeping the law of the Lord.

谕旨一出，以色列人就把初熟的五谷，新酒，油，蜜，和田地的出产多多送来，又把各物的十分之一送来的极多。
And when the order was made public, straight away the children of Israel gave, in great amounts, the first-fruits of their grain and wine and oil and honey, and of the produce of their fields; and they took in a tenth part of everything, a great store.

住犹大各城的以色列人和犹大人也将牛羊的十分之一，并分别为圣归耶和华他们神之物，就是十分取一之物，尽都送来，积成堆垒。
And the children of Israel and Judah, who were living in the towns of Judah came with the tenth part of their oxen and sheep, and a tenth of all the holy things which were to be given to the Lord their God, and put them in great masses.

从三月积起，到七月才完。
The first store of things was put down in the third month, and in the seventh month the masses were complete.

希西家和众首领来，看见堆垒，就称颂耶和华，又为耶和华的民以色列人祝福。
And when Hezekiah and the rulers came and saw all the store of goods, they gave praise to the Lord and to his people Israel.

希西家向祭司，利未人查问这堆垒。
Then Hezekiah put questions to the priests and Levites about the store of goods.

撒督家的大祭司亚撒利雅回答说，自从民将供物送到耶和华殿以来，我们不但吃饱，且剩下的甚多。因为耶和华赐福给他的民，所剩下的才这样丰盛。
And Azariah, the chief priest, of the family of Zadok, said in answer, From the time when the people first came with their offerings into the house of the Lord, we have had food enough, and more than enough: for the blessing of the Lord is on his people; and there is this great store which has not been used.

希西家吩咐在耶和华殿里预备仓房，他们就预备了。
Then Hezekiah said that store-rooms were to be made ready in the house of the Lord; and this was done.

他们诚心将供物和十分取一之物，并分别为圣之物，都搬入仓内。利未人歌楠雅掌管这事，他兄弟示每为副管。
And in them they put all the offerings and the tenths and the holy things, keeping nothing back, and over them was Conaniah the Levite, with Shimei his brother second to him.

耶歇，亚撒细雅，拿哈，亚撒黑，耶利末，约撒拔，以列，伊斯玛基雅，玛哈，比拿雅都是督理，在歌楠雅和他兄弟示每的手下，是希西家王和管理神殿的亚撒利雅所派的。
And Jehiel and Azaziah and Nahath and Asahel and Jerimoth and Jozabad and Eliel and Ismachiah and Mahath and Benaiah were overseers, under the directions of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the order of Hezekiah the king and Azariah, the ruler of the house of God.

守东门的利未人音拿的儿子可利，掌管乐意献与神的礼物，发放献与耶和华的供物和至圣的物。
And Kore, the son of Imnah the Levite, the keeper of the east door, had control of the offerings freely given to God, and the distribution of the offerings of the Lord and the most holy things.

在他手下有伊甸，珉雅珉，耶书亚，示玛雅，亚玛利雅，示迦尼雅，在祭司的各城里供紧要的职任，无论弟兄大小，都按着班次分给他们。
And under him were Eden and Miniamin and Jeshua and Shemaiah and Amariah and Shecaniah, in the towns of the priests, who were made responsible for giving it to all their brothers, by divisions, to small and great:

按家谱，三岁以外的男丁，凡每日进耶和华殿，按班次供职的，也分给他。
As well as to all the males, of three years old and over, listed by their families, who went into the house of the Lord to do what was needed day by day, for their special work with their divisions.

又按宗族家谱分给祭司，按班次职任分给二十岁以外的利未人，
And the families of the priests were listed by their fathers' names, but the Levites, of twenty years old and over, were listed in relation to their work in their divisions;

又按家谱计算，分给他们会中的妻子，儿女。因他们身供要职，自洁成圣。
And in the lists were all their little ones and their wives and their sons and daughters, through all the people: they made themselves holy in the positions which they were given.

按名派定的人要把应得的分给亚伦子孙，住在各城郊野，祭司所有的男丁和一切载入家谱的利未人。
And as for the sons of Aaron, the priests, living in the country on the outskirts of their towns, every different town there were men, marked out by name, to give their part of the goods to all the males among the priests, and to all who were listed among the Levites.

希西家在犹大遍地这样办理，行耶和华他神眼中看为善为正为忠的事。
This Hezekiah did through all Judah; he did what was good and right and true before the Lord his God.

凡他所行的，无论是办神殿的事，是遵律法守诫命，是寻求他的神，都是尽心去行，无不亨通。
And for everything he undertook, in connection with the work of the house of God and his law and orders, he got directions from God and did it with serious purpose; and things went well for him.

这虔诚的事以后，亚述王西拿基立来侵入犹大，围困一切坚固城，想要攻破占据。
Now after these things and this true-hearted work, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came into Judah, and put his army in position before the walled towns of Judah, designing to make his way into them by force.

希西家见西拿基立来，定意要攻打耶路撒冷，
And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come for the purpose of fighting against Jerusalem,

就与首领和勇士商议，塞住城外的泉源。他们就都帮助他。
He took up with his rulers and men of war the question of stopping up the water-springs outside the town; and they gave him their support.

于是有许多人聚集，塞了一切泉源，并通流国中的小河，说，亚述王来，为何让他得着许多水呢？
So they got together a great number of people, and had all the water-springs and the stream flowing through the land stopped up, saying, Why let the kings of Assyria come and have much water?

希西家力图自强，就修筑所有拆毁的城墙，高与城楼相齐。在城外又筑一城，坚固大卫城的米罗，制造了许多军器，盾牌。
Then he took heart, building up the wall where it was broken down, and making its towers higher, and building another wall outside; and he made strong the Millo in the town of David, and got together a great store of all sorts of instruments of war.

设立军长管理百姓，将他们招聚在城门的宽阔处，用话勉励他们，说，
And he put war chiefs over the people, and sent for them all to come together to him in the wide place at the doorway into the town, and to give them heart he said to them,

你们当刚强壮胆，不要因亚述王和跟随他的大军恐惧，惊慌。因为与我们同在的，比与他们同在的更大。
Be strong and take heart; have no fear, and do not be troubled on account of the king of Assyria and all the great army with him: for there is a greater with us.

与他们同在的是肉臂，与我们同在的是耶和华我们的神，他必帮助我们，为我们争战。百姓就靠犹大王希西家的话，安然无惧了。
With him is an arm of flesh; but we have the Lord our God, helping us and fighting for us. And the people put their faith in what Hezekiah, king of Judah, said.

此后，亚述王西拿基立和他的全军攻打拉吉，就差遣臣仆到耶路撒冷见犹大王希西家和一切在耶路撒冷的犹大人，说，
After this, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, sent his servants to Jerusalem (at that time he was stationed with all his army in front of Lachish), to say to Hezekiah and all the men of Judah in Jerusalem,

亚述王西拿基立如此说，你们倚靠什么，还在耶路撒冷受困呢？
Sennacherib, king of Assyria, says, In what are you placing your hope, waiting here in the walled town of Jerusalem?

希西家对你们说耶和华我们的神必救我们脱离亚述王的手，这不是诱惑你们，使你们受饥渴而死吗？
Is it not Hezekiah who has got you to do it, causing your death from need of food and water, by saying, The Lord our God will give us salvation out of the hands of the king of Assyria?

这希西家岂不是废去耶和华的丘坛和祭坛，吩咐犹大与耶路撒冷的人说你们当在一个坛前敬拜，在其上烧香吗？
Has not this same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, saying to Judah and Jerusalem, Give worship before one altar only, burning offerings on it?

我与我列祖向列邦所行的，你们岂不知道吗？列邦的神何尝能救自己的国脱离我手呢？
Have you no knowledge of what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of every land? were the gods of the nations of those lands able to keep their land from falling into my hands?

我列祖所灭的国，那些神中谁能救自己的民脱离我手呢？难道你们的神能救你们脱离我手吗？
Who was there among all the gods of those nations, which my fathers put to destruction, who was able to keep his people safe from my hands? and is it possible that your God will keep you safe from my hands?

所以你们不要叫希西家这样欺哄诱惑你们，也不要信他。因为没有一国一邦的神能救自己的民脱离我手和我列祖的手，何况你们的神更不能救你们脱离我的手。
So do not be tricked by Hezekiah or let him get you to do this, and do not put any faith in what he says: for no god of any nation or kingdom has been able to keep his people safe from my hands, or the hands of my fathers: how much less will your God keep you safe from my hands!

西拿基立的臣仆还有别的话毁谤耶和华神和他仆人希西家。
And his servants said even more against the Lord God and against his servant Hezekiah.

西拿基立也写信毁谤耶和华以色列的神说，列邦的神既不能救他的民脱离我手，希西家的神也不能救他的民脱离我手了。
And he sent letters, in addition, to put shame on the Lord, the God of Israel, and to say evil against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not been able to keep their people safe from my hands, no more will the God of Hezekiah keep his people safe from my hands.

亚述王的臣仆用犹大言语向耶路撒冷城上的民大声呼叫，要惊吓他们，扰乱他们，以便取城。
These things they said, crying out with a loud voice in the Jews' language, to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, with the purpose of troubling them and putting fear into them, so that they might take the town;

他们论耶路撒冷的神，如同论世上人手所造的神一样。
Talking of the God of Jerusalem as if he was like the gods of the peoples of the earth, the work of men's hands.

希西家王和亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚因此祷告，向天呼求。
And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, made prayer because of this, crying out to heaven.

耶和华就差遣一个使者进入亚述王营中，把所有大能的勇士和官长，将帅尽都灭了。亚述王满面含羞地回到本国，进了他神的庙中，有他亲生的儿子在那里用刀杀了他。
And the Lord sent an angel who put to death all the men of war and the chiefs and the captains in the army of the king of Assyria. So he went back to his country in shame. And when he came into the house of his god, his sons, the offspring of his body, put him to death there with the sword.

这样，耶和华救希西家和耶路撒冷的居民脱离亚述王西拿基立的手，也脱离一切仇敌的手，又赐他们四境平安。
So the Lord gave Hezekiah and the people of Jerusalem salvation from the power of Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, and from all others, giving them rest on every side.

有许多人到耶路撒冷，将供物献与耶和华，又将宝物送给犹大王希西家。此后，希西家在列邦人的眼中看为尊大。
And great numbers came to Jerusalem with offerings for the Lord, and things of great price for Hezekiah, king of Judah: so that he was honoured among all nations from that time.

那时希西家病得要死，就祷告耶和华，耶和华应允他，赐他一个兆头。
In those days Hezekiah was ill and near death; and he made prayer to the Lord, and the Lord in answer gave him a sign.

希西家却没有照他所蒙的恩报答耶和华。因他心里骄傲，所以忿怒要临到他和犹大并耶路撒冷。
But Hezekiah did not do as had been done to him; for his heart was lifted up in pride; and so wrath came on him and on Judah and Jerusalem.

但希西家和耶路撒冷的居民觉得心里骄傲，就一同自卑，以致耶和华的忿怒在希西家的日子没有临到他们。
But then, Hezekiah, in sorrow for what he had done, put away his pride; and he and all Jerusalem made themselves low, so that the wrath of the Lord did not come on them in Hezekiah's life-time.

希西家大有尊荣资财，建造府库，收藏金银，宝石，香料，盾牌，和各样的宝器，
And Hezekiah had very great wealth and honour; and he made himself store-houses for his gold and silver and jewels and spices, and for body-covers and all sorts of beautiful vessels.

又建造仓房，收藏五谷，新酒，和油，又为各类牲畜盖棚立圈。
And store-houses for the produce of grain and wine and oil; and buildings for all sorts of beasts and flocks.

并且建立城邑，还有许多的羊群牛群，因为神赐他极多的财产。
And he made towns for himself, and got together much property in flocks and herds: for God had given him great wealth.

这希西家也塞住基训的上源，引水直下，流在大卫城的西边。希西家所行的事尽都亨通。
It was Hezekiah who had the higher spring of the water of Gihon stopped, and the water taken down on the west side of the town of David. In everything he undertook, Hezekiah did well.

惟有一件事，就是巴比伦王差遣使者来见希西家，访问国中所现的奇事。这件事神离开他，要试验他，好知道他心内如何。
However, in the business of the representatives sent by the rulers of Babylon to get news of the wonder which had taken place in the land, God gave up guiding him, testing him to see what was in his heart.

希西家其余的事和他的善行，都写在亚摩斯的儿子先知以赛亚的默示书上，和犹大，以色列的诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and the good he did, are recorded in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, and in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

希西家与他列祖同睡，葬在大卫子孙的高陵上。他死的时候，犹大人和耶路撒冷的居民都尊敬他。他儿子玛拿西接续他作王。
So Hezekiah went to rest with his fathers, and they put his body into the higher part of the resting-places of the sons of David: and all Judah and the people of Jerusalem gave him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son became king in his place.

玛拿西登基的时候年十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王五十五年。
Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he was ruling for fifty-five years in Jerusalem.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法耶和华在以色列人面前赶出的外邦人那可憎的事，
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, copying the disgusting ways of the nations whom the Lord had sent out of the land before the children of Israel.

重新建筑他父希西家所拆毁的丘坛，又为巴力筑坛，作木偶，且敬拜事奉天上的万象，
For he put up again the high places which had been pulled down by his father Hezekiah; and he made altars for the Baals, and pillars of wood, and was a worshipper and servant of all the stars of heaven;

在耶和华的殿宇中筑坛耶和华曾指着这殿说，我的名必永远在耶路撒冷。
And he made altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord had said, In Jerusalem will my name be for ever.

他在耶和华殿的两院中为天上的万象筑坛，
And he made altars for all the stars of heaven in the two outer squares of the house of the Lord.

并在欣嫩子谷使他的儿女经火，又观兆，用法术，行邪术，立交鬼的和行巫术的，多行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，惹动他的怒气，
More than this, he made his children go through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom; and he made use of secret arts, and signs for reading the future, and unnatural powers, and gave positions to those who had control of spirits and to wonder-workers: he did much evil in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to wrath.

又在神殿内立雕刻的偶像。神曾对大卫和他儿子所罗门说，我在以色列各支派中所选择的耶路撒冷和这殿，必立我的名直到永远。
And he put the image he had made in the house of God, the house of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, the town which I have made mine out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:

以色列人若谨守遵行我借摩西所吩咐他们的一切法度，律例，典章，我就不再使他们挪移离开我所赐给他们列祖之地。
And never again will I let the feet of Israel be moved out of the land which I have given to their fathers; if only they will take care to do all my orders, even all the law and the orders and the rules given to them by Moses.

玛拿西引诱犹大和耶路撒冷的居民，以致他们行恶比耶和华在以色列人面前所灭的列国更甚。
And Manasseh made Judah and the people of Jerusalem go out of the true way, so that they did more evil than those nations whom the Lord gave up to destruction before the children of Israel.

耶和华警戒玛拿西和他的百姓，他们却是不听。
And the word of the Lord came to Manasseh and his people, but they gave no attention.

所以耶和华使亚述王的将帅来攻击他们，用铙钩钩住玛拿西，用铜链锁住他，带到巴比伦去。
So the Lord sent against them the captains of the army of Assyria, who made Manasseh a prisoner and took him away in chains to Babylon.

他在急难的时候，就恳求耶和华他的神，且在他列祖的神面前极其自卑。
And crying out to the Lord his God in his trouble, he made himself low before the God of his fathers,

他祈祷耶和华，耶和华就允准他的祈求，垂听他的祷告，使他归回耶路撒冷，仍坐国位。玛拿西这才知道惟独耶和华是神。
And made prayer to him; and in answer to his prayer God let him come back to Jerusalem and to his kingdom. Then Manasseh was certain that the Lord was God.

此后，玛拿西在大卫城外，从谷内基训西边直到鱼门口，建筑城墙，环绕俄斐勒，这墙筑得甚高。又在犹大各坚固城内设立勇敢的军长。
After this he made an outer wall for the town of David, on the west side of Gihon in the valley, as far as the way into the town by the fish doorway; and he put a very high wall round the Ophel; and he put captains of the army in all the walled towns of Judah.

并除掉外邦人的神像与耶和华殿中的偶像，又将他在耶和华殿的山上和耶路撒冷所筑的各坛都拆毁抛在城外。
He took away the strange gods and the image out of the house of the Lord, and all the altars he had put up on the hill of the Lord's house and in Jerusalem, and put them out of the town.

重修耶和华的祭坛，在坛上献平安祭，感谢祭，吩咐犹大人事奉耶和华以色列的神。
And he put the altar of the Lord in order, offering peace-offerings and praise-offerings on it, and said that all Judah were to be servants of the Lord, the God of Israel.

百姓却仍在丘坛上献祭，只献给耶和华他们的神。
However, the people still made offerings in the high places, but only to the Lord their God.

玛拿西其余的事和祷告他神的话，并先见奉耶和华以色列神的名警戒他的言语，都写在以色列诸王记上。
Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words which the seers said to him in the name of the Lord, the God of Israel, are recorded among the acts of the kings of Israel.

他的祷告，与神怎样应允他，他未自卑以前的罪愆过犯，并在何处建筑丘坛，设立亚舍拉和雕刻的偶像，都写在何赛的书上。
And the prayer which he made to God, and how God gave him an answer, and all his sin and his wrongdoing, and the places where he made high places and put up pillars of wood and images, before he put away his pride, are recorded in the history of the seers.

玛拿西与他列祖同睡，葬在自己的宫院里。他儿子亚们接续他作王。
So Manasseh went to rest with his fathers, and they put his body to rest in his house, and Amon his son became king in his place.

亚们登基的时候年二十二岁，在耶路撒冷作王二年。
Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king; and he was ruling for two years in Jerusalem.

他行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，效法他父玛拿西所行的，祭祀事奉他父玛拿西所雕刻的偶像，
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, as Manasseh his father had done; and Amon made offerings to all the images which his father Manasseh had made, and was their servant.

不在耶和华面前像他父玛拿西自卑。这亚们所犯的罪越犯越大。
He did not make himself low before the Lord, as his father Manasseh had done, but went on sinning more and more.

他的臣仆背叛，在宫里杀了他。
And his servants made a secret design against him, and put him to death in his house.

但国民杀了那些背叛亚们王的人，立他儿子约西亚接续他作王。
But the people of the land put to death all those who had taken part in the design against King Amon, and made his son Josiah king in his place.

约西亚登基的时候年八岁，在耶路撒冷作王三十一年。
Josiah was eight years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for thirty-one years.

他行耶和华眼中看为正的事，效法他祖大卫所行的，不偏左右。
And he did what was right in the eyes of the Lord, walking in the ways of his father David, without turning to the right hand or to the left.

他作王第八年，尚且年幼，就寻求他祖大卫的神。到了十二年才洁净犹大和耶路撒冷，除掉丘坛，木偶，雕刻的像，和铸造的像。
In the eighth year of his rule, while he was still young, his heart was first turned to the God of his father David; and in the twelfth year he undertook the clearing away of all the high places and the pillars and the images of wood and metal from Judah and Jerusalem.

众人在他面前拆毁巴力的坛，砍断坛上高高的日像，又把木偶和雕刻的像，并铸造的像打碎成灰，撒在祭偶像人的坟上，
He had the altars of the Baals broken down, while he himself was present; and the sun-images which were placed on high over them he had cut down; and the pillars of wood and the metal images he had broken up and crushed to dust, dropping the dust over the resting-places of the dead who had made offerings to them.

将他们祭司的骸骨烧在坛上，洁净了犹大和耶路撒冷。
And he had the bones of the priests burned on their altars, and so he made Judah and Jerusalem clean.

又在玛拿西，以法莲，西缅，拿弗他利各城，和四围破坏之处，都这样行。
And in all the towns of Manasseh and Ephraim and Simeon as far as Naphtali, he made waste their houses round about.

又拆毁祭坛，把木偶和雕刻的像打碎成灰，砍断以色列遍地所有的日像，就回耶路撒冷去了。
He had the altars and the pillars of wood pulled down and the images crushed to dust, and all the sun-images cut down, through all the land of Israel, and then he went back to Jerusalem.

约西亚王十八年，净地净殿之后，就差遣亚萨利雅的儿子沙番，邑宰玛西雅，约哈斯的儿子史官约亚去修理耶和华他神的殿。
Now in the eighteenth year of his rule, when the land and the house had been made clean, he sent Shaphan, the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah, the ruler of the town, and Joah, the son of Joahaz, the recorder, to make good what was damaged in the house of the Lord his God.

他们就去见大祭司希勒家，将奉到神殿的银子交给他。这银子是看守殿门的利未人从玛拿西，以法莲，和一切以色列剩下的人，以及犹大，便雅悯众人，并耶路撒冷的居民收来的。
And they came to Hilkiah, the chief priest, and gave him all the money which had been taken into the house of God, which the Levites, the keepers of the door, had got from Manasseh and Ephraim and those of Israel who had not been taken away as prisoners, and from all Judah and Benjamin and the people of Jerusalem.

又将这银子交给耶和华殿里督工的，转交修理耶和华殿的工匠，
And they gave it to the overseers of the work of the Lord's house, and the overseers gave it to the workmen working in the house, for building it up and making good what was damaged;

就是交给木匠，石匠，买凿成的石头和架木与栋梁，修犹大王所毁坏的殿。
Even to the woodworkers and builders to get cut stone and wood for joining the structure together and for making boards for the houses which the kings of Judah had given up to destruction.

这些人办事诚实，督工的是利未人米拉利的子孙雅哈，俄巴底。督催的是哥辖的子孙撒迦利亚，米书兰。还有善于作乐的利未人。
And the men did the work well; and those who had authority over them were Jahath and Obadiah, Levites of the sons of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, who were to be responsible for seeing that the work was done; and others of the Levites, who were expert with instruments of music,

他们又监管扛抬的人，督催一切作工的。利未人中也有作书记，作司事，作守门的。
Had authority over the transport workers, giving directions to all who were doing any sort of work; and among the Levites there were scribes and overseers and door-keepers.

他们将奉到耶和华殿的银子运出来的时候，祭司希勒家偶然得了摩西所传耶和华的律法书。
Now when they were taking out the money which had come into the Lord's house, Hilkiah the priest came across the book of the law of the Lord, which he had given by the mouth of Moses.

希勒家对书记沙番说，我在耶和华殿里得了律法书。遂将书递给沙番。
Then Hilkiah said to Shaphan the scribe, I have made discovery of the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan.

沙番把书拿到王那里，回覆王说，凡交给仆人们办的都办理了。
And Shaphan took the book to the king; and he gave him an account of what had been done, saying, Your servants are doing all they have been given to do;

耶和华殿里的银子倒出来，交给督工的和匠人的手里了。
They have taken out all the money which was in the Lord's house and have given it to the overseers and to the workmen.

书记沙番又对王说，祭司希勒家递给我一卷书。沙番就在王面前读那书。
Then Shaphan the scribe said to the king, Hilkiah the priest has given me a book; and he made a start at reading some of it to the king.

王听见律法上的话，就撕裂衣服，
And the king, hearing the words of the law, took his robe in his hands, violently parting it as a sign of his grief.

吩咐希勒家与沙番的儿子亚希甘，米迦的儿子亚比顿，书记沙番，和王的臣仆亚撒雅说，
And he gave orders to Hilkiah and to Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Abdon, the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe and Asaiah, the king's servant, saying,

你们去为我，为以色列和犹大剩下的人，以这书上的话求问耶和华。因我们列祖没有遵守耶和华的言语，没有照这书上所记的去行，耶和华的烈怒就倒在我们身上。
Go and get directions from the Lord for me and for those who are still in Israel and for Judah, about the words of this book which has come to light; for great is the wrath of the Lord which has been let loose on us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the Lord or done what is recorded in this book.

于是，希勒家和王所派的众人都去见女先知户勒大。户勒大是掌管礼服沙龙的妻，沙龙是哈斯拉的孙子，特瓦的儿子。户勒大住在耶路撒冷第二区。他们请问于她。
So Hilkiah, and those whom the king sent, went to Huldah the woman prophet, the wife of Shallum, the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, the keeper of the robes (now she was living in Jerusalem, in the second part of the town); and they had talk with her about this thing.

她对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，你们可以回覆那差遣你们来见我的人说，
And she said to them, The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, Say to the man who sent you to me,

耶和华如此说，我必照着在犹大王面前所读那书上的一切咒诅，降祸与这地和其上的居民。
These are the words of the Lord: See, I will send evil on this place and on its people, even all the curses in the book which they have been reading before the king of Judah;

因为他们离弃我，向别神烧香，用他们手所作的惹我发怒，所以我的忿怒如火倒在这地上，总不息灭。
Because they have given me up, burning offerings to other gods and moving me to wrath by all the works of their hands; so my wrath is let loose on this place and will not be put out.

然而差遣你们来求问耶和华的犹大王，你们要这样回覆他说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，至于你所听见的话，
But to the king of Judah who sent you to get directions from the Lord, say, This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, has said: Because you have given ear to my words,

就是听见我指着这地和其上居民所说的话，你便心里敬服，在我面前自卑，撕裂衣服，向我哭泣，因此我应允了你。这是我耶和华说的。
And your heart was soft, and you made yourself low before God, on hearing his words about this place and its people, and with weeping and signs of grief have made yourself low before me, I have given ear to you, says the Lord God.

我必使你平平安安地归到坟墓，到你列祖那里，我要降与这地和其上居民的一切灾祸，你也不至亲眼看见。他们就回覆王去了。
See, I will let you go to your fathers, and be put in your last resting-place in peace, and your eyes will not see all the evil which I will send on this place and on its people. So they took this news back to the king.

王差遣人招聚犹大和耶路撒冷的众长老来。
Then the king sent and got together all the responsible men of Judah and of Jerusalem.

王和犹大众人，与耶路撒冷的居民，并祭司利未人，以及所有的百姓，无论大小，都一同上到耶和华的殿。王就把殿里所得的约书念给他们听。
And the king went up to the house of the Lord, with all the men of Judah and the people of Jerusalem, and the priests and the Levites and all the people, small and great; and they were present at his reading of the book of the law which had come to light in the house of the Lord.

王站在他的地位上，在耶和华面前立约，要尽心尽性地顺从耶和华，遵守他的诫命，法度，律例，成就这书上所记的约言。
Then the king, taking his place by the pillar, made an agreement before the Lord, to go in the way of the Lord, and to keep his orders and his decisions and his rules with all his heart and with all his soul, and to keep the words of the agreement recorded in this book.

又使住耶路撒冷和便雅悯的人都服从这约。于是耶路撒冷的居民都遵行他们列祖之神的约。
And he made all the people in Jerusalem and Benjamin give their word to keep it. And the people of Jerusalem kept the agreement of God, the God of their fathers.

约西亚从以色列各处将一切可憎之物尽都除掉，使以色列境内的人都事奉耶和华他们的神。约西亚在世的日子，就跟从耶和华他们列祖的神，总不离开。
Josiah took away all the disgusting things out of all the lands of the children of Israel, and made all who were in Israel servants of the Lord their God. And as long as he was living they were true to the Lord, the God of their fathers.

约西亚在耶路撒冷向耶和华守逾越节。正月十四日，就宰了逾越节的羊羔。
And Josiah kept a Passover to the Lord in Jerusalem; on the fourteenth day of the first month they put the Passover lamb to death.

王分派祭司各尽其职，又勉励他们办耶和华殿中的事。
And he gave the priests their places, making them strong for the work of the house of God.

又对那归耶和华为圣，教训以色列人的利未人说，你们将圣约柜安放在以色列王大卫儿子所罗门建造的殿里，不必再用肩扛抬。现在要事奉耶和华你们的神，服事他的民以色列。
And he said to the Levites, the teachers of all Israel, who were holy to the Lord, See, the holy ark is in the house which Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel, made; it will no longer have to be transported on your backs: now be the servants of the Lord your God and his people Israel,

你们应当按着宗族，照着班次，遵以色列王大卫和他儿子所罗门所写的，自己预备。
And make yourselves ready in your divisions, by your families, as it is ordered in the writings of David, king of Israel, and of Solomon his son;

要按着你们的弟兄，这民宗族的班次，站在圣所，每班中要利未宗族的几个人。
And take your positions in the holy place, grouped in the families of your brothers, the children of the people, and for every division let there be a part of a family of the Levites.

要宰逾越节的羊羔，洁净自己，为你们的弟兄预备了，好遵守耶和华借摩西所吩咐的话。
And put the Passover lamb to death, and make yourselves holy, and make it ready for your brothers, so that the orders given by the Lord through Moses may be done.

约西亚从群畜中赐给在那里所有的人民，绵羊羔和山羊羔三万只，牛三千只，作逾越节的祭物。这都是出自王的产业中。
And Josiah gave lambs and goats from the flock as Passover offerings for all the people who were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand oxen: these were from the king's private property.

约西亚的众首领也乐意将牺牲给百姓和祭司利未人。又有管理神殿的希勒家，撒迦利亚，耶歇将羊羔二千六百只，牛三百只，给祭司作逾越节的祭物。
And his captains freely gave an offering to the people, the priests, and the Levites. Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings two thousand, six hundred small cattle and three hundred oxen.

利未人的族长歌楠雅和他两个兄弟示玛雅，拿坦业，与哈沙比雅，耶利，约撒拔将羊羔五千只，牛五百只，给利未人作逾越节的祭物。
And Conaniah and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the Levites for the Passover offerings five thousand small cattle and five hundred oxen.

这样，供献的事齐备了。祭司站在自己的地方，利未人按着班次站立，都是照王所吩咐的。
So everything was made ready and the priests took their places with the Levites in their divisions, as the king had said.

利未人宰了逾越节的羊羔，祭司从他们手里接过血来洒在坛上。利未人剥皮，
And they put the Passover lambs to death, the blood being drained out by the priests when it was given to them, and the Levites did the skinning.

将燔祭搬来，按着宗族的班次分给众民，好照摩西书上所写的，献给耶和华。献牛也是这样。
And they took away the burned offerings, so that they might give them to be offered to the Lord for the divisions of the families of the people, as it is recorded in the book of Moses. And they did the same with the oxen.

他们按着常例，用火烤逾越节的羊羔。别的圣物用锅，用釜，用罐煮了，速速地送给众民。
And the Passover lamb was cooked over the fire, as it says in the law; and the holy offerings were cooked in pots and basins and vessels, and taken quickly to all the people.

然后为自己和祭司预备祭物。因为祭司亚伦的子孙献燔祭和脂油，直到晚上。所以利未人为自己和祭司亚伦的子孙，预备祭物。
And after that, they made ready for themselves and for the priests; for the priests, the sons of Aaron, were offering the burned offerings and the fat till night; so the Levites made ready what was needed for themselves and for the priests, the sons of Aaron.

歌唱的亚萨之子孙，照着大卫，亚萨，希幔，和王的先见耶杜顿所吩咐的，站在自己的地位上。守门的看守各门，不用离开他们的职事，因为他们的弟兄利未人给他们预备祭物。
And the sons of Asaph, the makers of melody, were in their places, as ordered by David and Asaph and Heman and Jeduthun, the king's seer; and the door-keepers were stationed at every door: there was no need for them to go away from their places, for their brothers the Levites made ready for them.

当日，供奉耶和华的事齐备了，就照约西亚王的吩咐守逾越节，献燔祭在耶和华的坛上。
So everything needed for the worship of the Lord was made ready that same day, for the keeping of the Passover and the offering of burned offerings on the altar of the Lord, as King Josiah had given orders.

当时在耶路撒冷的以色列人守逾越节，又守除酵节七日。
And all the children of Israel who were present kept the Passover and the feast of unleavened bread at that time for seven days.

自从先知撒母耳以来，在以色列中没有守过这样的逾越节，以色列诸王也没有守过，像约西亚，祭司，利未人，在那里的犹大人，和以色列人，以及耶路撒冷居民所守的逾越节。
No Passover like it had been kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; and not one of the kings of Israel had ever kept a Passover like the one kept by Josiah and the priests and the Levites and all those of Judah and Israel who were present, and the people of Jerusalem.

这逾越节是约西亚作王十八年守的。
In the eighteenth year of the rule of Josiah this Passover was kept.

这事以后，约西亚修完了殿，有埃及王尼哥上来，要攻击靠近伯拉河的迦基米施。约西亚出去抵挡他。
After all this, and after Josiah had put the house in order, Neco, king of Egypt, went up to make war at Carchemish by the river Euphrates; and Josiah went out against him.

他差遣使者来见约西亚，说，犹大王阿，我与你何干。我今日来不是要攻击你，乃是要攻击与我争战之家，并且神吩咐我速行，你不要干预神的事，免得他毁灭你，因为神是与我同在。
But he sent representatives to him, saying, What have I to do with you, O king of Judah? I have not come against you this day, but against those with whom I am at war; and God has given me orders to go forward quickly: keep out of God's way, for he is with me, or he will send destruction on you.

约西亚却不肯转去离开他，改装要与他打仗，不听从神借尼哥之口所说的话，便来到米吉多平原争战。
However, Josiah would not go back; but keeping to his purpose of fighting against him, and giving no attention to the words of Neco, which came from God, he went forward to the fight in the valley of Megiddo.

弓箭手射中约西亚王。王对他的臣仆说，我受了重伤，你拉我出阵吧。
And the bowmen sent their arrows at King Josiah, and the king said to his servants, Take me away, for I am badly wounded.

他的臣仆扶他下了战车，上了次车，送他到耶路撒冷，他就死了，葬在他列祖的坟墓里。犹大人和耶路撒冷人都为他悲哀。
So his servants took him out of the line of war-carriages, and put him in his second carriage and took him to Jerusalem, where he came to his end, and they put his body in the resting-place of his fathers. And in all Judah and Jerusalem there was great weeping for Josiah.

耶利米为约西亚作哀歌。所有歌唱的男女也唱哀歌，追悼约西亚，直到今日。而且在以色列中成了定例。这歌载在哀歌书上。
And Jeremiah made a song of grief for Josiah; and to this day Josiah is named by all the makers of melody, men and women, in their songs of grief; they made it a rule in Israel; and the songs are recorded among the songs of grief.

约西亚其余的事和他遵着耶和华律法上所记而行的善事，
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and the good he did, in keeping with what is recorded in the law of the Lord,

并他自始至终所行的，都写在以色列和犹大列王记上。
And all his acts, first and last, are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

国民立约西亚的儿子约哈斯在耶路撒冷接续他父作王。
Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz, the son of Josiah, and made him king in Jerusalem in place of his father.

约哈斯登基的时候年二十三岁，在耶路撒冷作王三个月。
Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for three months.

埃及王在耶路撒冷废了他，又罚犹大国银子一百他连得，金子一他连得。
Then the king of Egypt took the kingdom from him in Jerusalem, and put on the land a tax of a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.

埃及王尼哥立约哈斯的哥哥以利雅敬作犹大和耶路撒冷的王，改名叫约雅敬，又将约哈斯带到埃及去了。
And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, changing his name to Jehoiakim. And Neco took his brother Jehoahaz away to Egypt.

约雅敬登基的时候年二十五岁，在耶路撒冷作王十一年，行耶和华他神眼中看为恶的事。
Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for eleven years, and he did evil in the eyes of the Lord his God.

巴比伦王尼布甲尼撒上来攻击他，用铜链锁着他，要将他带到巴比伦去。
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came up against him, and took him away in chains to Babylon.

尼布甲尼撒又将耶和华殿里的器皿带到巴比伦，放在他神的庙里（或作自己的宫里）。
And Nebuchadnezzar took away some of the vessels of the Lord's house, and put them in the house of his god in Babylon.

约雅敬其余的事和他所行可憎的事，并他一切的行为，都写在以色列和犹大列王记上。他儿子约雅斤接续他作王。
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and the disgusting things he did, and all there is to be said against him, are recorded in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah; and Jehoiachin his son became king in his place.

约雅斤登基的时候年八岁（列王下二十四章八节作十八岁），在耶路撒冷作王三个月零十天，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事。
Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for three months and ten days, and he did evil in the eyes of the Lord.

过了一年，尼布甲尼撒差遣人将约雅斤和耶和华殿里各样宝贵的器皿带到巴比伦，就立约雅斤的叔叔（原文作兄）西底家，作犹大和耶路撒冷的王。
In the spring of the year King Nebuchadnezzar sent and took him away to Babylon, with the beautiful vessels of the house of the Lord, and made Zedekiah, his father's brother, king over Judah and Jerusalem.

西底家登基的时候年二十一岁，在耶路撒冷作王十一年，
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king; he was ruling in Jerusalem for eleven years.

行耶和华他神眼中看为恶的事。先知耶利米以耶和华的话劝他，他仍不在耶利米面前自卑。
He did evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did not make himself low before Jeremiah the prophet who gave him the word of the Lord.

尼布甲尼撒曾使他指着神起誓，他却背叛，强项硬心，不归服耶和华以色列的神。
And he took up arms against King Nebuchadnezzar, though he had made him take an oath by God; but he made his neck stiff and his heart hard, turning away from the Lord, the God of Israel.

众祭司长和百姓也大大犯罪，效法外邦人一切可憎的事，污秽耶和华在耶路撒冷分别为圣的殿。
And more than this, all the great men of Judah and the priests and the people made their sin great, turning to all the disgusting ways of the nations; and they made unclean the house of the Lord which he had made holy in Jerusalem.

耶和华他们列祖的神因为爱惜自己的民和他的居所，从早起来差遣使者去警戒他们。
And the Lord, the God of their fathers, sent word to them by his servants, sending early and frequently, because he had pity on his people and on his living-place;

他们却嘻笑神的使者，藐视他的言语，讥诮他的先知，以致耶和华的忿怒向他的百姓发作，无法可救。
But they put shame on the servants of God, making sport of his words and laughing at his prophets, till the wrath of God was moved against his people, till there was no help.

所以，耶和华使迦勒底人的王来攻击他们，在他们圣殿里用刀杀了他们的壮丁，不怜恤他们的少男处女，老人白叟。耶和华将他们都交在迦勒底王手里。
So he sent against them the king of the Chaldaeans, who put their young men to death with the sword in the house of their holy place, and had no pity for any, young man or virgin, old man or white-haired: God gave them all into his hands.

迦勒底王将神殿里的大小器皿与耶和华殿里的财宝，并王和众首领的财宝，都带到巴比伦去了。
And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the stored wealth of the Lord's house and the wealth of the king and his chiefs, he took away to Babylon.

迦勒底人焚烧神的殿，拆毁耶路撒冷的城墙，用火烧了城里的宫殿，毁坏了城里宝贵的器皿。
And the house of God was burned and the wall of Jerusalem broken down; all its great houses were burned with fire and all its beautiful vessels given up to destruction.

凡脱离刀剑的，迦勒底王都掳到巴比伦去，作他和他子孙的仆婢，直到波斯国兴起来。
And all who had not come to death by the sword he took away prisoners to Babylon; and they became servants to him and to his sons till the kingdom of Persia came to power:

这就应验耶和华借耶利米口所说的话，地享受安息。因为地土荒凉便守安息，直满了七十年。
So that the words of the Lord, which he said by the mouth of Jeremiah, might come true, till the land had had pleasure in her Sabbaths; for as long as she was waste the land kept the Sabbath, till seventy years were complete.

波斯王古列元年，耶和华为要应验借耶利米口所说的话，就激动波斯王古列的心，使他下诏通告全国，说，
Now in the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, in order that the words which the Lord had said by the mouth of Jeremiah might come true, the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia, was moved by the Lord, and he made a public statement and had it given out through all his kingdom and put in writing, saying,

波斯王古列如此说，耶和华天上的神已将天下万国赐给我，又嘱咐我在犹大的耶路撒冷为他建造殿宇。你们中间凡作他子民的，可以上去，愿耶和华他的神与他同在。
Cyrus, king of Persia, has said, All the kingdoms of the earth have been given to me by the Lord, the God of heaven; and he has made me responsible for building a house for him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, may the Lord his God be with him and let him go up.

