哈巴谷书 Habakkuk

先知哈巴谷所得的默示。
The word which Habakkuk the prophet saw.

他说，耶和华阿，我呼求你，你不应允，要到几时呢？我因强暴哀求你，你还不拯救。
How long, O Lord, will your ears be shut to my voice? I make an outcry to you about violent behaviour, but you do not send salvation.

你为何使我看见罪孽？你为何看着奸恶而不理呢？毁灭和强暴在我面前。又起了争端和相斗的事。
Why do you make me see evil-doing, and why are my eyes fixed on wrong? for wasting and violent acts are before me: and there is fighting and bitter argument.

因此律法放松，公理也不显明。恶人围困义人。所以公理显然颠倒。
For this reason the law is feeble and decisions are not effected: for the upright man is circled round by evil-doers; because of which right is twisted.

耶和华说，你们要向列国中观看，大大惊奇。因为在你们的时候，我行一件事，虽有人告诉你们，你们总是不信。
See among the nations, and take note, and be full of wonder: for in your days I am doing a work in which you will have no belief, even if news of it is given to you.

我必兴起迦勒底人，就是那残忍暴躁之民，通行遍地，占据那不属自己的住处。
For see, I am sending the Chaldaeans, that bitter and quick-moving nation; who go through the wide spaces of the earth to get for themselves living-places which are not theirs.

他威武可畏。判断和势力，都任意发出。
They are greatly to be feared: their right comes from themselves.

他的马比豹更快，比晚上的豺狼更猛。马兵踊跃争先，都从远方而来，他们飞跑如鹰抓食。
And their horses are quicker than leopards and their horsemen more cruel than evening wolves; they come from far away, like an eagle in flight rushing on its food.

都为行强暴而来。定住脸面向前，将掳掠的人聚集，多如尘沙。
They are coming all of them with force; the direction of their faces is forward, the number of their prisoners is like the sands of the sea.

他们讥诮君王，笑话首领，嗤笑一切保障，筑垒攻取。
He makes little of kings, rulers are a sport to him; all the strong places are to be laughed at; for he makes earthworks and takes them.

他以自己的势力为神，像风猛然扫过，显为有罪。
Then his purpose will be changed, over-stepping the limit; he will make his strength his god.

耶和华我的神，我的圣者阿，你不是从亘古而有吗？我们必不致死。耶和华阿，你派定他为要刑罚人。磐石阿，你设立他为要惩治人。
Are you not eternal, O Lord my God, my Holy One? for you there is no death. O Lord, he has been ordered by you for our punishment; and by you, O Rock, he has been marked out to put us right.

你眼目清洁，不看邪僻，不看奸恶。行诡诈的，你为何看着不理呢？恶人吞灭比自己公义的，你为何静默不语呢？
Before your holy eyes sin may not be seen, and you are unable to put up with wrong; why, then, are your eyes on the false? why do you say nothing when the evil-doer puts an end to one who is more upright than himself?

你为何使人如海中的鱼，又如没有管辖的爬物呢？
He has made men like the fishes of the sea, like the worms which have no ruler over them.

他用钩钩住，用网捕获，用拉网聚集他们。因此，他欢喜快乐。
He takes them all up with his hook, he takes them in his net, getting them together in his fishing-net: for which cause he is glad and full of joy.

就向网献祭，向网烧香。因他由此得肥美的分，和富裕的食物。
For this reason he makes an offering to his net, burning perfume to his fishing-net; because by them he gets much food and his meat is fat.

他岂可屡次倒空网罗，将列国的人时常杀戮，毫不顾惜呢？
For this cause his net is ever open, and there is no end to his destruction of the nations.

我要站在守望所，立在望楼上观看，看耶和华对我说什么话，我可用什么话向他诉冤。（向他诉冤或作回答所疑问的）。
I will take my position and be on watch, placing myself on my tower, looking out to see what he will say to me, and what answer he will give to my protest.

他对我说，将这默示明明地写在版上，使读的人容易读（或作随跑随读）。
And the Lord gave me an answer, and said, Put the vision in writing and make it clear on stones, so that the reader may go quickly.

因为这默示有一定的日期，快要应验，并不虚谎。虽然迟延，还要等候。因为必然临到，不再迟延。
For the vision is still for the fixed time, and it is moving quickly to the end, and it will not be false: even if it is slow in coming, go on waiting for it; because it will certainly come, it will not be kept back.

迦勒底人自高自大，心不正直。惟义人因信得生。
As for the man of pride, my soul has no pleasure in him; but the upright man will have life through his good faith.

迦勒底人因酒诡诈，狂傲，不住在家中，扩充心欲，好像阴间。他如死不能知足，聚集万国，堆积万民，都归自己。
A curse on the cruel and false one! the man full of pride, who never has enough; who makes his desires wide as the underworld! he is like death; he is never full, but he makes all nations come to him, getting all peoples together to himself.

这些国的民，岂不都要提起诗歌，并俗语讥刺他，说，祸哉，迦勒底人，你增添不属自己的财物，多多取人的当头，要到几时为止呢？
Will not all these take up a word of shame against him and a bitter saying against him, and say, A curse on him who goes on taking what is not his and is weighted down with the property of debtors!

咬伤你的岂不忽然起来，扰害你的岂不兴起，你就作他们的掳物吗？
Will not your creditors suddenly be moved against you, and your troublers get up from their sleep, and you will be to them like goods taken in war?

因你抢夺许多的国，杀人流血，向国内的城，并城中一切居民施行强暴，所以各国剩下的民，都必抢夺你。
Because you have taken their goods from great nations, all the rest of the peoples will take your goods from you; because of men's blood and violent acts against the land and the town and all who are living in it.

为本家积蓄不义之财，在高处搭窝，指望免灾的有祸了。
A curse on him who gets evil profits for his family, so that he may put his resting-place on high and be safe from the hand of the wrongdoer!

你图谋剪除多国的民，犯了罪，使你的家蒙羞，自害己命。
You have been a cause of shame to your house by cutting off a number of peoples, and sinning against your soul.

墙里的石头必呼叫，房内的栋梁必应声。
For the stone will give a cry out of the wall, and it will be answered by the board out of the woodwork.

以人血建城，以罪孽立邑的有祸了。
A curse on him who is building a place with blood, and basing a town on evil-doing!

众民所劳碌得来的被火焚烧，列国由劳乏而得的，归于虚空，不都是出于万军之耶和华吗？
See, is it not the pleasure of the Lord of armies that the peoples are working for the fire and using themselves up for nothing?

认识耶和华荣耀的知识，要充满遍地，好像水充满洋海一般。
For the earth will be full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord as the sea is covered by the waters.

给人酒喝，又加上毒物，使他喝醉，好看见他下体的，有祸了。
A curse on him who gives his neighbour the wine of his wrath, making him overcome with strong drink from the cup of his passion, so that you may be a witness of their shame!

你满受羞辱，不得荣耀。你也喝吧，显出是未受割礼的。耶和华右手的杯，必传到你那里，你的荣耀，就变为大大的羞辱。
You are full of shame in place of glory: take your part in the drinking, and let your shame be uncovered: the cup of the Lord's right hand will come round to you and your glory will be covered with shame.

你向利巴嫩行强暴，与残害惊吓野兽的事，必遮盖你。因你杀人流血，向国内的城，并城中一切居民，施行强暴。
For the violent acts against Lebanon will come on you, and the destruction of the cattle will be a cause of fear to you, because of men's blood and the violent acts against the land and the town and all who are living in it.

雕刻的偶像，人将它刻出来，有什么益处呢？铸造的偶像，就是虚谎的师傅。制造者倚靠这哑巴偶像，有什么益处呢？
What profit is the pictured image to its maker? and as for the metal image, the false teacher, why does its maker put his faith in it, making false gods without a voice?

对木偶说，醒起，对哑巴石像说，起来，那人有祸了。这个还能教训人吗？看哪，是包裹金银的，其中毫无气息。
A curse on him who says to the wood, Awake! to the unbreathing stone, Up! let it be a teacher! See, it is plated with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all inside it.

惟耶和华在他的圣殿中。全地的人，都当在他面前肃敬静默。
But the Lord is in his holy Temple: let all the earth be quiet before him.

先知哈巴谷的祷告，调用流离歌。
A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, put to Shigionoth.

耶和华阿，我听见你的名声（名声或作言语），就惧怕。耶和华阿，求你在这些年间复兴你的作为，在这些年间显明出来，在发怒的时候，以怜悯为念。
O Lord, word of you has come to my ears; I have seen your work, O Lord; when the years come near make it clear; in wrath keep mercy in mind.

神从提幔而来，圣者从巴兰山临到。（细拉）他的荣光遮蔽诸天，颂赞充满大地。
God came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah. The heavens were covered with his glory, and the earth was full of his praise.

他的辉煌如同日光。从他手里射出光线。在其中藏着他的能力。
He was shining like the light; he had rays coming out from his hand: there his power was kept secret.

在他前面有瘟疫流行，在他脚下有热症发出。
Before him went disease, and flames went out at his feet.

他站立，量了大地（或作使地震动），观看，赶散万民。永久的山崩裂，长存的岭塌陷。他的作为与古时一样。
From his high place he sent shaking on the earth; he saw and nations were suddenly moved: and the eternal mountains were broken, the unchanging hills were bent down; his ways are eternal.

我见古珊的帐棚遭难，米甸的幔子战兢。
The curtains of Cushan were troubled, and the tents of Midian were shaking.

耶和华阿，你乘在马上，坐在得胜的车上，岂是不喜悦江河，向江河发怒气，向洋海发愤恨吗？
Was your wrath burning against the rivers? were you angry with the sea, that you went on your horses, on your war-carriages of salvation?

你的弓全然显露。向众支派所起的誓，都是可信的。（细拉）你以江河分开大地。
Your bow was quite uncovered. Selah. By you the earth was cut through with rivers.

山岭见你，无不战惧。大水泛滥过去，深渊发声，汹涌翻腾。（原文作向上举手）。
The mountains saw you and were moved with fear; the clouds were streaming with water: the voice of the deep was sounding; the sun did not come up, and the moon kept still in her place.

因你的箭射出发光，你的枪闪出光耀，日月都在本宫停住。
At the light of your arrows they went away, at the shining of your polished spear.

你发愤恨通行大地。发怒气责打列国，如同打粮。
You went stepping through the land in wrath, crushing the nations in your passion.

你出来要拯救你的百姓，拯救你的受膏者，打破恶人家长的头。露出他的脚，（脚原文作根基），直到颈项。（细拉）
You went out for the salvation of your people, for the salvation of the one on whom your holy oil was put; wounding the head of the family of the evil-doer, uncovering the base even to the neck. Selah.

你用敌人的戈矛刺透他战士的头。他们来如旋风，要将我们分散。他们所喜爱的，是暗中吞吃贫民。
You have put your spears through his head, his horsemen were sent in flight like dry stems; they had joy in driving away the poor, in making a meal of them secretly.

你乘马践踏红海，就是践踏汹涌的大水。
The feet of your horses were on the sea, on the mass of great waters.

我听见耶和华的声音，身体战兢，嘴唇发颤，骨中朽烂。我在所立之处战兢。我只可安静等候灾难之日临到，犯境之民上来。
Hearing it, my inner parts were moved, and my lips were shaking at the sound; my bones became feeble, and my steps were uncertain under me: I gave sounds of grief in the day of trouble, when his forces came up against the people in bands.

虽然无花果树不发旺，葡萄树不结果，橄榄树也不效力，田地不出粮食，圈中绝了羊，棚内也没有牛。
For though the fig-tree has no flowers, and there is no fruit on the vine, and work on the olive comes to nothing, and the fields give no food; and the flock is cut off from its resting-place, and there is no herd in the cattle-house:

然而我要因耶和华欢欣，因救我的神喜乐。
Still, I will be glad in the Lord, my joy will be in the God of my salvation.

主耶和华是我的力量。他使我的脚快如母鹿的蹄。又使我稳行在高处。这歌交与伶长，用丝弦的乐器。
The Lord God is my strength, and he makes my feet like roes' feet, guiding me on my high places. For the chief music-maker on corded instruments.

