大利乌王第二年六月初一日，耶和华的话借先知哈该，向犹大省长撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯和约撒答的儿子大祭司约书亚说，
In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, came the word of the Lord by Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, ruler of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, saying,

万军之耶和华如此说，这百姓说，建造耶和华殿的时候尚未来到。
These are the words of the Lord of armies: These people say, The time has not come for building the Lord's house.

那时耶和华的话临到先知哈该说，
Then the word of the Lord came by Haggai the prophet, saying,

这殿仍然荒凉，你们自己还住天花板的房屋吗？
Is it a time for you to be living in roofed houses while this house is a waste?

现在万军之耶和华如此说，你们要省察自己的行为。
For this cause the Lord of armies has said, Give thought to your ways.

你们撒的种多，收的却少。你们吃，却不得饱。喝，却不得足。穿衣服，却不得暖。得工钱的，将工钱装在破漏的囊中。
Much has been planted, but little got in; you take food, but have not enough; you take drink, but are not full; you are clothed, but no one is warm; and he who gets payment for his work, gets it to put it into a bag full of holes.

万军之耶和华如此说，你们要省察自己的行为。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Give thought to your ways.

你们要上山取木料，建造这殿。我就因此喜乐，且得荣耀。这是耶和华说的。
Go up to the hills and get wood and put up the house; and I will take pleasure in it and be honoured, says the Lord.

你们盼望多得，所得的却少。你们收到家中，我就吹去。这是为什么呢？因为我的殿荒凉，你们各人却顾自己的房屋（顾原文作奔）。这是万军之耶和华说的。
You were looking for much, and it came to little; and when you got it into your house, I took it away with a breath. Why? says the Lord of armies. Because of my house which is a waste, while every man takes care of the house which is his.

所以为你们的缘故，天就不降甘露，地也不出土产。
For this cause the heaven over you is kept from giving dew, and the earth from giving her fruit.

我命干旱临到地土，山冈，五谷，新酒，和油，并地上的出产，人民，牲畜，以及人手一切劳碌得来的。
And by my order no rain came on the land or on the mountains or the grain or the wine or the oil or the produce of the earth or on men or cattle or on any work of man's hands.

那时，撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，和约撒答的儿子大祭司约书亚，并剩下的百姓，都听从耶和华他们神的话，和先知哈该奉耶和华他们神差来所说的话。百姓也在耶和华面前存敬畏的心。
Then Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and all the rest of the people, gave ear to the voice of the Lord their God and to the words of Haggai the prophet, because the Lord their God had sent him, and the people were in fear before the Lord.

耶和华的使者哈该，奉耶和华差遣对百姓说，耶和华说，我与你们同在。
Then Haggai, whom the Lord had sent to give his words to the people, said, I am with you, says the Lord.

耶和华激动犹大省长撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，和约撒答的儿子大祭司约书亚，并剩下之百姓的心。他们就来为万军之耶和华他们神的殿做工。
And the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, ruler of Judah, was moved by the Lord, as was the spirit of Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of armies, their God.

这是在大利乌王第二年六月二十四日。
On the twenty-fourth day of the month, in the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.

七月二十一日，耶和华的话临到先知哈该说，
In the seventh month, on the twenty-first day of the month, the word of the Lord came by Haggai the prophet, saying,

你要晓谕犹大省长撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯，和约撒答的儿子大祭司约书亚。并剩下的百姓，说，
Say now to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, ruler of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the rest of the people,

你们中间存留的，有谁见过这殿从前的荣耀呢？现在你们看着如何？岂不在眼中看如无有吗？
Who is there still among you who saw this house in its first glory? and how do you see it now? is it not in your eyes as nothing?

耶和华说，所罗巴伯阿，虽然如此，你当刚强。约撒答的儿子大祭司约书亚阿，你也当刚强。这地的百姓，你们都当刚强做工，因为我与你们同在。这是万军之耶和华说的。
But now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest; and be strong, all you people of the land, says the Lord, and get to work: for I am with you, says the Lord of armies:

这是照着你们出埃及我与你们立约的话。那时，我的灵住在你们中间。你们不要惧怕。
The agreement which I made with you when you came out of Egypt, and my spirit, are with you still; have no fear.

万军之耶和华如此说，过不多时，我必再一次震动天地，沧海，与旱地。
For this is what the Lord of armies has said: In a short time I will make a shaking of the heavens and the earth and the sea and the dry land;

我必震动万国。万国的珍宝必都运来（或作万国所羡慕的必来到），我就使这殿满了荣耀。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And I will make a shaking of all the nations, and the desired things of all nations will come: and I will make this house full of my glory, says the Lord of armies.

万军之耶和华说，银子是我的，金子也是我的。
The silver is mine and the gold is mine, says the Lord of armies.

这殿后来的荣耀，必大过先前的荣耀。在这地方我必赐平安。这是万军之耶和华说的。
The second glory of this house will be greater than the first, says the Lord of armies: and in this place I will give peace, says the Lord of armies.

大利乌王第二年，九月二十四日，耶和华的话临到先知哈该说，
On the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came by Haggai the prophet, saying,

万军之耶和华如此说，你要向祭司问律法，
These are the words of the Lord of armies: Put now a point of law to the priests, saying,

说，若有人用衣襟兜圣肉，这衣襟挨着饼，或汤，或酒，或油，或别的食物，便算为圣吗？祭司说，不算为圣。
If anyone has some holy flesh folded in the skirt of his robe, will bread or soup or wine or oil or any other food be made holy if touched by his skirt? And the priests answering said, No.

哈该又说，若有人因摸死尸染了污秽，然后挨着这些物的那一样，这物算污秽吗？祭司说，必算污秽。
Then Haggai said, Will any of these be made unclean by the touch of one who is unclean through touching a dead body? And the priests answering said, It will be made unclean.

于是哈该说，耶和华说，这民这国，在我面前也是如此。他们手下的各样工作，都是如此。他们在坛上所献的也是如此。
Then Haggai said, So is this people and so is this nation before me, says the Lord; and so is every work of their hands; and the offering they give there is unclean.

现在你们要追想，此日以前，耶和华的殿，没有一块石头垒在石头上的光景。
And now, give thought, looking back from this day to the time before one stone was put on another in the Temple of the Lord:

在那一切日子，有人来到谷堆，想得二十斗，只得了十斗。有人来到酒池，想得五十桶，只得了二十桶。
How, when anyone came to a store of twenty measures, there were only ten: when anyone went to the wine-store to get fifty vessels full, there were only twenty.

在你们手下的各样工作上，我以旱风，霉烂，冰雹，攻击你们。你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
And I sent burning and wasting and a rain of ice-drops on all the works of your hands; but still you were not turned to me, says the Lord.

你们要追想此日以前，就是从这九月二十四日起，追想到立耶和华殿根基的日子。
And now, give thought; looking on from this day, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, from the time when the base of the Lord's house was put in its place, give thought to it.

仓里有谷种吗？葡萄树，无花果树，石榴树，橄榄树都没有结果子。从今日起，我必赐福与你们。
Is the seed still in the store-house? have the vine and the fig-tree, the pomegranate and the olive-tree, still not given their fruit? from this day I will send my blessing on you.

这月二十四日，耶和华的话二次临到哈该说，
And the word of the Lord came a second time to Haggai, on the twenty-fourth day of the month, saying,

你要告诉犹大省长所罗巴伯说，我必震动天地。
Say to Zerubbabel, ruler of Judah, I will make a shaking of the heavens and the earth,

我必倾覆列国的宝座，除灭列邦的势力，并倾覆战车，和坐在其上的。马必跌倒，骑马的败落，各人被弟兄的刀所杀。
Overturning the power of kingdoms; and I will send destruction on the strength of the kingdoms of the nations; by me war-carriages will be overturned with those who are in them; and the horses and the horsemen will come down, everyone by the sword of his brother.

万军之耶和华说，我仆人撒拉铁的儿子所罗巴伯阿，到那日，我必以你为印，因我拣选了你。这是万军之耶和华说的。
In that day, says the Lord of armies, I will take you, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says the Lord, and will make you as a jewelled ring: for I have taken you to be mine, says the Lord of armies.

