士师记 Judges

约书亚死后，以色列人求问耶和华说，我们中间谁当首先上去攻击迦南人，与他们争战。
Now after the death of Joshua, the children of Israel made request to the Lord, saying, Who is to go up first to make war for us against the Canaanites?

耶和华说，犹大当先上去，我已将那地交在他手中。
And the Lord said, Judah is to go up: see, I have given the land into his hands.

犹大对他哥哥西缅说，请你同我到拈阄所得之地去，好与迦南人争战。以后我也同你到你拈阄所得之地去。于是西缅与他同去。
Then Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my heritage, so that we may make war against the Canaanites; and I will then go with you into your heritage. So Simeon went with him.

犹大就上去，耶和华将迦南人和比利洗人交在他们手中。他们在比色击杀了一万人。
And Judah went up; and the Lord gave the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hands; and they overcame ten thousand of them in Bezek.

又在那里遇见亚多尼比色，与他争战，杀败迦南人和比利洗人。
And they came across Adoni-zedek, and made war on him; and they overcame the Canaanites and the Perizzites.

亚多尼比色逃跑。他们追赶，拿住他，砍断他手脚的大姆指。
But Adoni-zedek went in flight; and they went after him and overtook him, and had his thumbs and his great toes cut off.

亚多尼比色说，从前有七十个王，手脚的大姆指都被我砍断，在我桌子底下拾取零碎食物。现在神按着我所行的报应我了。于是他们将亚多尼比色带到耶路撒冷，他就死在那里。
And Adoni-zedek said, Seventy kings, whose thumbs and great toes had been cut off, got broken meat under my table: as I have done, so has God done to me in full. And they took him to Jerusalem, and he came to his end there.

犹大人攻打耶路撒冷，将城攻取，用刀杀了城内的人，并且放火烧城。
Then the children of Judah made an attack on Jerusalem, and took it, burning down the town after they had put its people to the sword without mercy.

后来犹大人下去，与住山地，南地，和高原的迦南人争战。
After that the children of Judah went down to make war on the Canaanites living in the hill-country and in the south and in the lowlands.

犹大人去攻击住希伯仑的迦南人，杀了示筛，亚希幔，挞买。希伯仑从前名叫基列亚巴。
And Caleb went against the Canaanites of Hebron: (now in earlier times Hebron was named Kiriath-arba:) and he put Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai to the sword.

他们从那里去攻击底璧的居民。底璧从前名叫基列西弗。
And from there he went up against the people of Debir. (Now the name of Debir in earlier times was Kiriath-sepher.)

迦勒说，谁能攻打基列西弗，将城夺取，我就把我女儿押撒给他为妻。
And Caleb said, I will give Achsah, my daughter, as wife to the man who overcomes Kiriath-sepher and takes it.

迦勒兄弟基纳斯的儿子俄陀聂夺取了那城，迦勒就把女儿押撒给他为妻。
And Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it; so he gave him his daughter Achsah for his wife.

押撒过门的时候，劝丈夫向她父亲求一块田。押撒一下驴，迦勒问她说，你要什么。
Now when she came to him, he put into her mind the idea of requesting a field from her father: and she got down from her ass; and Caleb said to her, What is it?

她说，求你赐福给我，你既将我安置在南地，求你也给我水泉。迦勒就把上泉下泉赐给她。
And she said to him, Give me a blessing; because you have put me in a dry south-land, now give me springs of water. So Caleb gave her the higher spring and the lower spring.

摩西的内兄（或作岳父）是基尼人，他的子孙与犹大人一同离了棕树城，往亚拉得以南的犹大旷野去，就住在民中。
Now Hobab the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law, had come up out of the town of palm-trees, with the children of Judah, into the waste land of Arad; and he went and was living among the Amalekites;

犹大和他哥哥西缅同去，击杀了住洗法的迦南人，将城尽行毁灭，那城的名便叫何珥玛。
And Judah went with Simeon, his brother, and overcame the Canaanites living in Zephath, and put it under the curse; and he gave the town the name of Hormah.

犹大又取了迦萨和迦萨的四境，亚实基伦和亚实基伦的四境，以革伦和以革伦的四境。
Then Judah took Gaza and its limit, and Ashkelon and its limit, and Ekron and its limit.

耶和华与犹大同在，犹大就赶出山地的居民，只是不能赶出平原的居民，因为他们有铁车。
And the Lord was with Judah; and he took the hill-country for his heritage; but he was unable to make the people of the valley go out, for they had war-carriages of iron.

以色列人照摩西所说的，将希伯仑给了迦勒。迦勒就从那里赶出亚衲族的三个族长。
And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had said; and he took the land of the three sons of Anak, driving them out from there.

便雅悯人没有赶出住耶路撒冷的耶布斯人。耶布斯人仍在耶路撒冷与便雅悯人同住，直到今日。
And the children of Judah did not make the Jebusites who were living in Jerusalem go out; the Jebusites are still living with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem.

约瑟家也上去攻打伯特利。耶和华与他们同在。
And the family of Joseph went up against Beth-el, and the Lord was with them.

约瑟家打发人去窥探伯特利。那城起先名叫路斯。
So they sent men to make a search round Beth-el. (Now the name of the town in earlier times was Luz.)

窥探的人看见一个人从城里出来，就对他说，求你将进城的路指示我们，我们必恩待你。
And the watchers saw a man coming out of the town, and said to him, If you will make clear to us the way into the town, we will be kind to you.

那人将进城的路指示他们，他们就用刀击杀了城中的居民，但将那人和他全家放去。
So he made clear to them the way into the town, and they put it to the sword; but they let the man and all his family get away safe.

那人往赫人之地去，筑了一座城，起名叫路斯。那城到如今还叫这名。
And he went into the land of the Hittites, building a town there and naming it Luz: which is its name to this day.

玛拿西没有赶出伯善和属伯善乡村的居民，他纳和属他纳乡村的居民，多珥和属多珥乡村的居民，以伯莲和属以伯莲乡村的居民，米吉多和属米吉多乡村的居民。迦南人却执意住在那些地方。
And Manasseh did not take away the land of the people of Beth-shean and its daughter-towns, or of Taanach and its daughter-towns, or of the people of Dor and its daughter-towns, or of the people of Ibleam and its daughter-towns, or of the people of Megiddo and its daughter-towns, driving them out; but the Canaanites would go on living in that land.

及至以色列强盛了，就使迦南人作苦工，没有把他们全然赶出。
And whenever Israel became strong, they put the Canaanites to forced work, without driving them out completely.

以法莲没有赶出住基色的迦南人。于是迦南人仍住在基色，在以法莲中间。
And Ephraim did not make the Canaanites who were living in Gezer go out; but the Canaanites went on living in Gezer among them.

西布伦没有赶出基伦的居民和拿哈拉的居民。于是迦南人仍住在西布伦中间，成了服苦的人。
Zebulun did not make the people of Kitron or the people of Nahalol go out; but the Canaanites went on living among them and were put to forced work.

亚设没有赶出亚柯和西顿的居民，亚黑拉和亚革悉的居民，黑巴，亚弗革与利合的居民。
And Asher did not take the land of the people of Acco, or Zidon, or Ahlab, or Achzib, or Helbah, or Aphik, or Rehob, driving them out;

于是，亚设因为没有赶出那地的迦南人，就住在他们中间。
But the Asherites went on living among the Canaanites, the people of the land, without driving them out.

拿弗他利没有赶出伯示麦和伯亚纳的居民，于是拿弗他利就住在那地的迦南人中间。然而伯示麦和伯亚纳的居民成了服苦的人。
Naphtali did not take the land of the people of Beth-shemesh or of Beth-anath, driving them out; but he was living among the Canaanites in the land; however, the people of Beth-shemesh and Beth-anath were put to forced work.

亚摩利人强逼但人住在山地，不容他们下到平原。
And the children of Dan were forced into the hill-country by the Amorites, who would not let them come down into the valley;

亚摩利人却执意住在希烈山和亚雅伦并沙宾。然而约瑟家胜了他们，使他们成了服苦的人。
For the Amorites would go on living in Mount Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim; but the children of Joseph became stronger than they, and put them to forced work.

亚摩利人的境界，是从亚克拉滨坡，从西拉而上。
And the limit of the Edomites went from the slope of Akrabbim from Sela and up.

耶和华的使者从吉甲上到波金，对以色列人说，我使你们从埃及上来，领你们到我向你们列祖起誓应许之地。我又说，我永不废弃与你们所立的约。
Now the angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim. And he said, *** I took you out of Egypt, guiding you into the land which I gave by an oath to your fathers; and I said, My agreement with you will never be broken by me:

你们也不可与这地的居民立约，要拆毁他们的祭坛。你们竟没有听从我的话。为何这样行呢？
And you are to make no agreement with the people of this land; you are to see that their altars are broken down: but you have not given ear to my voice: what have you done?

因此我又说，我必不将他们从你们面前赶出。他们必作你们肋下的荆棘。他们的神必作你们的网罗。
And so I have said, I will not send them out from before you; but they will be a danger to you, and their gods will be a cause of falling to you.

耶和华的使者向以色列众人说这话的时候，百姓就放声而哭。
Now on hearing these words which the angel of the Lord said to all the children of Israel, the people gave themselves up to loud crying and weeping.

于是给那地方起名叫波金（就是哭的意思）。众人在那里向耶和华献祭。
And they gave that place the name of Bochim, and made offerings there to the Lord.

从前约书亚打发以色列百姓去的时候，他们各归自己的地业，占据地土。
And Joshua let the people go away, and the children of Israel went, every man to his heritage, to take the land for themselves.

约书亚在世和约书亚死后，那些见耶和华为以色列人所行大事的长老还在的时候，百姓都事奉耶和华。
And the people were true to the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the responsible men who were still living after the death of Joshua, and had seen all the great work of the Lord which he had done for Israel.

耶和华的仆人，嫩的儿子约书亚，正一百一十岁就死了。
And death came to Joshua, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, he being a hundred and ten years old.

以色列人将他葬在他地业的境内，就是在以法莲山地的亭拿希烈，在迦实山的北边。
And they put his body in the earth in the land of his heritage in Timnath-heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim to the north of Mount Gaash.

那世代的人也都归了自己的列祖。后来有别的世代兴起，不知道耶和华，也不知道耶和华为以色列人所行的事。
And in time death overtook all that generation; and another generation came after them, having no knowledge of the Lord or of the things which he had done for Israel.

以色列人行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，去事奉诸巴力，
And the children of Israel did evil in the eyes of the Lord and became servants to the Baals;

离弃了领他们出埃及地的耶和华他们列祖的神，去叩拜别神，就是四围列国的神，惹耶和华发怒。
And they gave up the Lord, the God of their fathers, who had taken them out of the land of Egypt, and went after other gods, the gods of the peoples round about them, worshipping them and moving the Lord to wrath.

并离弃耶和华，去事奉巴力和亚斯他录。
And they gave up the Lord, and became the servants of Baal and the Astartes.

耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作，就把他们交在抢夺他们的人手中，又将他们付与四围仇敌的手中，甚至他们在仇敌面前再不能站立得住。
And the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of those who violently took their property, and into the hands of their haters all round them, so that they were forced to give way before them.

他们无论往何处去，耶和华都以灾祸攻击他们，正如耶和华所说的话，又如耶和华向他们所起的誓。他们便极其困苦。
Wherever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had taken his oath it would be; and things became very hard for them.

耶和华兴起士师，士师就拯救他们脱离抢夺他们人的手。
Then the Lord gave them judges, as their saviours from the hands of those who were cruel to them.

他们却不听从士师，竟随从叩拜别神，行了邪淫，速速地偏离他们列祖所行的道，不如他们列祖顺从耶和华的命令。
But still they would not give ear to their judges, but went after other gods and gave them worship; quickly turning from the way in which their fathers had gone, keeping the orders of the Lord; but they did not do so.

耶和华为他们兴起士师，就与那士师同在。士师在世的一切日子，耶和华拯救他们脱离仇敌的手。他们因受欺压扰害，就哀声叹气，所以耶和华后悔了。
And whenever the Lord gave them judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and was their saviour from the hands of their haters all the days of the judge; for the Lord was moved by their cries of grief because of those who were cruel to them.

及至士师死后，他们就转去行恶，比他们列祖更甚，去事奉叩拜别神，总不断绝顽梗的恶行。
But whenever the judge was dead, they went back and did more evil than their fathers, going after other gods, to be their servants and their worshippers; giving up nothing of their sins and their hard-hearted ways.

于是耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作。他说，因这民违背我吩咐他们列祖所守的约，不听从我的话，
And the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and he said, Because this nation has not been true to my agreement which I made with their fathers, and has not given ear to my voice;

所以约书亚死的时候所剩下的各族，我必不再从他们面前赶出，
From now on I will not go on driving out from before them any of the nations which at the death of Joshua were still living in this land;

为要借此试验以色列人，看他们肯照他们列祖谨守遵行我的道不肯。
In order to put Israel to the test, and see if they will keep the way of the Lord, walking in it as their fathers did, or not.

这样耶和华留下各族，不将他们速速赶出，也没有交付约书亚的手。
So the Lord let those nations go on living in the land, not driving them out quickly, and did not give them up into the hands of Joshua.

耶和华留下这几族，为要试验那不曾知道与迦南争战之事的以色列人，
Now these are the nations which the Lord kept in the land for the purpose of testing Israel by them, all those who had had no experience of all the wars of Canaan;

好叫以色列的后代又知道又学习未曾晓得的战事。
Only because of the generations of the children of Israel, for the purpose of teaching them war--only those who up till then had no experience of it;

所留下的就是非利士的五个首领和一切迦南人，西顿人，并住利巴嫩山的希未人，从巴力黑们山直到哈马口。
The five chiefs of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites and the Zidonians and the Hivites living in Mount Lebanon, from the mountain Baal-hermon as far as Hamath:

留下这几族，为要试验以色列人，知道他们肯听从耶和华借摩西吩咐他们列祖的诫命不肯。
For the purpose of testing Israel by them, to see if they would give ear to the orders of the Lord, which he had given to their fathers by the hand of Moses.

以色列人竟住在迦南人，赫人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人中间，
Now the children of Israel were living among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites:

娶他们的女儿为妻，将自己的女儿嫁给他们的儿子，并事奉他们的神。
And they took as wives the daughters of these nations and gave their daughters to their sons, and became servants to their gods.

以色列人行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，忘记耶和华他们的神，去事奉诸巴力和亚舍拉，
And the children of Israel did evil in the eyes of the Lord, and put out of their minds the Lord their God, and became servants to the Baals and the Astartes.

所以耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作，就把他们交在米所波大米王古珊利萨田的手中。以色列人服事古珊利萨田八年。
So the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of Cushan-rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia; and the children of Israel were his servants for eight years.

以色列人呼求耶和华的时候，耶和华就为他们兴起一位拯救者救他们，就是迦勒兄弟基纳斯的儿子俄陀聂。
And when the children of Israel made prayer to the Lord, he gave them a saviour, Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.

耶和华的灵降在他身上，他就作了以色列的士师，出去争战。耶和华将米所波大米王古珊利萨田交在他手中，他便胜了古珊利萨田。
And the spirit of the Lord came on him and he became judge of Israel, and went out to war, and the Lord gave up Cushan-rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia, into his hands and he overcame him.

于是国中太平四十年。基纳斯的儿子俄陀聂死了。
Then for forty years the land had peace, till the death of Othniel, the son of Kenaz.

以色列人又行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，耶和华就使摩押王伊矶伦强盛，攻击以色列人。
Then the children of Israel again did evil in the eyes of the Lord; and the Lord made Eglon, king of Moab, strong against Israel, because they had done evil in the Lord's eyes.

伊矶伦招聚亚扪人和亚玛力人，去攻打以色列人，占据棕树城。
And Eglon got together the people of Ammon and Amalek, and they went and overcame Israel and took the town of palm-trees.

于是以色列人服事摩押王伊矶伦十八年。
And the children of Israel were servants to Eglon, king of Moab, for eighteen years.

以色列人呼求耶和华的时候，耶和华就为他们兴起一位拯救者，就是便雅悯人基拉的儿子以笏。他是左手便利的。以色列人托他送礼物给摩押王伊矶伦。
Then when the children of Israel made prayer to the Lord, he gave them a saviour, Ehud, the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a left-handed man; and the children of Israel sent an offering by him to Eglon, king of Moab.

以笏打了一把两刃的剑，长一肘，带在右腿上衣服里面。
So Ehud made himself a two-edged sword, a cubit long, which he put on at his right side under his robe.

他将礼物献给摩押王伊矶伦，原来伊矶伦极其肥胖。
And he took the offering to Eglon, king of Moab, who was a very fat man.

以笏献完礼物，便将抬礼物的人打发走了，
And after giving the offering, he sent away the people who had come with the offering.

自己却从靠近吉甲凿石之地回来，说，王阿，我有一件机密事奏告你。王说，回避吧。于是左右侍立的人都退去了。
But he himself, turning back from the stone images at Gilgal, said, I have something to say to you in secret, O king. And he said, Let there be quiet. Then all those who were waiting before him went out.

以笏来到王面前。王独自一人坐在凉楼上。以笏说，我奉神的命报告你一件事。王就从座位上站起来。
Then Ehud came in to him while he was seated by himself in his summer-house. And Ehud said, I have a word from God for you. And he got up from his seat.

以笏便伸左手，从右腿上拔出剑来，刺入王的肚腹，
And Ehud put out his left hand, and took the sword from his right side, and sent it into his stomach;

连剑把都刺进去了。剑被肥肉夹住，他没有从王的肚腹拔出来，且穿通了后身。
And the hand-part went in after the blade, and the fat was joined up over the blade; for he did not take the sword out of his stomach. And he went out into the ...

以笏就出到游廊，将楼门尽都关锁。
Then Ehud went out into the covered way, shutting the doors of the summer-house on him and locking them.

以笏出来之后，王的仆人到了，看见楼门关锁，就说，他必是在楼上大解。
Now when he had gone, the king's servants came, and saw that the doors of the summer-house were locked; and they said, It may be that he is in his summer-house for a private purpose.

他们等烦了，见仍不开楼门，就拿钥匙开了，不料，他们的主人已死，倒在地上。
And they went on waiting till they were shamed, but the doors were still shut; so they took the key, and, opening them, saw their lord stretched out dead on the floor.

他们耽延的时候，以笏就逃跑了，经过凿石之地，逃到西伊拉。
But Ehud had got away while they were waiting and had gone past the stone images and got away to Seirah.

到了，就在以法莲山地吹角。以色列人随着他下了山地，他在前头引路，
And when he came there, he had a horn sounded in the hill-country of Ephraim, and all the children of Israel went down with him from the hill-country, and he at their head.

对他们说，你们随我来，因为耶和华已经把你们的仇敌摩押人交在你们手中。于是他们跟着他下去，把守约旦河的渡口，不容摩押一人过去。
And he said to them, Come after me; for the Lord has given the Moabites, your haters, into your hands. So they went down after him and took the crossing-places of Jordan against Moab, and let no one go across.

那时击杀了摩押人约有一万，都是强壮的勇士，没有一人逃脱。
At that time they put about ten thousand men of Moab to the sword, every strong man and every man of war; not a man got away.

这样，摩押就被以色列人制伏了。国中太平八十年。
So Moab was broken that day under the hand of Israel. And for eighty years the land had peace.

以笏之后，有亚拿的儿子珊迦，他用赶牛的棍子打死六百非利士人。他也救了以色列人。
And after him came Shamgar, the son of Anath, who put to death six hundred Philistines with an ox-stick; and he was another saviour of Israel.

以笏死后，以色列人又行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，
And the children of Israel again did evil in the eyes of the Lord when Ehud was dead.

耶和华就把他们付与在夏琐作王的迦南王耶宾手中。他的将军是西西拉，住在外邦人的夏罗设。
And the Lord gave them up into the hands of Jabin, king of Canaan, who was ruling in Hazor; the captain of his army was Sisera, who was living in Harosheth of the Gentiles.

耶宾王有铁车九百辆。他大大欺压以色列人二十年，以色列人就呼求耶和华。
Then the children of Israel made prayer to the Lord; for he had nine hundred iron war-carriages, and for twenty years he was very cruel to the children of Israel.

有一位女先知名叫底波拉，是拉比多的妻，当时作以色列的士师。
Now Deborah, a woman prophet, the wife of Lapidoth, was judge of Israel at that time.

她住在以法莲山地拉玛和伯特利中间，在底波拉的棕树下。以色列人都上她那里去听判断。
(And she had her seat under the palm-tree of Deborah between Ramah and Beth-el in the hill-country of Ephraim; and the children of Israel came up to her to be judged.)

她打发人从拿弗他利的基低斯将亚比挪庵的儿子巴拉召了来，对他说，耶和华以色列的神吩咐你说，你率领一万拿弗他利和西布伦人上他泊山去。
And she sent for Barak, the son of Abinoam, from Kedesh-naphtali, and said to him, Has not the Lord, the God of Israel, given orders saying, Go and get your force into line in Mount Tabor, and take with you ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun?

我必使耶宾的将军西西拉率领他的车辆和全军往基顺河，到你那里去。我必将他交在你手中。
And I will make Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his war-carriages and his forces, come against you at the river Kishon, where I will give him into your hands.

巴拉说，你若同我去，我就去。你若不同我去，我就不去。
And Barak said to her, If you will go with me then I will go; but if you will not go with me I will not go.

底波拉说，我必与你同去，只是你在所行的路上得不着荣耀，因为耶和华要将西西拉交在一个妇人手里。于是底波拉起来，与巴拉一同往基低斯去了。
And she said, I will certainly go with you: though you will get no honour in your undertaking, for the Lord will give Sisera into the hands of a woman. So Deborah got up and went with Barak to Kedesh.

巴拉就招聚西布伦人和拿弗他利人到基低斯，跟他上去的有一万人。底波拉也同他上去。
Then Barak sent for Zebulun and Naphtali to come to Kedesh; and ten thousand men went up after him, and Deborah went up with him.

摩西岳父（或作内兄）何巴的后裔，基尼人希百曾离开基尼族，到靠近基低斯撒拿音的橡树旁支搭帐棚。
Now Heber the Kenite, separating himself from the rest of the Kenites, from the children of Hobab, the brother-in-law of Moses, had put up his tent as far away as the oak-tree in Zaanannim, by Kedesh.

有人告诉西西拉说，亚比挪庵的儿子巴拉已经上他泊山了。
And word was given to Sisera that Barak, the son of Abinoam, had gone up to Mount Tabor.

西西拉就聚集所有的铁车九百辆和跟随他的全军，从外邦人的夏罗设出来，到了基顺河。
So Sisera got together all his war-carriages, nine hundred war-carriages of iron, and all the people who were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles as far as the river Kishon.

底波拉对巴拉说，你起来，今日就是耶和华将西西拉交在你手的日子。耶和华岂不在你前头行吗？于是巴拉下了他泊山，跟随他有一万人。
Then Deborah said to Barak, Up! for today the Lord has given Sisera into your hands: has not the Lord gone out before you? So Barak went down from Mount Tabor and ten thousand men after him.

耶和华使西西拉和他一切车辆全军溃乱，在巴拉面前被刀杀败。西西拉下车步行逃跑。
And the Lord sent fear on Sisera and all his war-carriages and all his army before Barak; and Sisera got down from his war-carriage and went in flight on foot.

巴拉追赶车辆，军队，直到外邦人的夏罗设。西西拉的全军都倒在刀下，没有留下一人。
But Barak went after the war-carriages and the army as far as Harosheth of the Gentiles; and all Sisera's army was put to the sword; not a man got away.

只有西西拉步行逃跑，到了基尼人希百之妻雅亿的帐棚，因为夏琐王耶宾与基尼人希百家和好。
But Sisera went in flight on foot to the tent of Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite; for there was peace between Jabin, king of Hazor, and the family of Heber the Kenite.

雅亿出来迎接西西拉，对他说，请我主进来，不要惧怕。西西拉就进了她的帐棚。雅亿用被将他遮盖。
And Jael went out to Sisera, and said to him, Come in, my lord, come in to me without fear. So he went into her tent, and she put a cover over him.

西西拉对雅亿说，我渴了，求你给我一点水喝。雅亿就打开皮袋，给他奶子喝，仍旧把他遮盖。
Then he said to her, Give me now a little water, for I have need of a drink. And opening a skin of milk, she gave him drink, and put the cover over him again.

西西拉又对雅亿说，请你站在帐棚门口，若有人来问你说，有人在这里没有。你就说，没有。
And he said to her, Take your place at the door of the tent, and if anyone comes and says to you, Is there any man here, say, No.

西西拉疲乏沉睡。希百的妻雅亿取了帐棚的橛子，手里拿着锤子，轻悄悄地到他旁边，将橛子从他鬓边钉进去，钉入地里。西西拉就死了。
Then Jael, Heber's wife, took a tent-pin and a hammer and went up to him quietly, driving the pin into his head, and it went through his head into the earth, for he was in a deep sleep from weariness; and so he came to his end.

巴拉追赶西西拉的时候，雅亿出来迎接他说，来吧，我将你所寻找的人给你看。他就进入帐棚，看见西西拉已经死了，倒在地上，橛子还在他鬓中。
Then Jael went out, and meeting Barak going after Sisera, said to him, Come, and I will let you see the man you are searching for. So he came into her tent and saw, and there was Sisera stretched out dead with the tent-pin in his head.

这样，神使迦南王耶宾被以色列人制伏了。
So that day God overcame Jabin, king of Canaan, before the children of Israel.

从此以色列人的手越发有力，胜了迦南王耶宾，直到将他灭绝了。
And the power of the children of Israel went on increasing against Jabin, king of Canaan, till he was cut off.

那时，底波拉和亚比挪庵的儿子巴拉作歌，说，
At that time Deborah and Barak, the son of Abinoam, made this song, saying:

因为以色列中有军长率领，百姓也甘心牺牲自己，你们应当颂赞耶和华。
Because of the flowing hair of the fighters in Israel, because the people gave themselves freely, give praise to the Lord.

君王阿，要听。王子阿，要侧耳而听。我要向耶和华歌唱，我要歌颂耶和华以色列的神。
Give attention, O kings; give ear, O rulers; I, even I, will make a song to the Lord; I will make melody to the Lord, the God of Israel.

耶和华阿，你从西珥出来，由以东地行走。那时地震天漏，云也落雨。
Lord, when you went out from Seir, moving like an army from the field of Edom, the earth was shaking and the heavens were troubled, and the clouds were dropping water.

山见耶和华的面就震动，西乃山见耶和华以色列神的面也是如此。
The mountains were shaking before the Lord, before the Lord, the God of Israel.

在亚拿之子珊迦的时候，又在雅亿的日子，大道无人行走，都是绕道而行。
In the days of Shamgar, the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were not used, and travellers went by side roads.

以色列中的官长停职，直到我底波拉兴起，等我兴起作以色列的母。
Country towns were no more in Israel, *** were no more, till you, Deborah, came up, till you came up as a mother in Israel.

以色列人选择新神，争战的事就临到城门。那时，以色列四万人中岂能见藤牌枪矛呢？
They had no one to make arms, there were no more armed men in the towns; was there a body-cover or a spear to be seen among forty thousand in Israel?

我心倾向以色列的首领，他们在民中甘心牺牲自己。你们应当颂赞耶和华。
Come, you rulers of Israel, you who gave yourselves freely among the people: give praise to the Lord.

骑白驴的，坐绣花毯子的，行路的，你们都当传扬。
Let them give thought to it, who go on white asses, and those who are walking on the road.

在远离弓箭响声打水之处，人必述说耶和华公义的作为，就是他治理以色列公义的作为。那时耶和华的民下到城门。
Give ear to the women laughing by the water-springs; there they will give again the story of the upright acts of the Lord, all the upright acts of his arm in Israel.

底波拉阿，兴起。兴起。你当兴起，兴起，唱歌。亚比挪庵的儿子巴拉阿，你当奋兴，掳掠你的敌人。
Awake! awake! Deborah: awake! awake! give a song: Up! Barak, and take prisoner those who took you prisoner, O son of Abinoam.

那时有余剩的贵胄和百姓一同下来。耶和华降临，为我攻击勇士。
Then the chiefs went down to the doors; the Lord's people went down among the strong ones.

有根本在亚玛力人的地，从以法莲下来的。便雅悯在民中跟随你。有掌权的从玛吉下来。有持杖检点民数的从西布伦下来。
Out of Ephraim they came down into the valley; after you, Benjamin, among your tribesmen; from Machir came down the captains, and from Zebulun those in whose hand is the ruler's rod.

以萨迦的首领与底波拉同来。以萨迦怎样，巴拉也怎样。众人都跟随巴拉冲下平原。在流便的溪水旁有心中定大志的。
Your chiefs, Issachar, were with Deborah; and Naphtali was true to Barak; into the valley they went rushing out at his feet. In Reuben there were divisions, and great searchings of heart.

你为何坐在羊圈内听群中吹笛的声音呢？在流便的溪水旁有心中设大谋的。
Why did you keep quiet among the sheep, hearing nothing but the watchers piping to the flocks?

基列人安居在约旦河外。但人为何等在船上。亚设人在海口静坐，在港口安居。
Gilead was living over Jordan; and Dan was waiting in his ships; Asher kept in his place by the sea's edge, living by his inlets.

西布伦人是拚命敢死的。拿弗他利人在田野的高处也是如此。
It was the people of Zebulun who put their lives in danger, even to death, with Naphtali on the high places of the field.

君王都来争战。那时迦南诸王在米吉多水旁的他纳争战，却未得掳掠银钱。
The kings came on to the fight, the kings of Canaan were warring; in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo: they took no profit in money.

星宿从天上争战，从其轨道攻击西西拉。
The stars from heaven were fighting; from their highways they were fighting against Sisera.

基顺古河把敌人冲没。我的灵阿，应当努力前行。
The river Kishon took them violently away, stopping their flight, the river Kishon. Give praise, O my soul, to the strength of the Lord!

那时壮马驰驱，踢跳，奔腾。
Then loudly the feet of the horses were sounding with the stamping, the stamping of their war-horses.

耶和华的使者说，应当咒诅米罗斯，大大咒诅其中的居民。因为他们不来帮助耶和华，不来帮助耶和华攻击勇士。
A curse, a curse on Meroz! said the angel of the Lord. A bitter curse on her townspeople! Because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord among the strong ones.

愿基尼人希百的妻雅亿比众妇人多得福气，比住帐棚的妇人更蒙福祉。
Blessings be on Jael, more than on all women! Blessings greater than on any in the tents!

西西拉求水，雅亿给他奶子，用宝贵的盘子给他奶油。
His request was for water, she gave him milk; she put butter before him on a fair plate.

雅亿左手拿着帐棚的橛子，右手拿着匠人的锤子，击打西西拉，打伤他的头，把他的鬓角打破穿通。
She put out her hand to the tent-pin, and her right hand to the workman's hammer; and she gave Sisera a blow, crushing his head, wounding and driving through his brow.

西西拉在她脚前曲身仆倒，在她脚前曲身倒卧。在哪里曲身，就在哪里死亡。
Bent at her feet he went down, he was stretched out; bent at her feet he went down; where he was bent down, there he went down in death.

西西拉的母亲从窗户里往外观看，从窗棂中呼叫说，他的战车为何耽延不来呢？他的车轮为何行得慢呢？
Looking out from the window she gave a cry, the mother of Sisera was crying out through the window, Why is his carriage so long in coming? When will the noise of his wheels be sounding?

聪明的宫女安慰她（原文作回答她），她也自言自语地说，
Her wise women gave answer to her, yes, she made answer again to herself,

他们莫非得财而分。每人得了一两个女子。西西拉得了彩衣为掳物，得绣花的彩衣为掠物。这彩衣两面绣花，乃是披在被掳之人颈项上的。
Are they not getting, are they not parting the goods among them: a young girl or two to every man; and to Sisera robes of coloured needlework, worked in fair colours on this side and on that, for the neck of the queen?

耶和华阿，愿你的仇敌都这样灭亡。愿爱你的人如日头出现，光辉烈烈。这样，国中太平四十年。
So may destruction come on all your haters, O Lord; but let your lovers be like the sun going out in his strength. And for forty years the land had peace.

以色列人又行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，耶和华就把他们交在米甸人手里七年。
And the children of Israel did evil in the eyes of the Lord; and the Lord gave them up into the hand of Midian for seven years.

米甸人压制以色列人。以色列人因为米甸人，就在山中挖穴，挖洞，建造营寨。
And Midian was stronger than Israel; and because of the Midianites, the children of Israel made holes for themselves in the mountains, and hollows in the rocks, and strong places.

以色列人每逢撒种之后，米甸人，亚玛力人，和东方人都上来攻打他们，
And whenever Israel's grain was planted, the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the east came up against them;

对着他们安营，毁坏土产，直到迦萨，没有给以色列人留下食物，牛，羊，驴也没有留下。
And put their army in position against them; and they took all the produce of the earth as far as Gaza, till there was no food in Israel, or any sheep or oxen or asses.

因为那些人带着牲畜帐棚来，像蝗虫那样多，人和骆驼无数，都进入国内，毁坏全地。
For they came up regularly with their oxen and their tents; they came like the locusts in number; they and their camels were without number; and they came into the land for its destruction.

以色列人因米甸人的缘故，极其穷乏，就呼求耶和华。
And Israel was in great need because of Midian; and the cry of the children of Israel went up to the Lord.

以色列人因米甸人的缘故，呼求耶和华，
And when the cry of the children of Israel, because of Midian, came before the Lord,

耶和华就差遣先知到以色列人那里，对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，我曾领你们从埃及上来，出了为奴之家，
The Lord sent a prophet to the children of Israel, who said to them, The Lord the God of Israel, has said, I took you up from Egypt, out of the prison-house;

救你们脱离埃及人的手，并脱离一切欺压你们之人的手，把他们从你们面前赶出，将他们的地赐给你们。
And I took you out of the hands of the Egyptians and out of the hands of all who were cruel to you, and I sent them out by force from before you and gave you their land;

又对你们说，我是耶和华你们的神。你们住在亚摩利人的地，不可敬畏他们的神。你们竟不听从我的话。
And I said to you, I am the Lord your God; you are not to give worship to the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living, but you did not give ear to my voice.

耶和华的使者到了俄弗拉，坐在亚比以谢族人约阿施的橡树下。约阿施的儿子基甸正在酒榨那里打麦子，为要防备米甸人。
Now the angel of the Lord came and took his seat under the oak-tree in Ophrah, in the field of Joash the Abiezrite; and his son Gideon was crushing grain in the place where the grapes were crushed, so that the Midianites might not see it.

耶和华的使者向基甸显现，对他说，大能的勇士阿，耶和华与你同在。
And the angel of the Lord came before his eyes, and said to him, The Lord is with you, O man of war.

基甸说，主阿，耶和华若与我们同在，我们何至遭遇这一切事呢？我们的列祖不是向我们说耶和华领我们从埃及上来吗？他那样奇妙的作为在哪里呢？现在他却丢弃我们，将我们交在米甸人手里。
Then Gideon said to him, O my lord, if the Lord is with us why has all this come on us? And where are all his works of power, of which our fathers have given us word, saying, Did not the Lord take us out of Egypt? But now he has given us up, handing us over to the power of Midian.

耶和华观看基甸，说，你靠着你这能力去从米甸人手里拯救以色列人，不是我差遣你去的吗？
And the Lord, turning to him, said, Go in the strength you have and be Israel's saviour from Midian: have I not sent you?

基甸说，主阿，我有何能拯救以色列人呢？我家在玛拿西支派中是至贫穷的。我在我父家是至微小的。
And he said to him, O Lord, how may I be the saviour of Israel? See, my family is the poorest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.

耶和华对他说，我与你同在，你就必击打米甸人，如击打一人一样。
Then the Lord said to him, Truly, I will be with you, and you will overcome the Midianites as if they were one man.

基甸说，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你给我一个证据，使我知道与我说话的就是主。
So he said to him, If now I have grace in your eyes, then give me a sign that it is you who are talking to me.

求你不要离开这里，等我归回将礼物带来供在你面前。主说，我必等你回来。
Do not go away till I come with my offering and put it before you. And he said, I will not go away before you come back.

基甸去预备了一只山羊羔，用一伊法细面作了无酵饼，将肉放在筐内，把汤盛在壶中，带到橡树下，献在使者面前。
Then Gideon went in and made ready a young goat, and with an ephah of meal he made unleavened cakes: he put the meat in a basket and the soup in which it had been cooked he put in a pot, and he took it out to him under the oak-tree and gave it to him there.

神的使者吩咐基甸说，将肉和无酵饼放在这磐石上，把汤倒出来。他就这样行了。
And the angel of God said to him, Take the meat and the unleavened cakes and put them down on the rock over there, draining out the soup over them. And he did so.

耶和华的使者伸出手内的杖，杖头挨了肉和无酵饼，就有火从磐石中出来，烧尽了肉和无酵饼。耶和华的使者也就不见了。
Then the angel of the Lord put out the stick which was in his hand, touching the meat and the cakes with the end of it; and a flame came up out of the rock, burning up the meat and the cakes: and the angel of the Lord was seen no longer.

基甸见他是耶和华的使者，就说，哀哉。主耶和华阿，我不好了，因为我觌面看见耶和华的使者。
Then Gideon was certain that he was the angel of the Lord; and Gideon said, I am in fear, O Lord God! for I have seen the angel of the Lord face to face.

耶和华对他说，你放心，不要惧怕，你必不至死。
But the Lord said to him, Peace be with you; have no fear: you are in no danger of death.

于是基甸在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛，起名叫耶和华沙龙（就是耶和华赐平安的意思）。这坛在亚比以谢族的俄弗拉直到如今。
Then Gideon made an altar there to the Lord, and gave it the name Yahweh-shalom; to this day it is in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

当那夜，耶和华吩咐基甸说，你取你父亲的牛来，就是（或作和）那七岁的第二只牛，并拆毁你父亲为巴力所筑的坛，砍下坛旁的木偶，
The same night the Lord said to him, Take ten men of your servants and an ox seven years old, and after pulling down the altar of Baal which is your father's, and cutting down the holy tree by its side,

在这磐石（原文作保障）上整整齐齐地为耶和华你的神筑一座坛，将第二只牛献为燔祭，用你所砍下的木偶作柴。
Make an altar to the Lord your God on the top of this rock, in the ordered way and take the ox and make a burned offering with the wood of the holy tree which has been cut down.

基甸就从他仆人中挑了十个人，照着耶和华吩咐他的行了。他因怕父家和本城的人，不敢在白昼行这事，就在夜间行了。
Then Gideon took ten of his servants and did as the Lord had said to him; but fearing to do it by day, because of his father's people and the men of the town, he did it by night.

城里的人清早起来，见巴力的坛拆毁，坛旁的木偶砍下，第二只牛献在新筑的坛上，
And the men of the town got up early in the morning, and they saw the altar of Baal broken down, and the holy tree which was by it cut down, and the ox offered on the altar which had been put up there.

就彼此说，这事是谁作的呢？他们访查之后，就说，这是约阿施的儿子基甸作的。
And they said to one another, Who has done this thing? And after searching with care, they said, Gideon, the son of Joash, has done this thing.

城里的人对约阿施说，将你儿子交出来，好治死他。因为他拆毁了巴力的坛，砍下坛旁的木偶。
Then the men of the town said to Joash, Make your son come out to be put to death, for pulling down the altar of Baal and cutting down the holy tree which was by it.

约阿施回答站着攻击他的众人说，你们是为巴力争论吗？你们要救他吗？谁为他争论，趁早将谁治死。巴力若果是神，有人拆毁他的坛，让他为自己争论吧。
But Joash said to all those who were attacking him, Will you take up the cause of Baal? will you be his saviour? Let anyone who will take up his cause be put to death while it is still morning: if he is a god, let him take up his cause himself because of the pulling down of his altar.

所以当日人称基甸为耶路巴力，意思说，他拆毁巴力的坛，让巴力与他争论。
So that day he gave him the name of Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal take up his cause against him because his altar has been broken down.

那时，米甸人，亚玛力人，和东方人都聚集过河，在耶斯列平原安营。
Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the people of the east, banding themselves together, went over and put up their tents in the valley of Jezreel.

耶和华的灵降在基甸身上，他就吹角。亚比以谢族都聚集跟随他。
But the spirit of the Lord came on Gideon; and at the sound of his horn all Abiezer came together after him.

他打发人走遍玛拿西地，玛拿西人也聚集跟随他。又打发人去见亚设人，西布伦人，拿弗他利人，他们也都出来与他们会合。
And he sent through all Manasseh, and they came after him; and he sent to Asher and Zebulun and Naphtali, and they came up and were joined to the others.

基甸对神说，你若果照着所说的话，借我手拯救以色列人，
Then Gideon said to God, If you are going to give Israel salvation by my hand, as you have said,

我就把一团羊毛放在禾场上，若单是羊毛上有露水，别的地方都是干的，我就知道你必照着所说的话，借我手拯救以色列人。
See, I will put the wool of a sheep on the grain-floor; if there is dew on the wool only, while all the earth is dry, then I will be certain that it is your purpose to give Israel salvation by my hand as you have said.

次日早晨基甸起来，见果然是这样。将羊毛挤一挤，从羊毛中拧出满盆的露水来。
And it was so: for he got up early on the morning after, and twisting the wool in his hands, he got a basin full of water from the dew on the wool.

基甸又对神说，求你不要向我发怒，我再说这一次，让我将羊毛再试一次。但愿羊毛是干的，别的地方都有露水。
Then Gideon said to God, Do not be moved to wrath against me if I say only this: let me make one more test with the wool; let the wool now be dry, while the earth is covered with dew.

这夜神也如此行，独羊毛上是干的，别的地方都有露水。
And that night God did so; for the wool was dry, and there was dew on all the earth round it.

耶路巴力就是基甸，他和一切跟随的人早晨起来，在哈律泉旁安营。米甸营在他们北边的平原，靠近摩利冈。
Then Jerubbaal, that is, Gideon, and all the people with him, got up early and put up their tents by the side of the water-spring of Harod; the tents of Midian were on the north side of him, under the hill of Moreh in the valley.

耶和华对基甸说，跟随你的人过多，我不能将米甸人交在他们手中，免得以色列人向我夸大，说，是我们自己的手救了我们。
And the Lord said to Gideon, So great is the number of your people, that if I give the Midianites into their hands they will be uplifted in pride over me and will say, I myself have been my saviour.

现在你要向这些人宣告说，凡惧怕胆怯的，可以离开基列山回去。于是有二万二千人回去，只剩下一万。
So now, let it be given out to the people that anyone who is shaking with fear is to go back from Mount Galud. So twenty-two thousand of the people went back, but there were still ten thousand.

耶和华对基甸说，人还是过多。你要带他们下到水旁，我好在那里为你试试他们。我指点谁说，这人可以同你去，他就可以同你去。我指点谁说，这人不可同你去，他就不可同你去。
Then the Lord said to Gideon, There are still more people than is necessary; take them down to the water so that I may put them to the test for you there; then whoever I say is to go with you will go, and whoever I say is not to go will not go.

基甸就带他们下到水旁。耶和华对基甸说，凡用舌头舔水，像狗舔的，要使他单站在一处。凡跪下喝水的，也要使他单站在一处。
So he took the people down to the water; and the Lord said to Gideon, Put on one side by themselves all those drinking up the water with their tongues like a dog; and in the same way, all those who go down on their knees to the water while drinking.

于是用手捧着舔水的有三百人，其余的都跪下喝水。
Now the number of those who took up the water with their tongues was three hundred; all the rest of the people went down on their knees to the water.

耶和华对基甸说，我要用这舔水的三百人拯救你们，将米甸人交在你手中。其余的人都可以各归各处去。
And the Lord said to Gideon, By those three hundred who were drinking with their tongues I will give you salvation and give the Midianites into your hands; let the rest of the people go away, every man to his place.

这三百人就带着食物和角。其余的以色列人，基甸都打发他们各归各的帐棚，只留下这三百人。米甸营在他下边的平原里。
So they took the vessels of the people, and their horns from their hands, and he sent them away, every man to his tent, keeping only the three hundred; and the tents of Midian were lower down in the valley.

当那夜，耶和华吩咐基甸说，起来，下到米甸营里去，因我已将他们交在你手中。
The same night the Lord said to him, Up! go down now against their army, for I have given them into your hands.

倘若你怕下去，就带你的仆人普拉下到那营里去。
But if you have fear of going down, take your servant Purah with you and go down to the tents;

你必听见他们所说的，然后你就有胆量下去攻营。于是基甸带着仆人普拉下到营旁。
And after hearing what they are saying, you will get strength to go down against the army. So he went down with his servant Purah to the outer line of the tents of the armed men.

米甸人，亚玛力人，和一切东方人都布散在平原，如同蝗虫那样多。他们的骆驼无数，多如海边的沙。
Now the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the people of the east were covering the valley like locusts; and their camels were like the sand by the seaside, without number.

基甸到了，就听见一人将梦告诉同伴说，我作了一梦，梦见一个大麦饼滚入米甸营中，到了帐幕，将帐幕撞倒，帐幕就翻转倾覆了。
When Gideon came there, a man was giving his friend an account of his dream, saying, See, I had a dream about a cake of barley bread which, falling into the tents of Midian, came on to the tent, overturning it so that it was stretched out flat on the earth.

那同伴说，这不是别的，乃是以色列人约阿施的儿子基甸的刀。神已将米甸和全军都交在他的手中。
And his friend in answer said, This is certainly the sword of Gideon, the son of Joash, the men of Israel: into their hands God has given up all the army of Midian.

基甸听见这梦和梦的讲解，就敬拜神，回到以色列营中，说，起来吧。耶和华已将米甸的军队交在你们手中了。
Then Gideon, hearing the story of the dream and the sense in which they took it, gave worship; then he went back to the tents of Israel, and said, Up! for the Lord has given the army of Midian into your hands.

于是基甸将三百人分作三队，把角和空瓶交在各人手里，瓶内都藏着火把，
Then separating the three hundred men into three bands, he gave every man a horn, and a vessel in which was a flaming branch.

吩咐他们说，你们要看我行事，我到了营的旁边怎样行，你们也要怎样行。
And he said to them, Keep your eyes on me, and do what I do; when I come to the outer line of tents, whatever I do, you are to do the same.

我和一切跟随我的人吹角的时候，你们也要在营的四围吹角，喊叫说，耶和华和基甸的刀。
At the sound of my horn, and the horns of those who are with me, let your horns be sounded all round the tents, and say, For the Lord and for Gideon.

基甸和跟随他的一百人，在三更之初才换更的时候，来到营旁，就吹角，打破手中的瓶。
So Gideon and the three hundred men who were with him came to the outer line of tents, at the start of the middle watch, when the watchmen had only then taken their stations; and the horns were sounded and the vessels broken.

三队的人就都吹角，打破瓶子，左手拿着火把，右手拿着角，喊叫说，耶和华和基甸的刀。
So the three bands all gave a loud note on their horns, and when the vessels had been broken, they took the flaming branches in their left hands, and the horns in their right hands ready for blowing, crying out, For the Lord and for Gideon.

他们在营的四围各站各的地方。全营的人都乱窜。三百人呐喊，使他们逃跑。
Then they made a line round the tents, every man in his place; and all the army, awaking from sleep, came running out, and with loud cries went in flight.

三百人就吹角，耶和华使全营的人用刀互相击杀，逃到西利拉的伯哈示他，直逃到靠近他巴的亚伯米何拉。
And the three hundred gave a loud note on their horns, and every man's sword was turned by the Lord against his brother all through the army; and the army went in flight as far as Beth-shittah in the direction of Zeredah, to the edge of Abel-meholah by Tabbath.

以色列人就从拿弗他利，亚设，和玛拿西全地聚集来追赶米甸人。
And the men of Israel came together from Naphtali and from Asher and all Manasseh, and went after Midian.

基甸打发人走遍以法莲山地，说，你们下来攻击米甸人，争先把守约旦河的渡口，直到伯巴拉。于是以法莲的众人聚集，把守约旦河的渡口，直到伯巴拉，
Then Gideon sent through all the hill-country of Ephraim saying, Come down against Midian, and keep the ways across Jordan before they come. So all the men of Ephraim, massing themselves together, kept the ways across Jordan.

捉住了米甸人的两个首领，一名俄立，一名西伊伯。将俄立杀在俄立磐石上，将西伊伯杀在西伊伯酒榨那里。又追赶米甸人，将俄立和西伊伯的首级带过约旦河，到基甸那里。
And they took the two chiefs of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; and they put Oreb to death at the rock of Oreb, and Zeeb they put to death at the place of the grape-crushing in Zeeb, and they went after Midian; but the heads of Oreb and Zeeb they took across Jordan to Gideon.

以法莲人对基甸说，你去与米甸人争战，没有招我们同去，为什么这样待我们呢？他们就与基甸大大地争吵。
And the men of Ephraim came and said to him, Why did you not send for us when you went to war against Midian? And they said sharp and angry words to him.

基甸对他们说，我所行的岂能比你们所行的呢？以法莲拾取剩下的葡萄不强过亚比以谢所摘的葡萄吗？
And he said to them, What have I done in comparison with you? Is not that which Ephraim took up after the grape-cutting better than all the grapes which Abiezer got in from the grape-cutting?

神已将米甸人的两个首领俄立和西伊伯交在你们手中。我所行的岂能比你们所行的呢？基甸说了这话，以法莲人的怒气就消了。
God has given into your hands the chiefs of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb; what have I been able to do in comparison with you? And when he said this, their feeling about him became kinder.

基甸和跟随他的三百人到约旦河过渡，虽然疲乏，还是追赶。
Then Gideon came to Jordan and went over it with his three hundred, overcome with weariness and in need of food.

基甸对疏割人说，求你们拿饼来给跟随我的人吃，因为他们疲乏了。我们追赶米甸人的两个王西巴和撒慕拿。
And he said to the men of Succoth, Give bread cakes to my people, for they are overcome with weariness, and I am going on after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.

疏割人的首领回答说，西巴和撒慕拿已经在你手里，你使我们将饼给你的军兵吗？
But the chiefs of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna even now in your hand that we are to give bread to your army?

基甸说，耶和华将西巴和撒慕拿交在我手之后，我就用野地的荆条和枳棘打伤你们。
Then Gideon said, Because of this, when the Lord has given Zebah and Zalmunna into my hands, I will have you stretched on a bed of thorns of the waste land and on sharp stems, and have you crushed as grain is crushed on a grain-floor.

基甸从那里上到毗努伊勒，对那里的人也是这样说。毗努伊勒人也与疏割人回答他的话一样。
So he went up from there to Penuel and made the same request to the men of Penuel; but they gave him the same answer as the men of Succoth had given.

他向毗努伊勒人说，我平平安安回来的时候，我必拆毁这楼。
So he said to the men of Penuel, When I come back in peace, I will have this tower broken down.

那时西巴和撒慕拿，并跟随他们的军队都在加各，约有一万五千人，就是东方人全军所剩下的。已经被杀约有十二万拿刀的。
Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor and their armies with them, about fifteen thousand men, those of all the army of the children of the east who were still living; for a hundred and twenty thousand of their swordsmen had been put to death.

基甸就由挪巴和约比哈东边，从住帐棚人的路上去，杀败了米甸人的军兵，因为他们坦然无惧。
And Gideon went up by the way used by the people living in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and made an attack on the army when they had no thought of danger.

西巴和撒慕拿逃跑。基甸追赶他们，捉住米甸的二王西巴和撒慕拿，惊散全军。
And Zebah and Zalmunna went in flight; and he went after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and put all the army to the curse.

约阿施的儿子基甸由希列斯坡从阵上回来，
Then Gideon, the son of Joash, went back from the fight:

捉住疏割的一个少年人，问他，疏割的首领长老是谁。他就将首领长老七十七个人的名字写出来。
And taking prisoner a young man of the people of Succoth, he got from him, in answer to his questions, a list of the chiefs of Succoth and the responsible men, seventy-seven men.

基甸到了疏割，对那里的人说，你们从前讥诮我说，西巴和撒慕拿已经在你手里，你使我们将饼给跟随你的疲乏人吗？现在西巴和撒慕拿在这里。
So he came to the men of Succoth and said, Here are Zebah and Zalmunna, on account of whom you made sport of me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna even now in your hand, that we are to give bread to your army who are overcome with weariness?

于是捉住那城内的长老，用野地的荆条和枳棘责打（原文作指教）疏割人。
Then he took the responsible men of the town and had them crushed on a bed of thorns and sharp stems.

又拆了毗努伊勒的楼，杀了那城里的人。
And he had the tower of Penuel broken down and the men of the town put to death.

基甸问西巴和撒慕拿说，你们在他泊山所杀的人是什么样式。回答说，他们好象你，各人都有王子的样式。
Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, Where are the men whom you put to death at Tabor? And they gave answer, As you are, so were they; every one of them was like a king's son.

基甸说，他们是我同母的弟兄，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你们从前若存留他们的性命，我如今就不杀你们了。
And he said, They were my brothers, my mother's sons: by the life of the Lord, if you had kept them safe, I would not put you to death.

于是对他的长子益帖说，你起来杀他们。但益帖因为是童子，害怕，不敢拔刀。
Then he said to Jether, his oldest son, Up! Put them to death. But the boy did not take out his sword, fearing because he was still a boy.

西巴和撒慕拿说，你自己起来杀我们吧。因为人如何，力量也是如何。基甸就起来，杀了西巴和撒慕拿，夺获他们骆驼项上戴的月牙圈。
Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Up! Put an end to us yourself: for you have a man's strength. Then Gideon got up and put Zebah and Zalmunna to death and took the ornaments which were on their camels' necks.

以色列人对基甸说，你既救我们脱离米甸人的手，愿你和你的儿孙管理我们。
Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, Be our ruler, you and your son and your son's son after him; for you have been our saviour from the hands of Midian.

基甸说，我不管理你们，我的儿子也不管理你们，惟有耶和华管理你们。
But Gideon said to them, I will not be a ruler over you, and my son will not be a ruler over you: it is the Lord who will be ruler over you.

基甸又对他们说，我有一件事求你们，请你们各人将所夺的耳环给我。（原来仇敌是以实玛利人，都是戴金耳环的。）
Then Gideon said to them, I have a request to make to you; let every man give me the ear-rings he has taken. (For they had gold ear-rings, because they were Ishmaelites.)

他们说，我们情愿给你。就铺开一件外衣，各人将所夺的耳环丢在其上。
And they gave answer, We will gladly give them. So they put down a robe, every man dropping into it the ear-rings he had taken.

基甸所要出来的金耳环重一千七百舍客勒金子。此外还有米甸王所戴的月环，耳坠，和所穿的紫色衣服，并骆驼项上的金链子。
The weight of the gold ear-rings which he got from them was one thousand, seven hundred shekels of gold; in addition to the moon-ornaments and jewels and the purple robes which were on the kings of Midian, and the chains on their camels' necks.

基甸以此制造了一个以弗得，设立在本城俄弗拉。后来以色列人拜那以弗得行了邪淫。这就作了基甸和他全家的网罗。
And Gideon made an ephod from them and put it up in his town Ophrah; and all Israel went after it there and were false to the Lord; and it became a cause of sin to Gideon and his house.

这样，米甸人被以色列人制伏了，不敢再抬头。基甸还在的日子，国中太平四十年。
So Midian was broken before the children of Israel and the Midianites never got back their strength. And the land had peace for forty years, in the days of Gideon.

约阿施的儿子耶路巴力回去，住在自己家里。
And Jerubbaal, the son of Joash, went back to his house and was living there.

基甸有七十个亲生的儿子，因为他有许多的妻。
Gideon had seventy sons, the offspring of his body; for he had a number of wives.

他的妾住在示剑，也给他生了一个儿子。基甸与他起名叫亚比米勒。
And the servant-wife he had in Shechem had a son by him, to whom he gave the name Abimelech.

约阿施的儿子基甸，年纪老迈而死，葬在亚比以谢族的俄弗拉，在他父亲约阿施的坟墓里。
And Gideon, the son of Joash, came to his end when he was very old, and his body was put in the resting-place of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.

基甸死后，以色列人又去随从诸巴力行邪淫，以巴力比利土为他们的神。
And after the death of Gideon, the children of Israel again went after the gods of Canaan and were false to the Lord, and made Baal-berith their god.

以色列人不记念耶和华他们的神，就是拯救他们脱离四围仇敌之手的，
And the children of Israel did not keep in their minds the Lord their God, who had been their saviour from all their haters on every side;

也不照着耶路巴力，就是基甸向他们所施的恩惠厚待他的家。
And they were not kind to the house of Jerubbaal, that is, Gideon, in reward for all the good he had done to Israel.

耶路巴力的儿子亚比米勒到了示剑见他的众母舅，对他们和他外祖全家的人说，
Now Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, went to Shechem to his mother's family, and said to them and to all the family of his mother's father,

请你们问示剑的众人说，是耶路巴力的众子七十人都管理你们好呢？还是一人管理你们好呢？你们又要记念我是你们的骨肉。
Say now in the ears of all the townsmen of Shechem, Is it better for you to be ruled by all the seventy sons of Jerubbaal or by one man only? And keep in mind that I am your bone and your flesh.

他的众母舅便将这一切话为他说给示剑人听，示剑人的心就归向亚比米勒。他们说，他原是我们的弟兄。
So his mother's family said all this about him in the ears of all the townsmen of Shechem: and their hearts were turned to Abimelech, for they said, He is our brother.

就从巴力比利土的庙中取了七十舍客勒银子给亚比米勒。亚比米勒用以雇了些匪徒跟随他。
And they gave him seventy shekels of silver from the house of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech got the support of a number of uncontrolled and good-for-nothing persons.

他往俄弗拉到他父亲的家，将他弟兄，耶路巴力的众子七十人都杀在一块磐石上。只剩下耶路巴力的小儿子约坦，因为他躲藏了。
Then he went to his father's house at Ophrah, and put his brothers, the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, to death on the same stone; however, Jotham, the youngest, kept himself safe by going away to a secret place.

示剑人和米罗人都一同聚集，往示剑橡树旁的柱子那里，立亚比米勒为王。
And all the townsmen of Shechem and all Beth-millo came together and went and made Abimelech their king, by the oak of the pillar in Shechem.

有人将这事告诉约坦，他就去站在基利心山顶上，向众人大声喊叫说，示剑人哪，你们要听我的话，神也就听你们的话。
Now Jotham, on hearing of it, went to the top of Mount Gerizim, and crying out with a loud voice said to them, Give ear to me, you townsmen of Shechem, so that God may give ear to you.

有一时树木要膏一树为王，管理他们，就去对橄榄树说，请你作我们的王。
One day the trees went out to make a king for themselves; and they said to the olive-tree, Be king over us.

橄榄树回答说，我岂肯止住供奉神和尊重人的油，飘摇在众树之上呢？
But the olive-tree said to them, Am I to give up my wealth of oil, by which men give honour to God, and go waving over the trees?

树木对无花果树说，请你来作我们的王。
Then the trees said to the fig-tree, You come and be king over us.

无花果树回答说，我岂肯止住所结甜美的果子，飘摇在众树之上呢？
But the fig-tree said to them, Am I to give up my sweet taste and my good fruit and go waving over the trees?

树木对葡萄树说，请你来作我们的王。
Then the trees said to the vine, You come and be king over us.

葡萄树回答说，我岂肯止住使神和人喜乐的新酒，飘摇在众树之上呢？
But the vine said to them, Am I to give up my wine, which makes glad God and men, to go waving over the trees?

众树对荆棘说，请你来作我们的王。
Then all the trees said to the thorn, You come and be king over us.

荆棘回答说，你们若诚诚实实地膏我为王，就要投在我的荫下。不然，愿火从荆棘里出来，烧灭利巴嫩的香柏树。
And the thorn said to the trees, If it is truly your desire to make me your king, then come and put your faith in my shade; and if not, may fire come out of the thorn, burning up the cedars of Lebanon.

现在你们立亚比米勒为王，若按诚实正直善待耶路巴力和他的全家，这就是酬他的劳。
So now, if you have done truly and uprightly in making Abimelech king, and if you have done well to Jerubbaal and his house in reward for the work of his hands;

从前我父冒死为你们争战，救了你们脱离米甸人的手。
(For my father made war for you, and put his life in danger, and made you free from the hands of Midian;

你们如今起来攻击我的父家，将他众子七十人杀在一块磐石上，又立他婢女所生的儿子亚比米勒为示剑人的王。他原是你们的弟兄。
And you have gone against my father's family this day, and have put to death his sons, even seventy men on one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his servant-wife, king over the townsmen of Shechem because he is your brother;)

你们如今若按诚实正直待耶路巴力和他的家，就可因亚比米勒得欢乐，他也可因你们得欢乐。
If then you have done what is true and upright to Jerubbaal and his family this day, may you have joy in Abimelech, and may he have joy in you;

不然，愿火从亚比米勒发出，烧灭示剑人和米罗众人，又愿火从示剑人和米罗人中出来，烧灭亚比米勒。
But if not, may fire come out from Abimelech, burning up the townsmen of Shechem and Beth-millo; and may fire come out from the townsmen of Shechem and Beth-millo, for the destruction of Abimelech.

约坦因怕他弟兄亚比米勒，就逃跑，来到比珥，住在那里。
Then Jotham straight away went in flight to Beer, and was living there for fear of his brother Abimelech.

亚比米勒管理以色列人三年。
So Abimelech was chief over Israel for three years.

神使恶魔降在亚比米勒和示剑人中间，示剑人就以诡诈待亚比米勒。
And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the townsmen of Shechem; and the townsmen of Shechem were false to Abimelech;

这是要叫耶路巴力七十个儿子所受的残害归与他们的哥哥亚比米勒，又叫那流他们血的罪归与帮助他杀弟兄的示剑人。
So that punishment for the violent attack made on the seventy sons of Jerubbaal, and for their blood, might come on Abimelech, their brother, who put them to death, and on the townsmen of Shechem who gave him their help in putting his brothers to death.

示剑人在山顶上设埋伏，等候亚比米勒。凡从他们那里经过的人，他们就抢夺。有人将这事告诉亚比米勒。
And the townsmen of Shechem put secret watchers on the tops of the mountains, and they made attacks on all who went by on the road and took their goods; and word of this came to Abimelech.

以别的儿子迦勒和他的弟兄来到示剑，示剑人都信靠他。
Then Gaal, the son of Ebed, came with his brothers, and went over to Shechem; and the men of Shechem put their faith in him.

示剑人出城到田间去，摘下葡萄，踹酒，设摆筵宴，进他们神的庙中吃喝，咒诅亚比米勒。
And they went out into their fields and got in the fruit of their vines, and when the grapes had been crushed, they made a holy feast and went into the house of their god, and over their food and drink they were cursing Abimelech.

以别的儿子迦勒说，亚比米勒是谁。示剑是谁。使我们服事他呢？他不是耶路巴力的儿子吗？他的帮手不是西布勒吗？你们可以服事示剑的父亲哈抹的后裔。我们为何服事亚比米勒呢？
And Gaal, the son of Ebed, said, Who is Abimelech and who is Shechem, that we are to be his servants? Is it not right for the son of Jerubbaal and Zebul his captain to be servants to the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem? But why are we to be his servants?

惟愿这民归我的手下，我就除掉亚比米勒。迦勒又对亚比米勒说，增添你的军兵出来吧。
If only I had authority over this people! I would put Abimelech out of the way, and I would say to Abimelech, Make your army strong, and come out.

邑宰西布勒听见以别的儿子迦勒的话，就发怒，
Now Zebul, the ruler of the town, hearing what Gaal, the son of Ebed, had said, was moved to wrath.

悄悄地打发人去见亚比米勒，说，以别的儿子迦勒和他的弟兄到了示剑，煽惑城中的民攻击你。
And he sent to Abimelech at Arumah, saying, See, Gaal, the son of Ebed, and his brothers have come to Shechem, and they are working up the town against you.

现在你和跟随你的人今夜起来，在田间埋伏。
So now, get up by night, you and your people, and keep watch in the field secretly;

到早晨太阳一出，你就起来闯城。迦勒和跟随他的人出来攻击你的时候，你便向他们见机而作。
And in the morning, when the sun is up, get up early and make a rush on the town; and when he and his people come out against you, do to them whatever you have a chance to do.

于是，亚比米勒和跟随他的众人夜间起来，分作四队，埋伏等候示剑人。
So Abimelech and the people with him got up by night, in four bands, to make a surprise attack on Shechem.

以别的儿子迦勒出去，站在城门口。亚比米勒和跟随他的人从埋伏之处起来。
And Gaal, the son of Ebed, went out, and took his place at the doorway into the town; then Abimelech and his people got up from the place where they had been waiting.

迦勒看见那些人，就对西布勒说，看哪，有人从山顶上下来了。西布勒说，你看见山的影子，以为是人。
And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, See! people are coming down from the tops of the mountains. And Zebul said to him, You see the shade of the mountains like men.

迦勒又说，看哪，有人从高处下来，又有一队从米恶尼尼橡树的路上而来。
And Gaal said again, See! people are coming down from the middle of the land, and one band is coming by way of the oak-tree of the Seers.

西布勒对他说，你曾说，亚比米勒是谁，叫我们服事他？你所夸的口在哪里呢？这不是你所藐视的民吗？你现在出去，与他们交战吧。
Then Zebul said to him, Now where is your loud talk when you said, Who is Abimelech that we are to be his servants? Is this not the people whom you were rating so low? Go out now, and make war on them.

于是迦勒率领示剑人出去，与亚比米勒交战。
So Gaal went out at the head of the townsmen of Shechem and made war on Abimelech.

亚比米勒追赶迦勒。迦勒在他面前逃跑，有许多受伤仆倒的，直到城门。
And Abimelech went after him and he went in flight before him; and a great number were falling by the sword all the way up to the town.

亚比米勒住在亚鲁玛。西布勒赶出迦勒和他弟兄，不准他们住在示剑。
Then Abimelech went back to Arumah; and Zebul sent Gaal and his brothers away and would not let them go on living in Shechem.

次日，民出到田间，有人告诉亚比米勒。
Now the day after, the people went out into the fields; and news of it came to Abimelech.

他就把他的人分作三队，埋伏在田间，看见示剑人从城里出来，就起来击杀他们。
And he took his people, separating them into three bands, and was waiting secretly in the field; and when he saw the people coming out of the town, he went up and made an attack on them.

亚比米勒和跟随他的一队向前闯去，站在城门口。那两队直闯到田间，击杀了众人。
And Abimelech with his band made a rush, and took up their position at the doorway into the town; and the other two bands made a rush on all those who were in the fields, and overcame them.

亚比米勒整天攻打城，将城夺取，杀了其中的居民，将城拆毁，撒上了盐。
And all that day Abimelech was fighting against the town; and he took it, and put to death the people who were in it, and had the town pulled down and covered with salt.

示剑楼的人听见了，就躲入巴力比利土庙的卫所。
Then all the townsmen of the tower of Shechem, hearing of it, went into the inner room of the house of El-berith.

有人告诉亚比米勒说，示剑楼的人都聚在一处。
And word was given to Abimelech that all the men of the tower of Shechem were there together.

亚比米勒和跟随他的人就都上撒们山。亚比米勒手拿斧子，砍下一根树枝，扛在肩上，对跟随他的人说，你们看我所行的，也当赶紧照样行。
Then Abimelech went up to Mount Zalmon, with all his people; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand and, cutting down branches of trees, took them and put them on his back. And he said to the people who were with him, Be quick and do as you have seen me do.

众人就各砍一枝，跟随亚比米勒，把树枝堆在卫所的四围，放火烧了卫所，以致示剑楼的人都死了，男女约有一千。
So all the people got branches, every man cutting down a branch, and they went with Abimelech at their head and, massing the branches against the inner room, put fire to the room over them; so all those who were in the tower of Shechem, about a thousand men and women, were burned to death with it.

亚比米勒到提备斯，向提备斯安营，就攻取了那城。
Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and put his army in position against Thebez and took it.

城中有一座坚固的楼。城里的众人，无论男女，都逃进楼去，关上门，上了楼顶。
But in the middle of the town there was a strong tower, to which all the men and women of the town went in flight and, shutting themselves in, went up to the roof of the tower.

亚比米勒到了楼前攻打，挨近楼门，要用火焚烧。
And Abimelech came to the tower and made an attack on it, and got near to the door of the tower for the purpose of firing it.

有一个妇人把一块上磨石抛在亚比米勒的头上，打破了他的脑骨。
But a certain woman sent a great stone, such as is used for crushing grain, on to the head of Abimelech, cracking the bone.

他就急忙喊叫拿他兵器的少年人，对他说，拔出你的刀来，杀了我吧。免得人议论我说，他为一个妇人所杀。于是少年人把他刺透，他就死了。
Then quickly crying out to his body-servant, he said to him, Take out your sword and put an end to me straight away, so that men may not say of me, His death was the work of a woman. So the young man put his sword through him, causing his death.

以色列人见亚比米勒死了，便各回自己的地方去了。
And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they went away, every man to his place.

这样，神报应亚比米勒向他父亲所行的恶，就是杀了弟兄七十个人的恶。
In this way Abimelech was rewarded by God for the evil he had done to his father in putting his seventy brothers to death;

示剑人的一切恶，神也都报应在他们头上。耶路巴力的儿子约坦的咒诅归到他们身上了。
And God sent back on to the heads of the men of Shechem all the evil they had done, and the curse of Jotham, the son of Jerubbaal, came on them.

亚比米勒以后，有以萨迦人朵多的孙子，普瓦的儿子陀拉兴起，拯救以色列人。他住在以法莲山地的沙密。
Now after Abimelech, Tola, the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, became the saviour of Israel; he was living in Shamir in the hill-country of Ephraim.

陀拉作以色列的士师二十三年，就死了，葬在沙密。
He was judge over Israel for twenty-three years; and at his death his body was put to rest in the earth in Shamir.

在他以后有基列人睚珥兴起，作以色列的士师二十二年。
And after him came Jair the Gileadite, who was judge over Israel for twenty-two years.

他有三十个儿子，骑着三十匹驴驹。他们有三十座城邑，叫作哈倭特睚珥，直到如今，都是在基列地。
And he had thirty sons, who went on thirty young asses; and they had thirty towns in the land of Gilead, which are named Havvoth-Jair to this day.

睚珥死了，就葬在加们。
And at the death of Jair his body was put to rest in the earth in Kamon.

以色列人又行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，去事奉诸巴力和亚斯他录，并亚兰的神，西顿的神，摩押的神，亚扪人的神，非利士人的神，离弃耶和华，不事奉他
And again the children of Israel did evil in the eyes of the Lord, worshipping the Baals and Astartes, and the gods of Aram and the gods of Zidon and the gods of Moab and the gods of the children of Ammon and the gods of the Philistines; they gave up the Lord and were servants to him no longer.

耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作，就把他们交在非利士人和亚扪人的手中。
And the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and he gave them up into the hands of the Philistines and into the hands of the children of Ammon.

从那年起，他们扰害欺压约旦河那边，住亚摩利人之基列地的以色列人，共有十八年。
And that year the children of Israel were crushed under their yoke; for eighteen years all the children of Israel on the other side of Jordan, in the land of the Amorites which is in Gilead, were cruelly crushed down.

亚扪人又渡过约旦河去攻打犹大和便雅悯，并以法莲族。以色列人就甚觉窘迫。
And the children of Ammon went over Jordan, to make war against Judah and Benjamin and the house of Ephraim; and Israel was in great trouble.

以色列人哀求耶和华说，我们得罪了你。因为离弃了我们神，去事奉诸巴力。
Then the children of Israel, crying out to the Lord, said, Great is our sin against you, for we have given up our God and have been servants to the Baals.

耶和华对以色列人说，我岂没有救过你们脱离埃及人，亚摩利人，亚扪人，和非利士人吗？
And the Lord said to the children of Israel, Were not the Egyptians and the Amorites and the children of Ammon and the Philistines

西顿人，亚玛力人，马云人也都欺压你们。你们哀求我，我也拯救你们脱离他们的手。
And the Zidonians and Amalek and Midian crushing you down, and in answer to your cry did I not give you salvation from their hands?

你们竟离弃我，事奉别神。所以我不再救你们了。
But, for all this, you have given me up and have been servants to other gods: so I will be your saviour no longer.

你们去哀求所选择的神。你们遭遇急难的时候，让他救你们吧。
Go, send up your cry for help to the gods of your selection; let them be your saviours in the time of your trouble.

以色列人对耶和华说，我们犯罪了，任凭你随意待我们吧。只求你今日拯救我们。
And the children of Israel said to the Lord, We are sinners; do to us whatever seems good to you: only give us salvation this day.

以色列人就除掉他们中间的外邦神，事奉耶和华。耶和华因以色列人受的苦难，就心中担忧。
So they put away the strange gods from among them, and became the Lord's servants; and his soul was angry because of the sorrows of Israel.

当时亚扪人聚集，安营在基列。以色列人也聚集，安营在米斯巴。
Then the children of Ammon came together and put their army in position in Gilead. And the children of Israel came together and put their army in position in Mizpah.

基列的民和众首领彼此商议说，谁能先去攻打亚扪人，谁必作基列一切居民的领袖。
And the people of Israel said to one another, Who will be the first to make an attack on the children of Ammon? We will make him head over all Gilead.

基列人耶弗他是个大能的勇士，是妓女的儿子。耶弗他是基列所生的。
Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a great man of war; he was the son of a loose woman, and Gilead was his father.

基列的妻也生了几个儿子，他妻所生的儿子长大了，就赶逐耶弗他，说，你不可在我们父家承受产业，因为你是妓女的儿子。
And Gilead's wife gave birth to sons, and when her sons became men, they sent Jephthah away, saying, You have no part in the heritage of our father's house, for you are the son of another woman.

耶弗他就逃避他的弟兄，去住在陀伯地，有些匪徒到他那里聚集，与他一同出入。
So Jephthah went in flight from his brothers and was living in the land of Tob, where a number of good-for-nothing men, joining Jephthah, went out with him on his undertakings.

过了些日子，亚扪人攻打以色列。
Now after a time the children of Ammon made war against Israel.

亚扪人攻打以色列的时候，基列的长老到陀伯地去，要叫耶弗他回来。
And when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the responsible men of Gilead went to get Jephthah back from the land of Tob;

对耶弗他说，请你来作我们的元帅，我们好与亚扪人争战。
And they said to Jephthah, Come and be our chief so that we may make war against the children of Ammon.

耶弗他回答基列的长老说，从前你们不是恨我，赶逐我出离父家吗？现在你们遭遇急难为何到我这里来呢？
But Jephthah said to the responsible men of Gilead, Did you not, in your hate for me, send me away from my father's house? Why do you come to me now when you are in trouble?

基列的长老回答耶弗他说，现在我们到你这里来，是要你同我们去，与亚扪人争战。你可以作基列一切居民的领袖。
And the responsible men of Gilead said to Jephthah, That is the reason we have come back to you; so go with us and make war against the children of Ammon, and we will make you our head over all the people of Gilead.

耶弗他对基列的长老说，你们叫我回去，与亚扪人争战，耶和华把他交给我，我可以作你们的领袖吗？
Then Jephthah said to the responsible men of Gilead, If you take me back to make war against the children of Ammon, and if with the help of the Lord I overcome them, will you make me your head?

基列的长老回答耶弗他说，有耶和华在你我中间作见证，我们必定照你的话行。
And the responsible men of Gilead said to Jephthah, May the Lord be our witness: we will certainly do as you say.

于是耶弗他同基列的长老回去，百姓就立耶弗他作领袖，作元帅。耶弗他在米斯巴将自己的一切话陈明在耶和华面前。
So Jephthah went with the responsible men of Gilead, and the people made him head and chief over them; and Jephthah said all these things before the Lord in Mizpah.

耶弗他打发使者去见亚扪人的王，说，你与我有什么相干，竟来到我国中攻打我呢？
Then Jephthah sent men to the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What have you against me that you have come to make war against my land?

亚扪人的王回答耶弗他的使者说，因为以色列人从埃及上来的时候占据我的地，从亚嫩河到雅博河，直到约旦河。现在你要好好地将这地归还吧。
And the king of the children of Ammon said to the men sent by Jephthah, Because Israel, when he came up out of Egypt, took away my land, from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok and as far as Jordan: so now, give me back those lands quietly.

耶弗他又打发使者去见亚扪人的王，
And Jephthah sent again to the king of the children of Ammon,

对他说，耶弗他如此说，以色列人并没有占据摩押地和亚扪人的地。
And said to him, This is the word of Jephthah: Israel did not take away the land of Moab or the land of the children of Ammon;

以色列人从埃及上来乃是经过旷野到红海，来到加低斯，
But when they came up from Egypt, Israel went through the waste land to the Red Sea and came to Kadesh;

就打发使者去见以东王，说，求你容我从你的地经过。以东王却不应允。又照样打发使者去见摩押王，他也不允准。以色列人就住在加低斯。
Then Israel sent men to the king of Edom saying, Let me now go through your land; but the king of Edom did not give ear to them. And in the same way he sent to the king of Moab, but he would not; so Israel went on living in Kadesh.

他们又经过旷野，绕着以东和摩押地，从摩押地的东边过来，在亚嫩河边安营，并没有入摩押的境内，因为亚嫩河是摩押的边界。
Then he went on through the waste land and round the land of Edom and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and put up their tents on the other side of the Arnon; they did not come inside the limit of Moab, for the Arnon was the limit of Moab.

以色列人打发使者去见亚摩利王西宏，就是希实本的王，对他说，求你容我们从你的地经过，往我们自己的地方去。
And Israel sent men to Sihon, king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said to him, Let me now go through your land to my place.

西宏却不信服以色列人，不容他们经过他的境界，乃招聚他的众民在雅杂安营，与以色列人争战。
But Sihon would not give way and let Israel go through his land; and Sihon got together all his people, and put his army in position in Jahaz, and made war on Israel.

耶和华以色列的神将西宏和他的众民都交在以色列人手中，以色列人就击杀他们，得了亚摩利人的全地，
And the Lord, the God of Israel, gave Sihon and all his people into the hands of Israel, and they overcame them; so all the land of the Amorites, the people of that land, became Israel's.

从亚嫩河到雅博河，从旷野直到约旦河。
All the limit of the Amorites was theirs, from the Arnon as far as the Jabbok and from the waste land even to Jordan.

耶和华以色列的神在他百姓以色列面前赶出亚摩利人，你竟要得他们的地吗？
So now the Lord, the God of Israel, has taken away their land from the Amorites and given it to his people Israel; are you then to have it?

你的神基抹所赐你的地你不是得为业吗？耶和华我们的神在我们面前所赶出的人，我们就得他的地。
Do you not keep the lands of those whom Chemosh your god sends out from before you? So we will keep all the lands of those whom the Lord our God sends out from before us.

难道你比摩押王西拨的儿子巴勒还强吗？他曾与以色列人争竞，或是与他们争战吗？
What! are you any better than Balak, the son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever take up a cause against Israel or make war against them?

以色列人住希实本和属希实本的乡村，亚罗珥和属亚罗珥的乡村，并沿亚嫩河的一切城邑，已经有三百年了。在这三百年之内，你们为什么没有取回这些地方呢？
While Israel was living in Heshbon and its daughter-towns and in Aroer and its daughter-towns and in all the towns which are by the side of the Arnon, for three hundred years, why did you not get them back at that time?

原来我没有得罪你，你却攻打我，恶待我。愿审判人的耶和华今日在以色列人和亚扪人中间判断是非。
So I have done no wrong against you, but you are doing wrong to me in fighting against me: may the Lord, who is Judge this day, be judge between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon.

但亚扪人的王不肯听耶弗他打发人说的话。
The king of the children of Ammon, however, did not give ear to the words which Jephthah sent to him.

耶和华的灵降在耶弗他身上，他就经过基列和玛拿西，来到基列的米斯巴，又从米斯巴来到亚扪人那里。
Then the spirit of the Lord came on Jephthah, and he went through Gilead and Manasseh, and came to Mizpeh of Gilead; and from Mizpeh of Gilead he went over to the children of Ammon.

耶弗他就向耶和华许愿，说，你若将亚扪人交在我手中，
And Jephthah took an oath to the Lord, and said, If you will give the children of Ammon into my hands,

我从亚扪人那里平平安安回来的时候，无论什么人，先从我家门出来迎接我，就必归你，我也必将他献上为燔祭。
Then whoever comes out from the door of my house, meeting me when I come back in peace from the children of Ammon, will be the Lord's and I will give him as a burned offering.

于是耶弗他往亚扪人那里去，与他们争战。耶和华将他们交在他手中，
So Jephthah went over to the children of Ammon to make war on them; and the Lord gave them into his hands.

他就大大杀败他们，从亚罗珥到米匿，直到亚备勒基拉明，攻取了二十座城。这样亚扪人就被以色列人制伏了。
And he made an attack on them from Aroer all the way to Minnith, overrunning twenty towns, as far as Abel-cheramim, and put great numbers to the sword. So the children of Ammon were crushed before the children of Israel.

耶弗他回米斯巴到了自己的家，不料，他女儿拿着鼓跳舞出来迎接他，是他独生的，此外无儿无女。
Then Jephthah came back to his house in Mizpah, and his daughter came out, meeting him on his way with music and with dances; she was his only child; he had no other sons or daughters.

耶弗他看见她，就撕裂衣服，说，哀哉。我的女儿阿，你使我甚是愁苦，叫我作难了。因为我已经向耶和华开口许愿，不能挽回。
And when he saw her he was overcome with grief, and said, Ah! my daughter! I am crushed with sorrow, and it is you who are the chief cause of my trouble; for I have made an oath to the Lord and I may not take it back.

他女儿回答说，父阿，你既向耶和华开口，就当照你口中所说的向我行，因耶和华已经在仇敌亚扪人身上为你报仇。
And she said to him, My father, you have made an oath to the Lord; do then to me whatever you have said; for the Lord has sent a full reward on your haters, on the children of Ammon.

又对父亲说，有一件事求你允准，容我去两个月，与同伴在山上，好哀哭我终为处女。
Then she said to her father, Only do this for me: let me have two months to go away into the mountains with my friends, weeping for my sad fate.

耶弗他说，你去吧。就容她去两个月。她便和同伴去了，在山上为她终为处女哀哭。
And he said, Go then. So he sent her away for two months; and she went with her friends to the mountains, weeping for her sad fate.

两月已满，她回到父亲那里，父亲就照所许的愿向她行了。女儿终身没有亲近男子。
And at the end of two months she went back to her father, who did with her as he had said in his oath: and she had never been touched by a man. So it became a rule in Israel,

此后以色列中有个规矩，每年以色列的女子去为基列人耶弗他的女儿哀哭四天。
For the women to go year by year sorrowing for the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite, four days in every year.

以法莲人聚集，到了北方，对耶弗他说，你去与亚扪人争战，为什么没有招我们同去呢？我们必用火烧你和你的房屋。
Now the men of Ephraim came together and took up arms and went over to Zaphon; and they said to Jephthah, Why did you go over to make war against the children of Ammon without sending for us to go with you? Now we will put your house on fire over you.

耶弗他对他们说，我和我的民与亚扪人大大争战。我招你们来，你们竟没有来救我脱离他们的手。
And Jephthah said to them, I and my people were in danger, and the children of Ammon were very cruel to us, and when I sent for you, you gave me no help against them.

我见你们不来救我，我就拚命前去攻击亚扪人，耶和华将他们交在我手中。你们今日为什么上我这里来攻打我呢？
So when I saw that there was no help to be had from you, I put my life in my hand and went over against the children of Ammon, and the Lord gave them into my hands: why then have you come up to me this day to make war on me?

于是耶弗他招聚基列人，与以法莲人争战。基列人击杀以法莲人，是因他们说，你们基列人在以法莲，玛拿西中间，不过是以法莲逃亡的人。
Then Jephthah got together all the men of Gilead and made war on Ephraim; and the men of Gilead overcame Ephraim.

基列人把守约旦河的渡口，不容以法莲人过去。以法莲逃走的人若说，容我过去。基列人就问他说，你是以法莲人不是。他若说，不是，
And the Gileadites took the crossing-places of Jordan against the Ephraimites; and when any of the men of Ephraim who had gone in flight said, let me go over; the men of Gilead said to him, Are you an Ephraimite? And if he said, No;

就对他说，你说示播列。。以法莲人因为咬不真字音，便说西播列。基列人就将他拿住，杀在约旦河的渡口。那时以法莲人被杀的有四万二千人。
Then they said to him, Now say Shibboleth; and he said Sibboleth, and was not able to say it in the right way; then they took him and put him to death at the crossing-places of Jordan; and at that time forty-two thousand Ephraimites were put to death.

耶弗他作以色列的士师六年。基列人耶弗他死了，葬在基列的一座城里。
Now Jephthah was judge of Israel for six years. And Jephthah the Gileadite came to his death, and his body was put to rest in his town, Mizpeh of Gilead.

耶弗他以后，有伯利恒人以比赞作以色列的士师。
And after him, Ibzan of Beth-lehem was judge of Israel.

他有三十个儿子，三十个女儿。女儿都嫁出去了。他给众子从外乡娶了三十个媳妇。他作以色列的士师七年。
He had thirty sons, and thirty daughters whom he sent to other places, and he got thirty wives from other places for his sons. And he was judge of Israel for seven years.

以比赞死了，葬在伯利恒。
And Ibzan came to his death and his body was put to rest at Beth-lehem.

以比赞之后，有西布伦人以伦，作以色列的士师十年。
And after him, Elon the Zebulonite was judge of Israel; and he was judge of Israel for ten years.

西布伦人以伦死了，葬在西布伦地的亚雅仑。
And Elon the Zebulonite came to his death, and his body was put to rest in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.

以伦之后，有比拉顿人希列的儿子押顿作以色列的士师。
And after him, Abdon, the son of Hillel, the Pirathonite, was judge of Israel.

他有四十个儿子，三十个孙子，骑着七十匹驴驹。押顿作以色列的士师八年。
He had forty sons and thirty sons' sons who went on seventy young asses; and he was judge of Israel for eight years.

比拉顿人希列的儿子押顿死了，葬在以法莲地的比拉顿，在亚玛力人的山地。
And Abdon, the son of Hillel, came to his death, and his body was put to rest in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekites.

以色列人又行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，耶和华将他们交在非利士人手中四十年。
And the children of Israel again did evil in the eyes of the Lord; and the Lord gave them into the hands of the Philistines for forty years.

那时，有一个琐拉人，是属但族的，名叫玛挪亚。他的妻不怀孕，不生育。
Now there was a certain man of Zorah of the family of the Danites, and his name was Manoah; and his wife had never given birth to a child.

耶和华的使者向那妇人显现，对她说，向来你不怀孕，不生育，如今你必怀孕生一个儿子。
And the angel of the Lord came to the woman, and said to her, See now! though you have never given birth to children, you will be with child and give birth to a son.

所以你当谨慎，清酒浓酒都不可喝，一切不洁之物也不可吃。
Now then take care to have no wine or strong drink and to take no unclean thing for food;

你必怀孕生一个儿子，不可用剃头刀剃他的头，因为这孩子一出胎就归神作拿细耳人。他必起首拯救以色列人脱离非利士人的手。
For you are with child and will give birth to a son; his hair is never to be cut, for the child is to be separate to God from his birth; and he will take up the work of freeing Israel from the hands of the Philistines.

妇人就回去对丈夫说，有一个神人到我面前来，他的相貌如神使者的相貌，甚是可畏。我没有问他从哪里来，他也没有将他的名告诉我，
Then the woman came in, and said to her husband, A man came to me, and his form was like the form of a god, causing great fear; I put no question to him about where he came from, and he did not give me his name;

却对我说，你要怀孕生一个儿子，所以清酒浓酒都不可喝，一切不洁之物也不可吃。因为这孩子从出胎一直到死，必归神作拿细耳人。
But he said to me, You are with child and will give birth to a son; and now do not take any wine or strong drink or let anything unclean be your food; for the child will be separate to God from his birth to the day of his death.

玛挪亚就祈求耶和华说，主阿，求你再差遣那神人到我们这里来，好指教我们怎样待这将要生的孩子。
Then Manoah made prayer to the Lord, and said, O Lord, let the man of God whom you sent come to us again and make clear to us what we are to do for the child who is to come.

神应允玛挪亚的话。妇人正坐在田间的时候，神的使者又到她那里，她丈夫玛挪亚却没有同她在一处。
And God gave ear to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came to the woman again when she was seated in the field; but her husband Manoah was not with her.

妇人急忙跑去告诉丈夫说，那日到我面前来的人，又向我显现。
So the woman, running quickly, gave her husband the news, saying, I have seen the man who came to me the other day.

玛挪亚起来跟随他的妻来到那人面前，对他说，与这妇人说话的就是你吗？他说，是我。
And Manoah got up and went after his wife, and came up to the man and said to him, Are you the man who was talking to this woman? And he said, I am.

玛挪亚说，愿你的话应验。我们当怎样待这孩子，他后来当怎样呢？
And Manoah said, Now when your words come true, what is to be the rule for the child and what will be his work?

耶和华的使者对玛挪亚说，我告诉妇人的一切事，她都当谨慎。
And the angel of the Lord said to Manoah, Let the woman take note of what I have said to her.

葡萄树所结的都不可吃，清酒浓酒都不可喝，一切不洁之物也不可吃。凡我所吩咐的，她都当遵守。
She is to have nothing which comes from the vine for her food, and let her take no wine or strong drink or anything which is unclean; let her take care to do all I have given her orders to do.

玛挪亚对耶和华的使者说，求你容我们款留你，好为你预备一只山羊羔。
And Manoah said to the angel of the Lord, Now let us keep you while we make ready a young goat for you.

耶和华的使者对玛挪亚说，你虽然款留我，我却不吃你的食物，你若预备燔祭就当献与耶和华。原来玛挪亚不知道他是耶和华的使者。
And the angel of the Lord said to Manoah, Though you keep me I will not take of your food; but if you will make a burned offering, let it be offered to the Lord. For it had not come into Manoah's mind that he was the angel of the Lord.

玛挪亚对耶和华的使者说，请将你的名告诉我，到你话应验的时候，我们好尊敬你。
Then Manoah said to the angel of the Lord, What is your name, so that when your words come true we may give you honour?

耶和华的使者对他说，你何必问我的名，我名是奇妙的。
But the angel of the Lord said to him, Why are you questioning me about my name, seeing that it is a wonder?

玛挪亚将一只山羊羔和素祭在磐石上献与耶和华，使者行奇妙的事。玛挪亚和他的妻观看，
So Manoah took the young goat with its meal offering, offering it on the rock to the Lord, who did strange things.

见火焰从坛上往上升，耶和华的使者在坛上的火焰中也升上去了。玛挪亚和他的妻看见，就俯伏于地。
And when the flame went up to heaven from the altar, the angel of the Lord went up in the flame of the altar, while Manoah and his wife were looking on; and they went down on their faces to the earth.

耶和华的使者不再向玛挪亚和他的妻显现，玛挪亚才知道他是耶和华的使者。
But the angel of the Lord was seen no more by Manoah and his wife. Then it was clear to Manoah that he was the angel of the Lord.

玛挪亚对他的妻说，我们必要死，因为看见了神。
And Manoah said to his wife, Death will certainly be our fate, for it is a god whom we have seen.

他的妻却对他说，耶和华若要杀我们，必不从我们手里收纳燔祭和素祭，并不将这一切事指示我们，今日也不将这些话告诉我们。
But his wife said to him, If the Lord was purposing our death, he would not have taken our burned offering and our meal offering, or have given us such orders about the child.

后来妇人生了一个儿子，给他起名叫参孙。孩子长大，耶和华赐福与他。
So the woman gave birth to a son, and gave him the name Samson; and he became a man and the blessing of the Lord was on him.

在玛哈尼但，就是琐拉和以实陶中间，耶和华的灵才感动他。
And the spirit of the Lord first came on him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.

参孙下到亭拿，在那里看见一个女子，是非利士人的女儿。
Now Samson went down to Timnah, and saw a woman in Timnah, of the daughters of the Philistines;

参孙上来禀告他父母说，我在亭拿看见一个女子，是非利士人的女儿，愿你们给我娶来为妻。
And when he came back he said to his father and mother, I have seen a woman in Timnah, of the daughters of the Philistines: get her now for me for my wife.

他父母说，在你弟兄的女儿中，或在本国的民中，岂没有一个女子，何至你去在未受割礼的非利士人中娶妻呢？参孙对他父亲说，愿你给我娶那女子，因我喜悦她。
Then his father and mother said to him, Is there no woman among the daughters of your relations or among all my people, that you have to go for your wife to the Philistines, who are without circumcision? But Samson said to his father, Get her for me, for she is pleasing to me.

他的父母却不知道这事是出于耶和华，因为他找机会攻击非利士人。那时，非利士人辖制以色列人。
Now his father and mother had no knowledge that this was the purpose of the Lord, who had the destruction of the Philistines in mind. Now the Philistines at that time were ruling over Israel.

参孙跟他父母下亭拿去，到了亭拿的葡萄园，见有一只少壮狮子向他吼叫。
Then Samson went down to Timnah (and his father and his mother,) and came to the vine-gardens of Timnah; and a young lion came rushing out at him.

耶和华的灵大大感动参孙，他虽然手无器械，却将狮子撕裂，如同撕裂山羊羔一样。他行这事并没有告诉父母。
And the spirit of the Lord came on him with power, and, unarmed as he was, pulling the lion in two as one might do to a young goat, he put him to death; (but he said nothing to his father and mother of what he had done.)

参孙下去与女子说话，就喜悦她。
So he went down and had talk with the woman; and she was pleasing to Samson.

过了些日子，再下去要娶那女子，转向道旁要看死狮，见有一群蜂子和蜜在死狮之内，
Then after a time he went back to take her; and turning from the road to see the dead body of the lion, he saw a mass of bees in the body of the lion, and honey there.

就用手取蜜，且吃且走。到了父母那里，给他父母，他们也吃了。只是没有告诉这蜜是从死狮之内取来的。
And he took the honey in his hand, and went on, tasting it on the way; and when he came to his father and mother he gave some to them; but did not say that he had taken the honey from the body of the lion.

他父亲下去见女子。参孙在那里设摆筵宴，因为向来少年人都有这个规矩。
Then Samson went down to the woman, and made a feast there, as was the way among young men.

众人看见参孙，就请了三十个人陪伴他。
And he took thirty friends, and they were with him.

参孙对他们说，我给你们出一个谜语，你们在七日筵宴之内，若能猜出意思告诉我，我就给你们三十件里衣，三十套衣裳。
And Samson said, Now I have a hard question for you: if you are able to give me the answer before the seven days of the feast are over, I will give you thirty linen robes and thirty changes of clothing;

你们若不能猜出意思告诉我，你们就给我三十件里衣，三十套衣裳。他们说，请将谜语说给我们听。
But if you are not able to give me the answer, then you will have to give me thirty linen robes and thirty changes of clothing. And they said to him, Put your hard question and let us see what it is.

参孙对他们说，吃的从吃者出来。甜的从强者出来。他们三日不能猜出谜语的意思。
And he said, Out of the taker of food came food, and out of the strong came the sweet. And at the end of three days they were still not able to give the answer.

到第七天，他们对参孙的妻说，你诓哄你丈夫，探出谜语的意思告诉我们，免得我们用火烧你和你父家。你们请了我们来，是要夺我们所有的吗？
So on the fourth day they said to Samson's wife, Get from your husband the answer to his question by some trick or other, or we will have you and your father's house burned with fire; did you get us here to take all we have?

参孙的妻在丈夫面前啼哭说，你是恨我，不是爱我，你给我本国的人出谜语，却没有将意思告诉我。参孙回答说，连我父母我都没有告诉，岂可告诉你呢？
Then Samson's wife, weeping over him, said, Truly you have no love for me but only hate; you have put a hard question to the children of my people and have not given me the answer. And he said to her, See, I have not given the answer even to my father or my mother; am I to give it to you?

七日筵宴之内，她在丈夫面前啼哭，到第七天逼着他，他才将谜语的意思告诉他妻，他妻就告诉本国的人。
And all the seven days of the feast she went on weeping over him; and on the seventh day he gave her the answer, because she gave him no peace; and she sent word of it to the children of her people.

到第七天，日头未落以前，那城里的人对参孙说，有什么比蜜还甜呢？有什么比狮子还强呢？参孙对他们说，你们若非用我的母牛犊耕地，就猜不出我谜语的意思来。
Then on the seventh day, before he went into the bride's room, the men of the town said to him, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said to them, If you had not been ploughing with my cow you would not have got the answer to my question.

耶和华的灵大大感动参孙，他就下到亚实基伦，击杀了三十个人，夺了他们的衣裳，将衣裳给了猜出谜语的人。参孙发怒，就上父家去了。
And the spirit of the Lord came rushing on him, and he went down to Ashkelon and, attacking thirty men there, took their clothing from them, and gave it to the men who had given the answer to his hard question. Then, full of wrath, he went back to his father's house.

参孙的妻便归了参孙的陪伴，就是作过他朋友的。
But Samson's wife was given to the friend who had been his best man.

过了些日子，到割麦子的时候，参孙带着一只山羊羔去看他的妻，说，我要进内室见我的妻。他岳父不容他进去，
Now a short time after, at the time of the grain-cutting, Samson, taking with him a young goat, went to see his wife; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the bride's room. But her father would not let him go in.

说，我估定你是极其恨她，因此我将她给了你的陪伴。她的妹子不是比她还美丽吗？你可以娶来代替她吧。
And her father said, It seemed to me that you had only hate for her; so I gave her to your friend: but is not her younger sister fairer than she? so please take her in place of the other.

参孙说，这回我加害于非利士人不算有罪。
Then Samson said to them, This time I will give payment in full to the Philistines, for I am going to do them great evil.

于是参孙去捉了三百只狐狸（或作野狗），将狐狸尾巴一对一对地捆上，将火把捆在两条尾巴中间，
So Samson went and got three hundred foxes and some sticks of fire-wood; and he put the foxes tail to tail with a stick between every two tails;

点着火把，就放狐狸进入非利士人站着的禾稼，将堆集的禾捆和未割的禾稼，并橄榄园尽都烧了。
Then firing the sticks, he let the foxes loose among the uncut grain of the Philistines, and all the corded stems as well as the living grain and the vine-gardens and the olives went up in flames.

非利士人说，这事是谁作的呢？有人说，是亭拿人的女婿参孙，因为他岳父将他的妻给了他的陪伴。于是非利士人上去，用火烧了妇人和她的父亲。
Then the Philistines said, Who has done this? And they said, Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he took his wife and gave her to his friend. So the Philistines came up and had her and her father's house burned.

参孙对非利士人说，你们既然这样行，我必向你们报仇才肯罢休。
And Samson said to them, If you go on like this, truly I will take my full payment from you; and that will be the end of it.

参孙就大大击杀他们，连腿带腰都砍断了。他便下去，住在以坦磐的穴内。
And he made an attack on them, driving them in uncontrolled flight, and causing great destruction; then he went away to his safe place in the crack of the rock at Etam.

非利士人上去安营在犹大，布散在利希。
Then the Philistines went and put up their tents in Judah, all round Lehi.

犹大人说，你们为何上来攻击我们呢？他们说，我们上来是要捆绑参孙。他向我们怎样行，我们也要向他怎样行。
And the men of Judah said, Why have you come up against us? And they said, We have come up to take Samson, and to do to him as he has done to us.

于是有三千犹大人下到以坦磐的穴内，对参孙说，非利士人辖制我们，你不知道吗？你向我们行的是什么事呢？他回答说，他们向我怎样行，我也要向他们怎样行。
Then three thousand of the men of Judah went down to the crack of the rock of Etam, and said to Samson, Is it not clear to you that the Philistines are our rulers? What is this you have done to us? And he said to them, I only did to them as they did to me.

犹大人对他说，我们下来是要捆绑你，将你交在非利士人手中。参孙说，你们要向我起誓，应承你们自己不害死我。
Then they said to him, We have come down to take you and give you up into the hands of the Philistines. And Samson said to them, Give me your oath that you will not make an attack on me yourselves.

他们说，我们断不杀你，只要将你捆绑交在非利士人手中。于是用两条新绳捆绑参孙，将他从以坦磐带上去。
And they said, No; we will take you and give you up into their hands, but truly we will not put you to death. So knotting two new cords round him they took him up from the rock.

参孙到了利希，非利士人都迎着喧嚷。耶和华的灵大大感动参孙，他臂上的绳就像火烧的麻一样，他的绑绳都从他手上脱落下来。
And when he came to Lehi, the Philistines came out, meeting him with loud cries; then the spirit of the Lord came rushing on him, and the cords on his arms became like grass which has been burned with fire, and the bands came falling off his hands.

他见一块未干的驴腮骨，就伸手拾起来，用以击杀一千人。
And taking up the mouth-bone of an ass newly dead, which he saw by chance on the earth, he put to death a thousand men with it.

参孙说，我用驴腮骨杀人成堆，用驴腮骨杀了一千人。
And Samson said, With a red ass's mouth-bone I have made them red with blood, with a red ass's mouth-bone I have sent destruction on a thousand men.

说完这话，就把那腮骨从手里抛出去了。那地便叫拉末利希。
And having said these words, he let the mouth-bone go out of his hand; so that place was named Ramath-lehi.

参孙甚觉口渴，就求告耶和华说，你既借仆人的手施行这么大的拯救，岂可任我渴死，落在未受割礼的人手中呢？
After this, he was in great need of water, and crying out to the Lord, he said, You have given this great salvation by the hand of your servant, and now need of water will be my death; and I will be given into the hands of this people who are without circumcision.

神就使利希的洼处裂开，有水从其中涌出来。参孙喝了精神复原。因此那泉名叫隐哈歌利，那泉直到今日还在利希。
Then God made a crack in the hollow rock in Lehi and water came out of it; and after drinking, his spirit came back to him and he was strong again; so that place was named En-hakkore; it is in Lehi to this day.

当非利士人辖制以色列人的时候，参孙作以色列的士师二十年。
And he was judge of Israel in the days of the Philistines for twenty years.

参孙到了迦萨，在那里看见一个妓女，就与她亲近。
Now Samson went to Gaza, and there he saw a loose woman and went in to her.

有人告诉迦萨人说，参孙到这里来了。他们就把他团团围住，终夜在城门悄悄埋伏，说，等到天亮我们便杀他。
And it was said to the Gazites, Samson is here. So they went round, watching for him all day at the doorway of the town, but at night they kept quiet, saying, When daylight comes we will put him to death.

参孙睡到半夜，起来，将城门的门扇，门框，门闩，一齐拆下来，扛在肩上，扛到希伯仑前的山顶上。
And Samson was there till the middle of the night; then he got up, and took a grip on the doors of the town, pulling them up, together with their two supports and their locks, and put them on his back and took them up to the top of the hill in front of Hebron.

后来参孙在梭烈谷喜爱一个妇人，名叫大利拉。
Now after this, he was in love with a woman in the valley of Sorek, named Delilah.

非利士人的首领上去见那妇人，对她说，求你诓哄参孙，探探他因何有这么大的力气，我们用何法能胜他，捆绑克制他。我们就每人给你一千一百舍客勒银子。
And the chiefs of the Philistines came up to her, and said to her, Make use of your power over him and see what is the secret of his great strength, and how we may get the better of him, and put bands on him, so that we may make him feeble; and every one of us will give you eleven hundred shekels of silver.

大利拉对参孙说，求你告诉我，你因何有这么大的力气，当用何法捆绑克制你。
So Delilah said to Samson, Make clear to me now what is the secret of your great strength, and how you may be put in bands and made feeble.

参孙回答说，人若用七条未干的青绳子捆绑我，我就软弱像别人一样。
And Samson said to her, If seven new bow-cords which have never been made dry are knotted round me, I will become feeble and will be like any other man.

于是非利士人的首领拿了七条未干的青绳子来，交给妇人，她就用绳子捆绑参孙。
So the chiefs of the Philistines gave her seven new bow-cords which had never been made dry, and she had them tightly knotted round him.

有人预先埋伏在妇人的内室里。妇人说，参孙哪。非利士人拿你来了。参孙就挣断绳子，如挣断经火的麻线一般。这样，他力气的根由人还是不知道。
Now she had men waiting secretly in the inner room; and she said to him, The Philistines are on you, Samson. And the cords were broken by him as a twist of thread is broken when touched by a flame. So the secret of his strength did not come to light.

大利拉对参孙说，你欺哄我，向我说谎言。现在求你告诉我当用何法捆绑你。
Then Delilah said to Samson, See, you have been making sport of me with false words; now, say truly how may you be put in bands?

参孙回答说，人若用没有使过的新绳捆绑我，我就软弱像别人一样。
And he said to her, If they only put round me new thick cords which have never been used, then I will become feeble and will be like any other man.

大利拉就用新绳捆绑他。对他说，参孙哪。非利士人拿你来了。有人预先埋伏在内室里。参孙将臂上的绳挣断了，如挣断一条线一样。
So Delilah took new thick cords, knotting them tightly round him, and said to him, The Philistines are on you, Samson. And men were waiting secretly in the inner room. And the cords were broken off his arms like threads.

大利拉对参孙说，你到如今还是欺哄我，向我说谎言。求你告诉我，当用何法捆绑你。参孙回答说，你若将我头上的七条发绺，与纬线同织就可以了。
Then Delilah said to Samson, Up to now you have made sport of me with false words; now say truly, how may you be put in bands? And he said to her, If you get the seven twists of my hair worked into the cloth you are making and fixed with the pin, I will become feeble and will be like any other man.

于是大利拉将他的发绺与纬线同织，用橛子钉住，对他说，参孙哪。非利士人拿你来了。参孙从睡中醒来，将机上的橛子和纬线一齐都拔出来了。
So while he was sleeping she got the seven twists of his hair worked into her cloth and fixed with the pin, and said to him, The Philistines are on you, Samson. Then awaking from his sleep, he got up quickly, pulling up cloth and machine together.

大利拉对参孙说，你既不与我同心，怎么说你爱我呢？你这三次欺哄我，没有告诉我，你因何有这么大的力气。
And she said to him, Why do you say you are my lover when your heart is not mine? Three times you have made sport of me, and have not made clear to me the secret of your great strength.

大利拉天天用话催逼他，甚至他心里烦闷要死。
So day after day she gave him no peace, for ever questioning him till his soul was troubled to death.

参孙就把心中所藏的都告诉了她，对她说，向来人没有用剃头刀剃我的头，因为我自出母胎就归神作拿细耳人。若剃了我的头发，我的力气就离开我，我便软弱像别人一样。
And opening all his heart to her, he said to her, My head has never been touched by a blade, for I have been separate to God from the day of my birth: if my hair is cut off, then my strength will go from me and I will become feeble, and will be like any other man.

大利拉见他把心中所藏的都告诉了她，就打发人到非利士人的首领那里，对他们说，他已经把心中所藏的都告诉了我，请你们再上来一次。于是非利士人的首领手里拿着银子，上到妇人那里。
And when Delilah saw that he had let her see into his heart, she sent word to the chiefs of the Philistines saying, Come up this time, for he has let out all his heart to me. Then the chiefs of the Philistines came to her, with the money in their hands.

大利拉使参孙枕着她的膝睡觉，叫了一个人来剃除他头上的七条发绺。于是大利拉克制他，他的力气就离开他了。
And she made him go to sleep on her knees; and she sent for a man and had his seven twists of hair cut off; and while it was being done he became feeble and his strength went from him.

大利拉说，参孙哪。非利士人拿你来了。参孙从睡中醒来，心里说，我要像前几次出去活动身体。他却不知道耶和华已经离开他了。
Then she said, The Philistines are on you, Samson. And awaking from his sleep, he said, I will go out as at other times, shaking myself free. But he was not conscious that the Lord had gone from him.

非利士人将他拿住，剜了他的眼睛，带他下到迦萨，用铜链拘索他。他就在监里推磨。
So the Philistines took him and put out his eyes; then they took him down to Gaza, and, chaining him with bands of brass, put him to work crushing grain in the prison-house.

然而他的头发被剃之后，又渐渐长起来了。
But the growth of his hair was starting again after it had been cut off.

非利士人的首领聚集，要给他们的神大衮献大祭，并且欢乐，因为他们说，我们的神将我们的仇敌参孙交在我们手中了。
And the chiefs of the Philistines came together to make a great offering to Dagon their god, and to be glad; for they said, Our god has given into our hands Samson our hater.

众人看见参孙，就赞美他们的神说，我们的神将毁坏我们地，杀害我们许多人的仇敌交在我们手中了。
And when the people saw him, they gave praise to their god; for they said, Our god has given into our hands the one who was fighting against us, who made our country waste, and who put great numbers of us to death.

他们正宴乐的时候，就说，叫参孙来，在我们面前戏耍戏耍。于是将参孙从监里提出来，他就在众人面前戏耍。他们使他站在两柱中间。
Now when their hearts were full of joy, they said, Send for Samson to make sport for us. And they sent for Samson out of the prison-house, and he made sport before them; and they put him between the pillars.

参孙向拉他手的童子说，求你让我摸着托房的柱子，我要靠一靠。
And Samson said to the boy who took him by the hand, Let me put my hand on the pillars supporting the house, so that I may put my back against them.

那时房内充满男女，非利士人的众首领也都在那里。房的平顶上约有三千男女，观看参孙戏耍。
Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and about three thousand men and women were on the roof, looking on while Samson made sport.

参孙求告耶和华说，主耶和华阿，求你眷念我。神阿，求你赐我这一次的力量，使我在非利士人身上报那剜我双眼的仇。
And Samson, crying out to the Lord, said, O Lord God, do have me now in mind, and do make me strong only this once, O God, so that I may take one last payment from the Philistines for my two eyes.

参孙就抱住托房的那两根柱子，左手抱一根，右手抱一根，
Then Samson put his arms round the two middle pillars supporting the house, putting his weight on them, on one with his right hand and on the other with his left.

说，我情愿与非利士人同死。就尽力屈身，房子倒塌，压住首领和房内的众人。这样，参孙死时所杀的人，比活着所杀的还多。
And Samson said, Let death overtake me with the Philistines. And he put out all his strength, and the house came down on the chiefs and on all the people who were in it. So the dead whom he sent to destruction by his death were more than all those on whom he had sent destruction in his life.

参孙的弟兄和他父的全家，都下去取他的尸首，抬上来葬在琐拉和以实陶中间，在他父玛挪亚的坟墓里。参孙作以色列的士师二十年。
Then his brothers and his father's people came down and took him up and put his body to rest in the earth between Zorah and Eshtaol in the resting-place of Manoah his father. And he had been judge of Israel for twenty years.

以法莲山地有一个人名叫米迦。
Now there was a man of the hill-country of Ephraim named Micah.

他对母亲说，你那一千一百舍客勒银子被人拿去，你因此咒诅，并且告诉了我。看哪。这银子在我这里，是我拿去了。他母亲说，我儿阿，愿耶和华赐福与你。
And he said to his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver which were taken from you, about which you took an oath and said in my hearing, I have given this silver to the Lord from my hand for myself, to make a pictured image and a metal image: see, I have the silver, for I took it: so now I will give it back to you. And his mother said, May the blessing of the Lord be on my son.

米迦就把这一千一百舍客勒银子还他母亲。他母亲说，我分出这银子来为你献给耶和华，好雕刻一个像，铸成一个像。现在我还是交给你。
And he gave back the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, and his mother said, I have made the silver holy to the Lord from me for my son, to make a pictured image and a metal image.

米迦将银子还他母亲，他母亲将二百舍客勒银子交给银匠，雕刻一个像，铸成一个像，安置在米迦的屋内。
So he gave the silver back to his mother. Then his mother took two hundred shekels of silver and gave them to a metal-worker who made a pictured image and a metal image from them: and it was in the house of Micah.

这米迦有了神堂，又制造以弗得和家中的神像，分派他一个儿子作祭司。
And the man Micah had a house of gods; and he made an ephod and family gods and put one of his sons in the position of priest.

那时以色列中没有王，各人任意而行。
In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did as seemed right to him.

犹大伯利恒有一个少年人，是犹大族的利未人，他在那里寄居。
Now there was a young man living in Beth-lehem-judah, of the family of Judah and a Levite, who was not a townsman of the place.

这人离开犹大伯利恒城，要找一个可住的地方。行路的时候，到了以法莲山地，走到米迦的家。
And he went away from the town of Beth-lehem-judah, looking for somewhere to make his living-place; and on his journey he came to the hill-country of Ephraim, to the house of Micah.

米迦问他说，你从哪里来。他回答说，从犹大伯利恒来。我是利未人，要找一个可住的地方。
And Micah said to him, Where do you come from? And he said to him, I am a Levite from Beth-lehem-judah, and I am looking for a living-place.

米迦说，你可以住在我这里，我以你为父，为祭司。我每年给你十舍客勒银子，一套衣服和度日的食物。利未人就进了他的家。
Then Micah said to him, Make your living-place with me, and be a father and a priest to me, and I will give you ten shekels of silver a year and your clothing and food.

利未人情愿与那人同住。那人看这少年人如自己的儿子一样。
And the Levite said he would make his living-place with the man, and he became to him as one of his sons.

米迦分派这少年的利未人作祭司，他就住在米迦的家里。
And Micah gave the position to the Levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.

米迦说，现在我知道耶和华必赐福与我，因我有一个利未人作祭司。
Then Micah said, Now I am certain that the Lord will do me good, seeing that the Levite has become my priest.

那时，以色列中没有王。但支派的人仍是寻地居住。因为到那日子，他们还没有在以色列支派中得地为业。
In those days there was no king in Israel, and in those days the Danites were looking for a heritage for themselves, to be their living-place; for up to that time no distribution of land had been made to them among the tribes of Israel.

但人从琐拉和以实陶打发本族中的五个勇士，去仔细窥探那地，吩咐他们说，你们去窥探那地。他们来到以法莲山地，进了米迦的住宅，就在那里住宿。
So the children of Dan sent five men from among their number, strong men, from Zorah and from Eshtaol, to take a look at the land and make a search through it; and they said to them, Go and make a search through the land; and they came to the hill-country of Ephraim, to the house of Micah, where they made a stop for the night.

他们临近米迦的住宅，听出那少年利未人的口音来，就进去问他说，谁领你到这里来。你在这里作什么。你在这里得什么。
When they were near the house of Micah, hearing a voice which was not strange to them, that of the young Levite, they went out of their road to his place, and said to him, How did you come here? and what are you doing in this place? and why are you here?

他回答说，米迦待我如此如此，请我作祭司。
And he said to them, This is what Micah did for me, and he gave me payment and I became his priest.

他们对他说，请你求问神，使我们知道所行的道路通达不通达。
Then they said, Do get directions from God for us, to see if the journey on which we are going will have a good outcome.

祭司对他们说，你们可以平平安安地去，你们所行的道路是在耶和华面前的。
And the priest said to them, Go in peace: your way is guided by the Lord.

五人就走了，来到拉亿，见那里的民安居无虑，如同西顿人安居一样。在那地没有人掌权扰乱他们。他们离西顿人也远，与别人没有来往。
Then the five men went on their way and came to Laish and saw the people who were there, living without thought of danger, like the Zidonians, quiet and safe; for they had everything on earth for their needs, and they were far from the Zidonians and had no business with Aram.

五人回到琐拉和以实陶，见他们的弟兄。弟兄问他们说，你们有什么话。
So they came back to their brothers in Zorah and Eshtaol, and their brothers said to them, What news have you?

他们回答说，起来，我们上去攻击他们吧。我们已经窥探那地，见那地甚好。你们为何静坐不动呢？要急速前往得那地为业，不可迟延。
And they said, Up! and let us go against Laish; for we have seen the land, and it is very good: why are you doing nothing? Do not be slow to go in and take the land for your heritage.

你们到了那里，必看见安居无虑的民，地也宽阔。神已将那地交在你们手中。那地百物俱全，一无所缺。
When you come there you will come to a people living without thought of danger; and the land is wide, and God has given it into your hands: a place where there is everything on earth for man's needs.

于是但族中的六百人，各带兵器，从琐拉和以实陶前往，
So six hundred men of the Danites from Zorah and Eshtaol went out armed with instruments of war.

上到犹大的基列耶琳，在基列耶琳后边安营。因此那地方名叫玛哈尼但，直到今日。
And they went up and put up their tents in Kiriath-jearim in Judah: so that place is named Mahaneh-dan to this day. It is to the west of Kiriath-jearim.

他们从那里往以法莲山地去，来到米迦的住宅。
From there they went on to the hill-country of Ephraim and came to the house of Micah.

从前窥探拉亿地的五个人对他们的弟兄说，这宅子里有以弗得和家中的神像，并雕刻的像与铸成的像，你们知道吗？现在你们要想一想当怎样行。
Then the five men who had gone to make a search through the country of Laish, said to their brothers, Have you knowledge that in these houses there is an ephod and family gods and a pictured image and a metal image? So now you see what to do.

五人就进入米迦的住宅，到了那少年利未人的房内问他好。
And turning from their road they came to the house of the young Levite, the house of Micah, and said to him, Is it well with you?

那六百但人各带兵器，站在门口。
And the six hundred armed men of the Danites took their places by the doorway.

窥探地的五个人走进去，将雕刻的像，以弗得，家中的神像，并铸成的像，都拿了去。祭司和带兵器的六百人，一同站在门口。
Then the five men who had gone to make a search through the land, went in and took the pictured image and the ephod and the family gods and the metal image; and the priest was by the doorway with the six hundred armed men.

那五个人进入米迦的住宅，拿出雕刻的像，以弗得，家中的神像，并铸成的像，祭司就问他们说，你们作什么呢？
And when they went into Micah's house and took out the pictured image and the ephod and the family gods and the metal image, the priest said to them, What are you doing?

他们回答说，不要作声，用手捂口，跟我们去吧。我们必以你为父，为祭司。你作一家的祭司好呢？还是作以色列一族一支派的祭司好呢？
And they said to him, Be quiet; say nothing, and come with us and be our father and priest; is it better for you to be priest to one man's house or to be priest to a tribe and a family in Israel?

祭司心里喜悦，便拿着以弗得和家中的神像，并雕刻的像，进入他们中间。
Then the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod and the family gods and the pictured image and went with the people.

他们就转身离开那里，妻子，儿女，牲畜，财物都在前头。
So they went on their way again, putting the little ones and the oxen and the goods in front of them.

离米迦的住宅已远，米迦的近邻都聚集来，追赶但人，
When they had gone some way from the house of Micah, the men from the houses near Micah's house came together and overtook the children of Dan,

呼叫但人。但人回头问米迦说，你聚集这许多人来作什么呢？
Crying out to them. And the Danites, turning round, said to Micah, What is your trouble, that you have taken up arms?

米迦说，你们将我所作的神像和祭司都带了去，我还有所剩的吗？怎么还问我说作什么呢？
And he said, You have taken my gods which I made, and my priest, and have gone away; what is there for me now? Why then do you say to me, What is your trouble?

但人对米迦说，你不要使我们听见你的声音，恐怕有性暴的人攻击你，以致你和你的全家尽都丧命。
And the children of Dan said to him, Say no more, or men of bitter spirit may make an attack on you, causing loss of your life and the lives of your people.

但人还是走他们的路。米迦见他们的势力比自己强盛，就转身回家去了。
Then the children of Dan went on their way; and when Micah saw that they were stronger than he, he went back to his house.

但人将米迦所作的神像和他的祭司都带到拉亿，见安居无虑的民，就用刀杀了那民，又放火烧了那城，
And they took that which Micah had made, and his priest, and came to Laish, to a people living quietly and without thought of danger, and they put them to the sword without mercy, burning down their town.

并无人搭救。因为离西顿远，他们又与别人没有来往。城在平原，那平原靠近伯利合。但人又在那里修城居住，
And they had no saviour, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no business with Aram; and it was in the valley which is the property of Beth-rehob. And building up the town again they took it for their living-place.

照着他们始祖以色列之子但的名字，给那城起名叫但。原先那城名叫拉亿。
And they gave the town the name of Dan, after Dan their father, who was the son of Israel: though the town had been named Laish at first.

但人就为自己设立那雕刻的像。摩西的孙子，革舜的儿子约拿单，和他的子孙作但支派的祭司，直到那地遭掳掠的日子。
(And the children of Dan put up the pictured image for themselves; and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, and his sons were priests for the tribe of the Danites till the day when the ark was taken prisoner.)

神的殿在示罗多少日子，但人为自己设立米迦所雕刻的像也在但多少日子。
And they put up for themselves the image which Micah had made, and it was there all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.

当以色列中没有王的时候，有住以法莲山地那边的一个利未人，娶了一个犹大伯利恒的女子为妾。
Now in those days, when there was no king in Israel, a certain Levite was living in the inmost parts of the hill-country of Ephraim, and he got for himself a servant-wife from Beth-lehem-judah.

妾行淫离开丈夫，回犹大伯利恒，到了父家，在那里住了四个月。
And his servant-wife was angry with him, and went away from him to her father's house at Beth-lehem-judah, and was there for four months.

她丈夫起来，带着一个仆人，两匹驴去见她，用好话劝她回来。女子就引丈夫进入父家。她父见了那人，便欢欢喜喜地迎接。
Then her husband got up and went after her, with the purpose of talking kindly to her, and taking her back with him; he had with him his young man and two asses: and she took him into her father's house, and her father, when he saw him, came forward to him with joy.

那人的岳父，就是女子的父亲，将那人留下住了三天。于是二人一同吃喝，住宿。
And his father-in-law, the girl's father, kept him there for three days; and they had food and drink and took their rest there.

到第四天，利未人清早起来要走，女子的父亲对女婿说，请你吃点饭，加添心力，然后可以行路。
Now on the fourth day they got up early in the morning and he made ready to go away; but the girl's father said to his son-in-law, Take a little food to keep up your strength, and then go on your way.

于是二人坐下一同吃喝。女子的父亲对那人说，请你再住一夜，畅快你的心。
So seating themselves they had food and drink, the two of them together; and the girl's father said to the man, If it is your pleasure, take your rest here tonight, and let your heart be glad.

那人起来要走，他岳父强留他，他又住了一宿。
And the man got up to go away, but his father-in-law would not let him go, so he took his rest there again for the night.

到第五天，他清早起来要走，女子的父亲说，请你吃点饭，加添心力，等到日头偏西再走。于是二人一同吃饭。
Then early on the morning of the fifth day he got up to go away; but the girl's father said, Keep up your strength; so the two of them had a meal, and the man and his woman and his servant did not go till after the middle of the day.

那人同他的妾和仆人起来要走，他岳父，就是女子的父亲，对他说，看哪，日头偏西了，请你再住一夜。天快晚了，可以在这里住宿，畅快你的心。明天早早起行回家去。
And when they got up to go away, his father-in-law, the girl's father, said to him, Now evening is coming on, so do not go tonight; see, the day is almost gone; take your rest here and let your heart be glad, and tomorrow early, go on your way back to your house.

那人不愿再住一夜，就备上那两匹驴，带着妾起身走了，来到耶布斯的对面，耶布斯就是耶路撒冷。
But the man would not be kept there that night, and he got up and went away and came opposite to Jebus (which is Jerusalem); and he had with him the two asses, ready for travelling, and his woman.

临近耶布斯的时候，日头快要落了，仆人对主人说，我们不如进这耶布斯人的城里住宿。
When they got near Jebus the day was far gone; and the servant said to his master, Now let us go from our road into this town of the Jebusites and take our night's rest there.

主人回答说，我们不可进不是以色列人住的外邦城，不如过到基比亚去。
But his master said to him, We will not go out of our way into a strange town, whose people are not of the children of Israel; but we will go on to Gibeah.

又对仆人说，我们可以到一个地方，或住在基比亚，或住在拉玛。
And he said to his servant, Come, let us go on to one of these places, stopping for the night in Gibeah or Ramah.

他们就往前走。将到便雅悯的基比亚，日头已经落了。
So they went on their way; and the sun went down when they were near Gibeah in the land of Benjamin.

他们进入基比亚要在那里住宿，就坐在城里的街上，因为无人接他们进家住宿。
And they went off the road there with the purpose of stopping for the night in Gibeah: and he went in, seating himself in the street of the town, for no one took them into his house for the night.

晚上，有一个老年人从田间作工回来。他原是以法莲山地的人，住在基比亚。那地方的人却是便雅悯人。
Now when it was evening they saw an old man coming back from his work in the fields; he was from the hill-country of Ephraim and was living in Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites.

老年人举目看见客人坐在城里的街上，就问他说，你从哪里来。要往哪里去。
And when he saw the traveller in the street of the town, the old man said, Where are you going? and where do you come from?

他回答说，我们从犹大伯利恒来，要往以法莲山地那边去。我原是那里的人，到过犹大伯利恒，现在我往耶和华的殿去，在这里无人接我进他的家。
And he said to him, We are on our way from Beth-lehem-judah to the inmost parts of the hill-country of Ephraim: I came from there and went to Beth-lehem-judah: now I am on my way back to my house, but no man will take me into his house.

其实我有粮草可以喂驴，我与我的妾，并我的仆人，有饼有酒，并不缺少什么。
But we have dry grass and food for our asses, as well as bread and wine for me, and for the woman, and for the young man with us: we have no need of anything.

老年人说，愿你平安。你所需用的我都给你，只是不可在街上过夜。
And the old man said, Peace be with you; let all your needs be my care; only do not take your rest in the street.

于是领他们到家里，喂上驴，他们就洗脚吃喝。
So he took them into his house and gave the asses food; and after washing their feet they took food and drink.

他们心里正欢畅的时候，城中的匪徒围住房子，连连叩门，对房主老人说，你把那进你家的人带出来，我们要与他交合。
While they were taking their pleasure at the meal, the good-for-nothing men of the town came round the house, giving blows on the door; and they said to the old man, the master of the house, Send out that man who came to your house, so that we may take our pleasure with him.

那房主出来对他们说，弟兄们哪，不要这样作恶。这人既然进了我的家，你们就不要行这丑事。
So the man, the master of the house, went out to them, and said, No, my brothers, do not this evil thing; this man has come into my house, and you are not to do him this wrong.

我有个女儿，还是处女，并有这人的妾，我将她们领出来任凭你们玷辱她们，只是向这人不可行这样的丑事。
See, here is my daughter, a virgin, and his servant-wife: I will send them out for you to take them and do with them whatever you will. But do no such thing of shame to this man.

那些人却不听从他的话。那人就把他的妾拉出去交给他们，他们便与她交合，终夜凌辱她，直到天色快亮才放她去。
But the men would not give ear to him: so the man took his woman and sent her out to them; and they took her by force, using her for their pleasure all night till the morning; and when dawn came they let her go.

天快亮的时候，妇人回到她主人住宿的房门前，就仆倒在地，直到天亮。
Then at the dawn of day the woman came, and, falling down at the door of the man's house where her master was, was stretched there till it was light.

早晨，她的主人起来开了房门，出去要行路，不料那妇人仆倒在房门前，两手搭在门槛上。
In the morning her master got up, and opening the door of the house went out to go on his way; and he saw his servant-wife stretched on the earth at the door of the house with her hands on the step.

就对妇人说，起来，我们走吧。妇人却不回答。那人便将她驮在驴上，起身回本处去了。
And he said to her, Get up and let us be going; but there was no answer; so he took her up and put her on the ass, and went on his way and came to his house.

到了家里，用刀将妾的尸身切成十二块，使人拿着传送以色列的四境。
And when he had come to his house, he got his knife, and took the woman, cutting her up bone by bone into twelve parts, which he sent through all Israel.

凡看见的人都说，从以色列人出埃及地，直到今日，这样的事没有行过，也没有见过。现在应当思想，大家商议当怎样办理。
And he gave orders to the men whom he sent, saying, This is what you are to say to all the men of Israel, Has ever an act like this been done from the day when the children of Israel came out of Egypt to this day? Give thought to it, turning it over in your minds, and give your opinion of it.

于是以色列从但到别是巴，以及住基列地的众人都出来，如同一人，聚集在米斯巴耶和华面前。
Then all the children of Israel took up arms, and the people came together like one man, from Dan to Beer-sheba, and the land of Gilead, before the Lord at Mizpah.

以色列民的首领，就是各支派的军长，都站在神百姓的会中。拿刀的步兵共有四十万。
And the chiefs of the people, out of all the tribes of Israel, took their places in the meeting of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen armed with swords.

以色列人上到米斯巴，便雅悯人都听见了。以色列人说，请你将这件恶事的情由对我们说明。
(Now the children of Benjamin had word that the children of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.) And the children of Israel said, Make clear how this evil thing took place.

那利未人，就是被害之妇人的丈夫，回答说，我和我的妾到了便雅悯的基比亚住宿。
Then the Levite, the husband of the dead woman, said in answer, I came to Gibeah in the land of Benjamin, I and my servant-wife, for the purpose of stopping there for the night.

基比亚人夜间起来，围了我住的房子，想要杀我，又将我的妾强奸致死。
And the townsmen of Gibeah came together against me, going round the house on all sides by night; it was their purpose to put me to death, and my servant-wife was violently used by them and is dead.

我就把我妾的尸身切成块子，使人拿着传送以色列得为业的全地，因为基比亚人在以色列中行了凶淫丑恶的事。
So I took her, cutting her into parts which I sent through all the country of the heritage of Israel: for they have done an act of shame in Israel.

你们以色列人都当筹划商议。
Here you all are, you children of Israel; give now your suggestions about what is to be done.

众民都起来如同一人，说，我们连一人都不回自己帐棚，自己房屋去。
Then all the people got up as one man and said, Not one of us will go to his tent or go back to his house:

我们向基比亚人必这样行，照所掣的签去攻击他们。
But this is what we will do to Gibeah: we will go up against it by the decision of the Lord;

我们要在以色列各支派中，一百人挑取十人，一千人挑取百人，一万人挑取千人，为民运粮，等大众到了便雅悯的基比亚，就照基比亚人在以色列中所行的丑事征伐他们。
And we will take ten men out of every hundred, through all the tribes of Israel, a hundred out of every thousand, a thousand out of every ten thousand, to get food for the people, so that they may give to Gibeah of Benjamin the right punishment for the act of shame they have done in Israel.

于是以色列众人彼此连合如同一人，聚集攻击那城。
So all the men of Israel were banded together against the town, united like one man.

以色列众支派打发人去，问便雅悯支派的各家说，你们中间怎么作了这样的恶事呢？
And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin saying, What is this evil which has been done among you?

现在你们要将基比亚的那些匪徒交出来，我们好治死他们，从以色列中除掉这恶。便雅悯人却不肯听从他们弟兄以色列人的话。
Now give up those good-for-nothing persons in Gibeah so that we may put them to death, clearing away the evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not give ear to the voice of their brothers, the children of Israel.

便雅悯人从他们的各城里出来，聚集到了基比亚，要与以色列人打仗。
And the children of Benjamin came together from all their towns to Gibeah, to go to war with the children of Israel.

那时便雅悯人从各城里点出拿刀的，共有二万六千。另外还有基比亚人点出七百精兵。
And the children of Benjamin who came that day from the towns were twenty-six thousand men armed with swords, in addition to the people of Gibeah, numbering seven hundred of the best fighting-men,

在众军之中有拣选的七百精兵，都是左手便利的，能用机弦甩石打人，毫发不差。
Who were left-handed, able to send a stone at a hair without error.

便雅悯人之外，点出以色列人拿刀的，共有四十万，都是战士。
And the men of Israel, other than Benjamin, were four hundred thousand in number, all armed with swords; they were all men of war.

以色列人就起来，到伯特利去求问神说，我们中间谁当首先上去与便雅悯人争战呢？耶和华说，犹大当先上去。
And they got up and went up to Beth-el to get directions from God, and the children of Israel said, Who is to be the first to go up to the fight against the children of Benjamin? And the Lord said, Judah is to go up first.

以色列人早晨起来，对着基比亚安营。
So the children of Israel got up in the morning and put themselves in position against Gibeah.

以色列人出来，要与便雅悯人打仗，就在基比亚前摆阵。
And the men of Israel went out to war against Benjamin (and the men of Israel put their forces in fighting order against them at Gibeah).

便雅悯人就从基比亚出来，当日杀死以色列人二万二千。
Then the children of Benjamin came out from Gibeah, cutting down twenty-two thousand of the Israelites that day.

以色列人彼此奋勇，仍在头一日摆阵的地方又摆阵。
But the people, the men of Israel, taking heart again, put their forces in order and took up the same position as on the first day.

未摆阵之先，以色列人上去，在耶和华面前哭号，直到晚上，求问耶和华说，我们再去与我们弟兄便雅悯人打仗可以不可以。耶和华说，可以上去攻击他们。
Now the children of Israel went up, weeping before the Lord till evening, requesting the Lord and saying, Am I to go forward again to the fight against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the Lord said, Go up against him.

第二日，以色列人就上前攻击便雅悯人。
So the children of Israel went forward against the children of Benjamin the second day.

便雅悯人也在这日从基比亚出来，与以色列人接战，又杀死他们一万八千，都是拿刀的。
And the second day Benjamin went out against them from Gibeah, cutting down eighteen thousand men of the children of Israel, all swordsmen.

以色列众人就上到伯特利，坐在耶和华面前哭号，当日禁食直到晚上。又在耶和华面前献燔祭和平安祭。
Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up to Beth-el, weeping and waiting there before the Lord, going without food all day till evening, and offering burned offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord.

那时，神的约柜在那里。亚伦的孙子，以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈侍立在约柜前。以色列人问耶和华说，我们当再出去与我们弟兄便雅悯人打仗呢？还是罢兵呢？耶和华说，你们当上去，因为明日我必将他们交在你们手中。
And the children of Israel made request to the Lord, (for the ark of the agreement of the Lord was there in those days,


And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, was in his place before it,) and said, Am I still to go on with the fight against the children of Benjamin my brother, or am I to give it up? And the Lord said, Go on; for tomorrow I will give him into your hands.

以色列人在基比亚的四围设下伏兵。
So Israel put men secretly all round Gibeah to make a surprise attack on it.

第三日，以色列人又上去攻击便雅悯人，在基比亚前摆阵，与前两次一样。
And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in fighting order against Gibeah as before.

便雅悯人也出来迎敌，就被引诱离城。在田间两条路上，一通伯特利，一通基比亚，像前两次，动手杀死以色列人约有三十个。
And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, moving away from the town; and as before, at their first attack, they put to death about thirty men of Israel on the highways, of which one goes up to Beth-el and the other to Gibeah, and in the open country.

便雅悯人说，他们仍旧败在我们面前。但以色列人说，我们不如逃跑，引诱他们离开城到路上来。
And the children of Benjamin said, They are giving way before us as at first. But the children of Israel said, Let us go in flight and get them away from the town, into the highways.

以色列众人都起来，在巴力他玛摆阵，以色列的伏兵从马利迦巴埋伏的地方冲上前去。
So all the men of Israel got up and put themselves in fighting order at Baal-tamar: and those who had been waiting secretly to make a surprise attack came rushing out of their place on the west of Geba.

有以色列人中的一万精兵，来到基比亚前接战，势派甚是凶猛。便雅悯人却不知道灾祸临近了。
And they came in front of Gibeah, ten thousand of the best men in all Israel, and the fighting became more violent; but the children of Benjamin were not conscious that evil was coming on them.

耶和华使以色列人杀败便雅悯人。那日，以色列人杀死便雅悯人二万五千一百，都是拿刀的。
Then the Lord sent sudden fear on Benjamin before Israel; and that day the children of Israel put to death twenty-five thousand, one hundred men of Benjamin, all of them swordsmen.

于是便雅悯人知道自己败了。先是以色列人。因为靠着在基比亚前所设的伏兵，就在便雅悯人面前诈败。
So the children of Benjamin saw that they were overcome: and the men of Israel had given way before Benjamin, putting their faith in the watchers who were to make the surprise attack on Gibeah.

伏兵急忙闯进基比亚，用刀杀死全城的人。
And the watchers, rushing on Gibeah and overrunning it, put all the town to the sword without mercy.

以色列人预先同伏兵约定在城内放火，以烟气上腾为号。
Now the sign fixed between the men of Israel and those making the surprise attack was that when they made a pillar of smoke go up from the town,

以色列人临退阵的时候，便雅悯人动手杀死以色列人，约有三十个，就说，他们仍像前次被我们杀败了。
The men of Israel were to make a turn about in the fight. And Benjamin had overcome and put to death about thirty of the men of Israel, and were saying, Certainly they are falling back before us as in the first fight.

当烟气如柱从城中上腾的时候，便雅悯人回头观看，见全城的烟气冲天。
Then the sign went up out of the town in the pillar of smoke, and the Benjamites, turning back, saw all the town going up in smoke to heaven.

以色列人又转身回来，便雅悯人就甚惊惶，因为看见灾祸临到自己了。
And the men of Israel had made a turn about, and the men of Benjamin were overcome with fear, for they saw that evil had overtaken them.

他们在以色列人面前转身往旷野逃跑。以色列人在后面追杀。那从各城里出来的，也都夹攻杀灭他们。
So turning their backs on the men of Israel, they went in the direction of the waste land; but the fight overtook them; and those who came out of the town were heading them off and putting them to the sword.

以色列人围绕便雅悯人，追赶他们，在他们歇脚之处，对着日出之地的基比亚践踏他们。
And crushing Benjamin down, they went after them, driving them from Nohah as far as the east side of Gibeah.

便雅悯人死了的有一万八千，都是勇士。
Eighteen thousand men of Benjamin came to their death, all strong men of war.

其余的人转身向旷野逃跑，往临门磐去。以色列人在道路上杀了他们五千人，如拾取遗穗一样，追到基顿又杀了他们二千人。
And turning, they went in flight to the rock of Rimmon in the waste land: and on the highways five thousand of them were cut off by the men of Israel, who, pushing on hard after them to Geba, put to death two thousand more.

那日便雅悯死了的共有二万五千人，都是拿刀的勇士。
So twenty-five thousand of the swordsmen of Benjamin came to their end that day, all strong men of war.

只剩下六百人，转身向旷野逃跑，到了临门磐，就在那里住了四个月。
But six hundred men, turning back, went in flight to the rock of Rimmon in the waste land, and were living on the rock of Rimmon for four months.

以色列人又转到便雅悯地，将各城的人和牲畜，并一切所遇见的，都用刀杀尽，又放火烧了一切城邑。
And the men of Israel, turning again against the children of Benjamin, put to the sword without mercy all the towns and the cattle and everything there was, burning every town which came into their hands.

以色列人在米斯巴曾起誓说，我们都不将女儿给便雅悯人为妻。
Now the men of Israel had taken an oath in Mizpah, saying, Not one of us will give his daughter as a wife to Benjamin.

以色列人来到伯特利，坐在神面前直到晚上，放声痛哭，
And the people came to Beth-el, waiting there till evening before God, and gave themselves up to bitter weeping.

说，耶和华以色列的神阿，为何以色列中有这样缺了一支派的事呢？
And they said, O Lord, the God of Israel, why has this fate come on Israel, that today one tribe has been cut off from Israel?

次日清早，百姓起来，在那里筑了一座坛，献燔祭和平安祭。
Then on the day after, the people got up early and made an altar there, offering burned offerings and peace-offerings.

以色列人彼此问说，以色列各支派中，谁没有同会众上到耶和华面前来呢？先是以色列人起过大誓说，凡不上米斯巴到耶和华面前来的，必将他治死。
And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel, who did not come up to the Lord at the meeting of all Israel? For they had taken a great oath that whoever did not come up to Mizpah to the Lord was to be put to death.

以色列人为他们的弟兄便雅悯后悔，说，如今以色列中绝了一个支派了。
And the children of Israel were moved with pity for Benjamin their brother, saying, Today one tribe has been cut off from Israel.

我们既在耶和华面前起誓说，必不将我们的女儿给便雅悯人为妻，现在我们当怎样办理，使他们剩下的人有妻呢？
What are we to do about wives for those who are still living? For we have taken an oath by the Lord that we will not give them our daughters for wives.

又彼此问说，以色列支派中谁没有上米斯巴到耶和华面前来呢？他们就查出基列雅比没有一人进营到会众那里。
And they said, Which one of the tribes of Israel did not come up to Mizpah to the Lord? And it was seen that no one had come from Jabesh-gilead to the meeting.

因为百姓被数的时候，没有一个基列雅比人在那里。
For when the people were numbered, not one man of the people of Jabesh-gilead was present.

会众就打发一万二千大勇士，吩咐他们说，你们去用刀将基列雅比人连妇女带孩子都击杀了。
So they (the meeting) sent twelve thousand of the best fighting-men, and gave them orders, saying, Go and put the people of Jabesh-gilead to the sword without mercy, with their women and their little ones.

所当行的就是这样，要将一切男子和已嫁的女子尽行杀戮。
And this is what you are to do: every male, and every woman who has had sex relations with a man, you are to put to the curse, but you are to keep safe the virgins. And they did so.

他们在基列雅比人中，遇见了四百个未嫁的处女，就带到迦南地的示罗营里。
Now there were among the people of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had never had sex relations with a man; these they took to their tents in Shiloh in the land of Canaan.

全会众打发人到临门磐的便雅悯人那里，向他们说和睦的话。
And all the meeting sent to the men of Benjamin who were in the rock of Rimmon, offering them peace.

当时便雅悯人回来了，以色列人就把所存活基列雅比的女子给他们为妻，还是不够。
Then Benjamin came back; and they gave them the women whom they had kept from death among the women of Jabesh-gilead: but still there were not enough for them.

百姓为便雅悯人后悔，因为耶和华使以色列人缺了一个支派（原文作使以色列中有了破口）。
And the people were moved with pity for Benjamin, because the Lord had let his wrath loose on the tribes of Israel.

会中的长老说，便雅悯中的女子既然除灭了，我们当怎样办理，使那余剩的人有妻呢？
Then the responsible men of the meeting said, What are we to do about wives for the rest of them, seeing that the women of Benjamin are dead?

又说，便雅悯逃脱的人当有地业，免得以色列中涂抹了一个支派。
And they said, How is the rest of Benjamin to be given offspring so that one tribe of Israel may not be put out of existence,

只是我们不能将自己的女儿给他们为妻。因为以色列人曾起誓说，有将女儿给便雅悯人为妻的，必受咒诅。
Seeing that we may not give them our daughters as wives? For the children of Israel had taken an oath, saying, Cursed is he who gives a wife to Benjamin.

他们又说，在利波拿以南，伯特利以北，在示剑大路以东的示罗，年年有耶和华的节期。
And they said, See, every year there is a feast of the Lord in Shiloh, which is to the north of Beth-el, on the east side of the highway which goes up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.

就吩咐便雅悯人说，你们去，在葡萄园中埋伏。
And they said to the men of Benjamin, Go into the vine-gardens, waiting there secretly,

若看见示罗的女子出来跳舞，就从葡萄园出来，在示罗的女子中各抢一个为妻，回便雅悯地去。
And watching; and if the daughters of Shiloh come out to take part in the dances, then come from the vine-gardens and take a wife for every one of you from among the daughters of Shiloh, and go back to the land of Benjamin.

他们的父亲或是弟兄若来与我们争竞，我们就说，求你们看我们的情面，施恩给这些人，因我们在争战的时候没有给他们留下女子为妻。这也不是你们将女子给他们的。若是你们给的，就算有罪。
And when their fathers or their brothers come and make trouble, you are to say to them, Give them to us as an act of grace; for we did not take them as wives for ourselves in war; and if you yourselves had given them to us you would have been responsible for the broken oath.

于是便雅悯人照样而行，按着他们的数目从跳舞的女子中抢去为妻，就回自己的地业去，又重修城邑居住。
So the men of Benjamin did this, and got wives for themselves for every one of their number, taking them away by force from the dance; then they went back to their heritage, building up their towns and living in them.

当时以色列人离开那里，各归本支派，本宗族，本地业去了。
Then the children of Israel went away from there, every man to his tribe and his family, every man went back to his heritage.

那时，以色列中没有王，各人任意而行。
In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did what seemed right to him.

ch goes up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.

就吩咐便雅悯人说，你们去，在葡萄园中埋伏。
And they said to the men of Benjamin, Go into the vine-gardens, waiting there secretly,

若看见示罗的女子出来跳舞，就从葡萄园出来，在示罗的女子中各抢一个为妻，回便雅悯地去。
And watching; and if the daughters of Shiloh come out to take part in the dances, then come from the vine-gardens and take a wife for every one of you from among the daughters of Shiloh, and go back to the land of Benjamin.

他们的父亲或是弟兄若来与我们争竞，我们就说，求你们看我们的情面，施恩给这些人，因我们在争战的时候没有给他们留下女子为妻。这也不是你们将女子给他们的。若是你们给的，就算有罪。
And when their fathers or their brothers come and make trouble, you are to say to them, Give them to us as an act of grace; for we did not take them as wives for ourselves in war; and if you yourselves had given them to us you would have been responsible for the broken oath.

于是便雅悯人照样而行，按着他们的数目从跳舞的女子中抢去为妻，就回自己的地业去，又重修城邑居住。
So the men of Benjamin did this, and got wives for themselves for every one of their number, taking them away by force from the dance; then they went back to their heritage, building up their towns and living in them.

当时以色列人离开那里，各归本支派，本宗族，本地业去了。
Then the children of Israel went away from there, every man to his tribe and his family, every man went back to his heritage.

那时，以色列中没有王，各人任意而行。
In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did what seemed right to him.

