当犹大王约坦，亚哈斯，希西家在位的时候，摩利沙人弥迦得耶和华的默示，论撒玛利亚和耶路撒冷。
The word of the Lord which came to Micah the Morashtite, in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah: his vision about Samaria and Jerusalem.

万民哪，你们都要听。地和其上所有的，也都要侧耳而听。主耶和华从他的圣殿，要见证你们的不是。
Give ear, you peoples, all of you; give attention, O earth and everything in it: let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy Temple.

看哪，耶和华出了他的居所，降临步行地的高处。
For see, the Lord is coming out from his place, and will come down, stepping on the high places of the earth.

众山在他以下必消化，诸谷必崩裂，如蜡化在火中，如水冲下山坡。
And the mountains will be turned to water under him, and the deep valleys will be broken open, like wax before the fire, like waters flowing down a slope.

这都因雅各的罪过，以色列家的罪恶。雅各的罪过在哪里呢？岂不是在撒玛利亚吗？犹大的丘坛在哪里呢？岂不是在耶路撒冷吗？
All this is because of the wrongdoing of Jacob and the sins of the children of Israel. What is the wrongdoing of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem?

所以，我必使撒玛利亚变为田野的乱堆，又作为种葡萄之处。也必将她的石头倒在谷中，露出根基来。
So I will make Samaria into a field and the plantings of a vine-garden: I will send its stones falling down into the valley, uncovering its bases.

她一切雕刻的偶像必被打碎，她所得的财物必被火烧，所有的偶像我必毁灭。因为是从妓女雇价所聚来的，后必归为妓女的雇价。
And all her pictured images will be hammered into bits, and all the payments for her loose ways will be burned with fire, and all the images of her gods I will make waste: for with the price of a loose woman she got them together, and as the price of a loose woman will they be given back.

先知说，因此我必大声哀号，赤脚露体而行。又要呼号如野狗，哀鸣如鸵鸟。
For this I will be full of sorrow and give cries of grief; I will go uncovered and unclothed: I will give cries of grief like the jackals and will be in sorrow like the ostriches.

因为撒玛利亚的伤痕无法医治，延及犹大和耶路撒冷我民的城门。
For her wounds may not be made well: for it has come even to Judah, stretching up to the doorway of my people, even to Jerusalem.

不要在迦特报告这事，总不要哭泣。我在伯亚弗拉滚于灰尘之中。
Give no word of it in Gath, let there be no weeping at all: at Beth-le-aphrah be rolling in the dust.

沙斐的居民哪，你们要赤身蒙羞过去。撒南的居民不敢出来。伯以薛人的哀哭，使你们无处可站。
Be uncovered and go away, you who are living in Shaphir: the one living in Zaanan has not come out of her town; Beth-ezel is taken away from its base, even from its resting-place.

玛律的居民心甚忧急，切望得好处，因为灾祸从耶和华那里临到耶路撒冷的城门。
For the one living in Maroth is waiting for good: for evil has come down from the Lord to the doorways of Jerusalem.

拉吉的居民哪，要用快马套车。锡安民（民原文作女子）的罪由你而起。以色列人的罪过在你那里显出。
Let the war-carriage be yoked to the quick-running horse, you who are living in Lachish: she was the first cause of sin to the daughter of Zion; for the wrongdoings of Israel were seen in you.

犹大阿，你要将礼物送给摩利设迦特。亚革悉的众族，必用诡诈待以色列诸王。
For this cause give a parting offering to Moresheth-gath: the daughter of Achzib will be a deceit to the king of Israel.

玛利沙的居民哪，我必使那夺取你的来到你这里。以色列的尊贵人（原文作荣耀）必到亚杜兰。
Even now will the taker of your heritage come to you, you who are living in Mareshah: the glory of Israel will come to destruction for ever.

犹大阿，要为你所喜爱的儿女剪除你的头发，使头光秃。要大大地光秃，如同秃鹰。因为他们都被掳去离开你。
Let your head be uncovered and your hair cut off in sorrow for the children of your delight: let the hair be pulled from your head like an eagle's; for they have been taken away from you as prisoners.

祸哉，那些在床上图谋罪孽，造作奸恶的。天一发亮，因手有能力就行出来了。
A curse on the designers of evil, working on their beds! in the morning light they do it, because it is in their power.

他们贪图田地就占据。贪图房屋便夺取。他们欺压人，霸占房屋和产业。
They have a desire for fields and take them by force; and for houses and take them away: they are cruel to a man and his family, even to a man and his heritage.

所以耶和华如此说，我筹划灾祸降与这族，这祸在你们的颈项上不能解脱，你们也不能昂首而行。因为这时势是恶的。
For this cause the Lord has said, See, against this family I am purposing an evil from which you will not be able to take your necks away, and you will be weighted down by it; for it is an evil time.

到那日，必有人向你们提起悲惨的哀歌，讥刺说，我们全然败落了。耶和华将我们的分转归别人。何竟使这分离开我们。他将我们的田地分给悖逆的人。
In that day this saying will be said about you, and this song of grief will be made: The heritage of my people is measured out, and there is no one to give it back; those who have made us prisoners have taken our fields from us, and complete destruction has come to us.

所以，在耶和华的会中，你必没有人拈阄拉准绳。
For this cause you will have no one to make the decision by the measuring line in the meeting of the Lord.

他们（或作假先知）说，你们不可说预言，不可向这些人说预言，不住地羞辱我们。
Let not words like these be dropped, they say: Shame and the curse will not come to the family of Jacob!

雅各家阿，岂可说耶和华的心不忍耐吗（或作心肠狭窄吗）？这些事是他所行的吗？我耶和华的言语，岂不是与行动正直的人有益吗？
Is the Lord quickly made angry? are these his doings? do not his words do good to his people Israel?

然而，近来我的民兴起如仇敌，从那些安然经过不愿打仗之人身上剥去外衣。
As for you, you have become haters of those who were at peace with you: you take the clothing of those who go by without fear, and make them prisoners of war.

你们将我民中的妇人从安乐家中赶出，又将我的荣耀从她们的小孩子尽行夺去。
The women of my people you have been driving away from their dearly loved children; from their young ones you are taking my glory for ever.

你们起来去吧。这不是你们安息之所。因为污秽使人（或作地）毁灭，而且大大毁灭。
Up! and go; for this is not your rest: because it has been made unclean, the destruction ordered will come on you.

若有人心存虚假，用谎言说，我要向你们预言得清酒和浓酒。那人就必作这民的先知。
If a man came with a false spirit of deceit, saying, I will be a prophet to you of wine and strong drink: he would be the sort of prophet for this people.

雅各家阿，我必要聚集你们，必要招聚以色列剩下的人，安置在一处，如波斯拉的羊，又如草场上的羊群。因为人数众多就必大大喧哗。
I will certainly make all of you, O Jacob, come together; I will get together the rest of Israel; I will put them together like the sheep in their circle: like a flock in their green field; they will be full of the noise of men.

开路的（或作破城的）在他们前面上去。他们直闯过城门，从城门出去。他们的王在前面行，耶和华引导他们。
The opener of the way will go up before them: forcing their way out they will go on to the doorway and out through it: their king will go on before them, and the Lord at their head.

我说，雅各的首领，以色列家的官长阿，你们要听。你们不当知道公平吗？
And I said, Give ear, now, you heads of Jacob and rulers of the people of Israel: is it not for you to have knowledge of what is right?

你们恶善好恶。从人身上剥皮，从人骨头上剔肉。
You who are haters of good and lovers of evil, pulling off their skin from them and their flesh from their bones;

吃我民的肉，剥他们的皮，打折他们的骨头，分成块子像要下锅，又像釜中的肉。
Like meat they take the flesh of my people for their food, skinning them and crushing their bones, yes, cutting them up as if for the pot, like flesh inside the cooking-pot.

到了遭灾的时候，这些人必哀求耶和华，他却不应允他们。那时他必照他们所行的恶事，向他们掩面。
Then they will be crying to the Lord for help, but he will not give them an answer: yes, he will keep his face veiled from them at that time, because their acts have been evil.

论到使我民走差路的先知，他们牙齿有所嚼的，他们就呼喊说，平安了。凡不供给他们吃的，他们就预备攻击他（预备攻击他或作说必遭遇刀兵）耶和华如此说，
This is what the Lord has said about the prophets by whom my people have been turned from the right way; who, biting with their teeth, say, Peace; and if anyone puts nothing in their mouths they make ready for war against him.

你们必遭遇黑夜，以致不见异象。又必遭遇幽暗，以致不能占卜。日头必向你们沉落，白昼变为黑暗。
For this cause it will be night for you, without a vision; and it will be dark for you, without knowledge of the future; the sun will go down over the prophets, and the day will be black over them.

先见必抱愧，占卜的必蒙羞，都必捂着嘴唇，因为神不应允他们。
And the seers will be shamed, and the readers of the future will be at a loss, all of them covering their lips; for there is no answer from God.

至于我，我借耶和华的灵，满有力量公平才能，可以向雅各说明他的过犯，向以色列指出他的罪恶。
But I truly am full of the spirit of the Lord, with power of judging and with strength to make clear to Jacob his wrongdoing and to Israel his sin.

雅各家的首领，以色列家的官长阿，当听我的话。你们厌恶公平，在一切事上屈枉正直。
Then give ear to this, you heads of the children of Jacob, you rulers of the children of Israel, hating what is right, twisting what is straight.

以人血建立锡安，以罪孽建造耶路撒冷。
They are building up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with evil-doing.

首领为贿赂行审判，祭司为雇价施训诲，先知为银钱行占卜。他们却倚赖耶和华，说，耶和华不是在我们中间吗？灾祸必不临到我们。
Its heads take rewards for judging, and the priests take payment for teaching, and the prophets get silver for reading the future: but still, supporting themselves on the Lord, they say, Is not the Lord among us? no evil will overtake us.

所以因你们的缘故，锡安必被耕种像一块田，耶路撒冷必变为乱堆，这殿的山必像丛林的高处。
For this reason, Zion will be ploughed like a field because of you, and Jerusalem will become a mass of broken walls, and the mountain of the house like a high place in the woods.

末后的日子，耶和华殿的山必坚立，超乎诸山，高举过于万岭。万民都要流归这山。
But in the last days it will come about that the mountain of the Lord's house will be placed on the top of the mountains, and be lifted up over the hills; and peoples will be flowing to it.

必有许多国的民前往，说，来吧，我们登耶和华的山，奔雅各神的殿。主必将他的道教训我们，我们也要行他的路。因为训诲必出于锡安，耶和华的言语必出于耶路撒冷。
And a number of nations will go and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will give us knowledge of his ways and we will be guided by his word: for from Zion the law will go out, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

他必在多国的民中施行审判，为远方强盛的国断定是非。他们要将刀打成犁头，把枪打成镰刀。这国不举刀攻击那国，他们也不再学习战事。
And he will be judge between great peoples, and strong nations far away will be ruled by his decisions; their swords will be hammered into plough-blades and their spears into vine-knives: nations will no longer be lifting up their swords against one another, and knowledge of war will have gone for ever.

人人都要坐在自己葡萄树下和无花果树下，无人惊吓。这是万军之耶和华亲口说的。
But every man will be seated under his vine and under his fig-tree, and no one will be a cause of fear to them: for the mouth of the Lord of armies has said it.

万民各奉己神的名而行。我们却永永远远奉耶和华我们神的名而行。
For all the peoples will be walking, every one in the name of his god, and we will be walking in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.

耶和华说，到那日，我必聚集瘸腿的，招聚被赶出的，和我所惩治的。
In that day, says the Lord, I will get together her who goes with uncertain steps, I will get together her who has been sent away, and her on whom I have sent evil;

我必使瘸腿的为余剩之民，使赶到远方的为强盛之民。耶和华要在锡安山作王治理他们，从今直到永远。
And I will make her whose steps were uncertain a small band, and her who was feeble a strong nation: and the Lord will be their King in Mount Zion from now and for ever.

你这羊群的高台，锡安城的山哪（城原文作女子），从前的权柄，就是耶路撒冷民的国权（民原文作女子），必归与你。
And you, O tower of the flock, Ophel of the daughter of Zion, to you it will come, even the earlier authority, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.

现在你为何大声哭号呢？疼痛抓住你仿佛产难的妇人。是因你中间没有君王吗？你的谋士灭亡了吗？
Now why are you crying so loudly? is there no king in you? has destruction come on your wise helper? so that pains have taken you like the pains of a woman in childbirth:

锡安的民哪（民原文作女子），你要疼痛劬劳，仿佛产难的妇人。因为你必从城里出来，住在田野，到巴比伦去。在那里要蒙解救，在那里耶和华必救赎你脱离仇敌的手。
Be in pain, make sounds of grief, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in childbirth: for now you will go out of the town, living in the open country, and will come even to Babylon; there you will have salvation; there the Lord will make you free from the hands of your haters.

现在有许多国的民聚集攻击你，说，愿锡安被玷污，愿我们亲眼见她遭报。
And now a number of nations have come together against you, and they say, Let her be made unclean and let our eyes see the fate of Zion.

他们却不知道耶和华的意念，也不明白他的筹划。他聚集他们，好像把禾捆聚到禾场一样。
But they have no knowledge of the thoughts of the Lord, their minds are not able to see his purpose: for he has got them together like stems of grain to the crushing-floor.

锡安的民哪（民原文作女子），起来踹谷吧。我必使你的角成为铁，使你的蹄成为铜。你必打碎多国的民。将他们的财献与耶和华，将他们的货献与普天下的主。
Up! and let the grain be crushed, O daughter of Zion, for I will make your horn iron and your feet brass, and a number of peoples will be broken by you, and you will give up their increase to the Lord and their wealth to the Lord of all the earth.

成群的民哪（民原文作女子），现在你要聚集成队。因为仇敌围攻我们，要用杖击打以色列审判者的脸。
Now you will give yourselves deep wounds for grief; they will put up a wall round us: they will give the judge of Israel a blow on the face with a rod.

伯利恒，以法他阿，你在犹大诸城中为小。将来必有一位从你那里出来，在以色列中为我作掌权的。他的根源从亘古，从太初就有。
And you, Beth-lehem Ephrathah, the least among the families of Judah, out of you one will come to me who is to be ruler in Israel; whose going out has been purposed from time past, from the eternal days.

耶和华必将以色列人交付敌人，直等那生产的妇人生下子来。那时掌权者（原文作他）其余的弟兄必归到以色列人那里。
For this cause he will give them up till the time when she who is with child has given birth: then the rest of his brothers will come back to the children of Israel.

他必起来，倚靠耶和华的大能，并耶和华他神之名的威严，牧养他的羊群。他们要安然居住。因为他必日见尊大，直到地极。
And he will take his place and give food to his flock in the strength of the Lord, in the glory of the name of the Lord his God; and their resting-place will be safe: for now he will be great to the ends of the earth.

这位必作我们的平安。当亚述人进入我们的地境，践踏宫殿的时候，我们就立起七个牧者，八个首领攻击他。
And this will be our peace: when the Assyrian comes into our country and his feet are in our land, then we will put up against him seven keepers of the flocks and eight chiefs among men.

他们必用刀剑毁坏亚述地，和宁录地的关口。亚述人进入我们的地境，践踏的时候，他必拯救我们。
And they will make waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod with the edge of the sword: he will give us salvation from the Assyrian when he comes into our country, when his feet come inside the limit of our land.

雅各余剩的人必在多国的民中，如从耶和华那里降下的露水，又如甘霖降在草上。不仗赖人力，也不等候世人之功。
And the rest of Jacob will be among the mass of peoples like dew from the Lord, like showers on the grass, which may not be kept back by man, or be waiting for the sons of men.

雅各余剩的人必在多国多民中，如林间百兽中的狮子，又如少壮狮子在羊群中。他若经过，就必践踏撕裂，无人搭救。
And the rest of Jacob will be among the nations, in the middle of the mass of peoples, like a lion among the beasts of the woods, like a young lion among the flocks of sheep: if he goes through, they will be crushed under foot and pulled to bits, and there will be no saviour.

愿你的手举起，高过敌人，愿你的仇敌都被剪除。
Your hand is lifted up against those who are against you, and all your haters will be cut off.

耶和华说，到那日，我必从你中间剪除马匹，毁坏车辆。
And it will come about in that day, says the Lord, that I will take away your horses from you, and will give your war-carriages to destruction:

也必从你国中除灭城邑，拆毁一切的保障。
I will have the towns of your land cut off and all your strong places pulled down:

又必除掉你手中的邪术。你那里也不再有占卜的。
I will put an end to your use of secret arts, and you will have no more readers of signs:

我必从你中间除灭雕刻的偶像，和柱像。你就不再跪拜自己手所造的。
And I will have your images and your pillars cut off from you; and you will no longer give worship to the work of your hands.

我必从你中间拔出木偶。又毁灭你的城邑。
I will have your Asherahs pulled up from among you: and I will send destruction on your images.

我也必在怒气，和忿怒中向那不听从的列国施报。
And my punishment will be effected on the nations with such burning wrath as they have not had word of.

以色列人哪，当听耶和华的话。要起来向山岭争辩，使冈陵听你的话。
Give ear now to the words of the Lord: Up! put forward your cause before the mountains, let your voice be sounding among the hills.

山岭和地永久的根基阿，要听耶和华争辩的话。因为耶和华要与他的百姓争辩，与以色列争论。
Give ear, O you mountains, to the Lord's cause, and take note, you bases of the earth: for the Lord has a cause against his people, and he will take it up with Israel.

我的百姓阿，我向你做了什么呢？我在什么事上使你厌烦？你可以对我证明。
O my people, what have I done to you? how have I been a weariness to you? give answer against me.

我曾将你从埃及地领出来，从作奴仆之家救赎你。我也差遣摩西，亚伦，和米利暗在你前面行。
For I took you up out of the land of Egypt and made you free from the prison-house; I sent before you Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

我的百姓阿，你们当追念摩押王巴勒所设的谋，和比珥的儿子巴兰回答他的话，并你们从什亭到吉甲所遇见的事，好使你们知道耶和华公义的作为。
O my people, keep in mind now what was designed by Balak, king of Moab, and the answer which Balaam, son of Beor, gave him; the events, from Shittim to Gilgal, so that you may be certain of the upright acts of the Lord.

我朝见耶和华，在至高神面前跪拜，当献上什么呢？岂可献一岁的牛犊为燔祭吗？
With what am I to come before the Lord and go with bent head before the high God? am I to come before him with burned offerings, with young oxen a year old?

耶和华岂喜悦千千的公羊，或是万万的油河吗？我岂可为自己的罪过，献我的长子吗？为心中的罪恶，献我身所生的吗？
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of sheep or with ten thousand rivers of oil? am I to give my first child for my wrongdoing, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

世人哪，耶和华已指示你何为善。他向你所要的是什么呢？只要你行公义，好怜悯，存谦卑的心，与你的神同行。
He has made clear to you, O man, what is good; and what is desired from you by the Lord; only doing what is right, and loving mercy, and walking without pride before your God.

耶和华向这城呼叫，智慧人必敬畏他的名。你们当听是谁派定刑杖的惩罚。
The voice of the Lord is crying out to the town: Give ear, you tribes and the meeting of the town.

恶人家中不仍有非义之财，和可恶的小升斗吗？
Am I to let the stores of the evil-doer go out of my memory, and the short measure, which is cursed?

我若用不公道的天平，和囊中诡诈的法码，岂可算为清洁呢？
Is it possible for me to let wrong scales and the bag of false weights go without punishment?

城里的富户满行强暴，其中的居民也说谎言，口中的舌头是诡诈的。
For its men of wealth are cruel, and its people have said what is not true, and their tongue is false in their mouth.

因此，我击打你，使你的伤痕甚重。使你因你的罪恶荒凉。
So I have made a start with your punishment; I have made you waste because of your sins.

你要吃，却吃不饱。你的虚弱，必显在你中间。你必挪去，却不得救护。所救护的，我必交给刀剑。
You will have food, but not enough; your shame will be ever with you: you will get your goods moved, but you will not take them away safely; and what you do take away I will give to the sword.

你必撒种，却不得收割。踹橄榄，却不得油抹身。踹葡萄，却不得酒喝。
You will put in seed, but you will not get in the grain; you will be crushing olives, but your bodies will not be rubbed with the oil; and you will get in the grapes, but you will have no wine.

因为你守暗利的恶规，行亚哈家一切所行的，顺从他们的计谋。因此，我必使你荒凉，使你的居民令人嗤笑。你们也必担当我民的羞辱。
For you have kept the laws of Omri and all the works of the family of Ahab, and you have been guided by their designs: so that I might make you a cause of wonder and your people a cause of hisses; and the shame of my people will be on you.

哀哉，我（或指以色列）好像夏天的果子已被收尽，又像摘了葡萄所剩下的。没有一挂可吃的，我心羡慕初熟的无花果。
Sorrow is mine! for I am as when they have got in the summer fruits, like the last of the grapes: there is nothing for food, not even an early fig for my desire.

地上虔诚人灭尽，世间没有正直人。各人埋伏，要杀人流血。都用网罗猎取弟兄。
The good man is gone from the earth, there is no one upright among men: they are all waiting secretly for blood, every man is going after his brother with a net.

他们双手作恶。君王徇情面，审判官要贿赂。位分大的吐出恶意。都彼此结联行恶。
Their hands are made ready to do evil; the ruler makes requests for money, and the judge is looking for a reward; and the great man gives decisions at his pleasure, and the right is twisted.

他们最好的，不过是蒺藜。最正直的，不过是荆棘篱笆。你守望者说降罚的日子已经来到。他们必扰乱不安。
The best of them is like a waste plant, and their upright ones are like a wall of thorns. Sorrow! the day of their fate has come; now will trouble come on them.

不要倚赖邻舍。不要信靠密友。要守住你的口，不要向你怀中的妻提说。
Put no faith in a friend, do not let your hope be placed in a relation: keep watch on the doors of your mouth against her who is resting on your breast.

因为，儿子藐视父亲，女儿抗拒母亲，媳妇抗拒婆婆。人的仇敌，就是自己家里的人。
For the son puts shame on his father, the daughter goes against her mother and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and a man's haters are those of his family.

至于我，我要仰望耶和华，要等候那救我的神。我的神必应允我。
But as for me, I am looking to the Lord; I am waiting for the God of my salvation: the ears of my God will be open to me.

我的仇敌阿，不要向我夸耀。我虽跌倒，却要起来。我虽坐在黑暗里，耶和华却作我的光。
Do not be glad because of my sorrow, O my hater: after my fall I will be lifted up; when I am seated in the dark, the Lord will be a light to me.

我要忍受耶和华的恼怒，因我得罪了他。直等他为我辨屈，为我伸冤。他必领我到光明中，我必得见他的公义。
I will undergo the wrath of the Lord, because of my sin against him; till he takes up my cause and does what is right for me: when he makes me come out into the light, I will see his righteousness;

那时我的仇敌，就是曾对我说耶和华你神在哪里的，他一看见这事就被羞愧遮盖。我必亲眼见他遭报。他必被践踏，如同街上的泥土。
And my hater will see it and be covered with shame; she who said to me, Where is the Lord your God? my eyes will see their desire effected on her, now she will be crushed under foot like the dust of the streets.

以色列阿，日子必到，你的墙垣必重修。到那日，你的境界必开展（或作命令必传到远方）。
A day for building your walls! in that day will your limits be stretched far and wide.

当那日，人必从亚述，从埃及的城邑，从埃及到大河，从这海到那海，从这山到那山，都归到你这里。
In that day they will come to you from Assyria and the towns of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and from sea to sea and from mountain to mountain.

然而，这地因居民的缘故，又因他们行事的结果，必然荒凉。
But the land will become a waste because of its people, as the fruit of their works.

求耶和华在迦密山的树林中，用你的杖牧放你独居的民，就是你产业的羊群。求你容他们在巴珊和基列得食物，像古时一样。
Keep your people safe with your rod, the flock of your heritage, living by themselves in the woods in the middle of Carmel: let them get their food in Bashan and Gilead as in the past.

耶和华说，我要把奇事显给他们看，好像出埃及地的时候一样。
As in the days when you came out from the land of Egypt, let us see things of wonder.

列国看见这事，就必为自己的势力惭愧。他们必用手捂口，掩耳不听。
The nations will see and be shamed because of all their strength; they will put their hands on their mouths, their ears will be stopped.

他们必舔土如蛇，又如土中腹行的物，战战兢兢地出他们的营寨。他们必战惧投降耶和华，也必因我们的神而惧怕。
They will take dust as their food like a snake, like the things which go flat on the earth; they will come shaking with fear out of their secret places: they will come with fear to the Lord our God, full of fear because of you.

神阿，有何神象你，赦免罪孽，饶恕你产业之余民的罪过。不永远怀怒，喜爱施恩。
Who is a God like you, offering forgiveness for evil-doing and overlooking the sins of the rest of his heritage? he does not keep his wrath for ever, because his delight is in mercy.

必再怜悯我们，将我们的罪孽踏在脚下，又将我们的一切罪投于深海。
He will again have pity on us; he will put our sins under his feet: and you will send all our sins down into the heart of the sea.

你必按古时起誓应许我们列祖的话，向雅各发诚实，向亚伯拉罕施慈爱。
You will make clear your good faith to Jacob and your mercy to Abraham, as you gave your oath to our fathers from times long past.

