撒母耳记上 Samuel

以法莲山地的拉玛琐非有一个以法莲人，名叫以利加拿，是苏弗的玄孙，托户的曾孙，以利户的孙子，耶罗罕的儿子。
Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim, a Zuphite of the hill-country of Ephraim, named Elkanah; he was the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite:

他有两个妻，一名哈拿，一名毗尼拿。毗尼拿有儿女，哈拿没有儿女。
And he had two wives, one named Hannah and the other Peninnah: and Peninnah was the mother of children, but Hannah had no children.

这人每年从本城上到示罗，敬拜祭祀万军之耶和华。在那里有以利的两个儿子何弗尼，非尼哈当耶和华的祭司。
Now this man went up from his town every year to give worship and to make offerings to the Lord of armies in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the Lord, were there.

以利加拿每逢献祭的日子，将祭肉分给他的妻毗尼拿和毗尼拿所生的儿女。
And when the day came for Elkanah to make his offering, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and daughters, their part of the feast:

给哈拿的却是双分，因为他爱哈拿。无奈耶和华不使哈拿生育。
But to Hannah he gave one part, though Hannah was very dear to him, but the Lord had not let her have children.

毗尼拿见耶和华不使哈拿生育，就作她的对头，大大激动她，要使她生气。
And the other wife did everything possible to make her unhappy, because the Lord had not let her have children;

每年上到耶和华殿的时候，以利加拿都以双分给哈拿。毗尼拿仍是激动她，以致她哭泣不吃饭。
And year by year, whenever she went up to the house of the Lord, she kept on attacking her, so that Hannah gave herself up to weeping and would take no food.

她丈夫以利加拿对她说，哈拿阿，你为何哭泣，不吃饭，心里愁闷呢？有我不比十个儿子还好吗？
Then her husband Elkanah said to her, Hannah, why are you weeping? and why are you taking no food? why is your heart troubled? am I not more to you than ten sons?

他们在示罗吃喝完了，哈拿就站起来。祭司以利在耶和华殿的门框旁边，坐在自己的位上。
So after they had taken food and wine in the guest room, Hannah got up. Now Eli the priest was seated by the pillars of the doorway of the Temple of the Lord.

哈拿心里愁苦，就痛痛哭泣，祈祷耶和华，
And with grief in her soul, weeping bitterly, she made her prayer to the Lord.

许愿说，万军之耶和华阿，你若垂顾婢女的苦情，眷念不忘婢女，赐我一个儿子，我必使他终身归与耶和华，不用剃头刀剃他的头。
And she made an oath, and said, O Lord of armies, if you will truly take note of the sorrow of your servant, not turning away from me but keeping me in mind, and will give me a man-child, then I will give him to the Lord all the days of his life, and his hair will never be cut.

哈拿在耶和华面前不住地祈祷，以利定睛看她的嘴。
Now while she was a long time in prayer before the Lord, Eli was watching her mouth.

原来哈拿心中默祷，只动嘴唇，不出声音，因此以利以为她喝醉了。
For Hannah's prayer came from her heart, and though her lips were moving she made no sound: so it seemed to Eli that she was overcome with wine.

以利对她说，你要醉到几时呢？你不应该喝酒。
And Eli said to her, How long are you going to be the worse for drink? Put away the effects of your wine from you.

哈拿回答说，主阿，不是这样。我是心里愁苦的妇人，清酒浓酒都没有喝，但在耶和华面前倾心吐意。
And Hannah, answering him, said, No, my lord, I am a woman whose spirit is broken with sorrow: I have not taken wine or strong drink, but I have been opening my heart before the Lord.

不要将婢女看作不正经的女子。我因被人激动，愁苦太多，所以祈求到如今。
Do not take your servant to be a good-for-nothing woman: for my words have come from my stored-up sorrow and pain.

以利说，你可以平平安安地回去。愿以色列的神允准你向他所求的。
Then Eli said to her, Go in peace: and may the God of Israel give you an answer to the prayer you have made to him.

哈拿说，愿婢女在你眼前蒙恩。于是妇人走去吃饭，面上再不带愁容了。
And she said, May your servant have grace in your eyes. So the woman went away, and took part in the feast, and her face was no longer sad.

次日清早，他们起来，在耶和华面前敬拜，就回拉玛。到了家里，以利加拿和妻哈拿同房，耶和华顾念哈拿，
And early in the morning they got up, and after worshipping before the Lord they went back to Ramah, to their house: and Elkanah had connection with his wife; and the Lord kept her in mind.

哈拿就怀孕。日期满足，生了一个儿子，给他起名叫撒母耳，说，这是我从耶和华那里求来的。
Now the time came when Hannah, being with child, gave birth to a son; and she gave him the name Samuel, Because, she said, I made a prayer to the Lord for him.

以利加拿和他全家都上示罗去，要向耶和华献年祭，并还所许的愿。
And the man Elkanah with all his family went up to make the year's offering to the Lord, and to give effect to his oath.

哈拿却没有上去，对丈夫说，等孩子断了奶，我便带他上去朝见耶和华，使他永远住在那里。
But Hannah did not go, for she said to her husband, I will not go till the child has been taken from the breast, and then I will take him with me and put him before the Lord, where he may be for ever.

她丈夫以利加拿说，就随你的意行吧。可以等儿子断了奶。但愿耶和华应验他的话。于是妇人在家里乳养儿子，直到断了奶。
And her husband Elkanah said to her, Do whatever seems right to you, but not till you have taken him from the breast; only may the Lord do as he has said. So the woman, waiting there, gave her son milk till he was old enough to be taken from the breast.

既断了奶，就把孩子带上示罗，到了耶和华的殿。又带了三只公牛，一伊法细面，一皮袋酒。那时孩子还小。
Then when she had done so, she took him with her, with a three-year old ox and an ephah of meal and a skin full of wine, and took him to the house of the Lord at Shiloh: now the child was still very young.

宰了一只公牛，就领孩子到以利面前。
And when they had made an offering of the ox, they took the child to Eli.

妇人说，主阿，我敢在你面前起誓，从前在你这里站着祈求耶和华的那妇人，就是我。
And she said, O my lord, as your soul is living, my lord, I am that woman who was making a prayer to the Lord here by your side:

我祈求为要得这孩子。耶和华已将我所求的赐给我了。
My prayer was for this child; and the Lord has given him to me in answer to my request:

所以，我将这孩子归与耶和华，使他终身归与耶和华。于是在那里敬拜耶和华。
So I have given him to the Lord; for all his life he is the Lord's. Then he gave the Lord worship there.

哈拿祷告说，我的心因耶和华快乐。我的角因耶和华高举。我的口向仇敌张开。我因耶和华的救恩欢欣。
And Hannah, in prayer before the Lord, said, My heart is glad in the Lord, my horn is lifted up in the Lord: my mouth is open wide over my haters; because my joy is in your salvation.

只有耶和华为圣。除他以外没有可比的，也没有磐石像我们的神。
No other is holy as the Lord, for there is no other God but you: there is no Rock like our God.

人不要夸口说骄傲的话，也不要出狂妄的言语。因耶和华是大有智识的神，人的行为被他衡量。
Say no more words of pride; let not uncontrolled sayings come out of your mouths: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, by him acts are judged.

勇士的弓都已折断。跌倒的人以力量束腰。
The bows of the men of war are broken, and the feeble are clothed with strength.

素来饱足的，反作佣人求食。饥饿的，再不饥饿。不生育的，生了七个儿子。多有儿女的，反倒衰微。
Those who were full are offering themselves as servants for bread; those who were in need are at rest; truly, she who had no children has become the mother of seven; and she who had a family is wasted with sorrow.

耶和华使人死，也使人活，使人下阴间，也使人往上升。
The Lord is the giver of death and life: sending men down to the underworld and lifting them up.

他使人贫穷，也使人富足，使人卑微，也使人高贵。
The Lord gives wealth and takes a man's goods from him: crushing men down and again lifting them up;

他从灰尘里抬举贫寒人，从粪堆中提拔穷乏人，使他们与王子同坐，得着荣耀的座位。地的柱子属于耶和华。他将世界立在其上。
Lifting the poor out of the dust, and him who is in need out of the lowest place, to give them their place among rulers, and for their heritage the seat of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lord's and he has made them the base of the world.

他必保护圣民的脚步，使恶人在黑暗中寂然不动。人都不能靠力量得胜。
He will keep the feet of his holy ones, but the evil-doers will come to their end in the dark night, for by strength no man will overcome.

与耶和华争竞的，必被打碎。耶和华必从天上以雷攻击他，必审判地极的人，将力量赐与所立的王，高举受膏者的角。
Those who make war against the Lord will be broken; against them he will send his thunder from heaven: the Lord will be judge of the ends of the earth, he will give strength to his king, lifting up the horn of him on whom the holy oil has been put.

以利加拿往拉玛回家去了。那孩子在祭司以利面前事奉耶和华。
Then Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child became the servant of the Lord under the direction of Eli the priest.

以利的两个儿子是恶人，不认识耶和华。
Now the sons of Eli were evil and good-for-nothing men, having no knowledge of the Lord.

这二祭司待百姓是这样的规矩，凡有人献祭，正煮肉的时候，祭司的仆人就来，手拿三齿的叉子，
And the priests' way with the people was this: when any man made an offering, the priest's servant came while the flesh was being cooked, having in his hand a meat-hook with three teeth;

将叉子往罐里，或鼎里，或釜里，或锅里一插，插上来的肉，祭司都取了去。凡上到示罗的以色列人，他们都是这样看待。
This he put into the pot, and everything which came up on the hook the priest took for himself. This they did in Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there.

又在未烧脂油以前，祭司的仆人就来对献祭的人说，将肉给祭司，叫他烤吧。他不要煮过的，要生的。
And more than this, before the fat was burned, the priest's servant would come and say to the man who was making the offering, Give me some of the flesh to be cooked for the priest; he has no taste for meat cooked in water, but would have you give it uncooked.

献祭的人若说，必须先烧脂油，然后你可以随意取肉。仆人就说，你立时给我，不然我便抢去。
And if the man said to him, First let the fat be burned, then take as much as you will; then the servant would say, No, you are to give it to me now, or I will take it by force.

如此，这二少年人的罪在耶和华面前甚重了，因为他们藐视耶和华的祭物（或作他们使人厌弃给耶和华献祭）。
And the sin of these young men was very great before the Lord; for they gave no honour to the Lord's offerings.

那时，撒母耳还是孩子，穿着细麻布的以弗得，侍立在耶和华面前。
But Samuel did the work of the Lord's house, while he was a child, dressed in a linen ephod.

他母亲每年为他作一件小外袍，同着丈夫上来献年祭的时候带来给他。
And his mother made him a little robe and took it to him every year when she came with her husband for the year's offering.

以利为以利加拿和他的妻祝福，说，愿耶和华由这妇人再赐你后裔，代替你从耶和华求来的孩子。他们就回本乡去了。
And every year Eli gave Elkanah and his wife a blessing, saying, May the Lord give you offspring by this woman in exchange for the child you have given to the Lord. And they went back to their house.

耶和华眷顾哈拿，她就怀孕生了三个儿子，两个女儿。那孩子撒母耳在耶和华面前渐渐长大。
And the Lord had mercy on Hannah and she gave birth to three sons and two daughters. And the young Samuel became older before the Lord.

以利年甚老迈，听见他两个儿子待以色列众人的事，又听见他们与会幕门前伺候的妇人苟合，
Now Eli was very old; and he had news from time to time of what his sons were doing to all Israel.

他就对他们说，你们为何行这样的事呢？我从这众百姓听见你们的恶行。
And he said to them, Why are you doing such things? for from all this people I get accounts of your evil ways.

我儿阿，不可这样。我听见你们的风声不好，你们使耶和华的百姓犯了罪。
No, my sons, the account which is given me, which the Lord's people are sending about, is not good.

人若得罪人，有士师审判他。人若得罪耶和华，谁能为他祈求呢？然而他们还是不听父亲的话，因为耶和华想要杀他们。
If one man does wrong to another, God will be his judge: but if a man's sin is against the Lord, who will take up his cause? But they gave no attention to the voice of their father, for it was the Lord's purpose to send destruction on them.

孩子撒母耳渐渐长大，耶和华与人越发喜爱他。
And the young Samuel, becoming older, had the approval of the Lord and of men.

有神人来见以利，对他说，耶和华如此说，你祖父在埃及法老家作奴仆的时候，我不是向他们显现吗？
And a man of God came to Eli and said to him, The Lord says, Did I let myself be seen by your father's people when they were in Egypt, servants in Pharaoh's house?

在以色列众支派中，我不是拣选人作我的祭司，使他烧香，在我坛上献祭，在我面前穿以弗得，又将以色列人所献的火祭都赐给你父家吗？
Did I take him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest and to go up to my altar to make the smoke of the offerings go up and to take up the ephod? Did I give to your father's family all the offerings made by fire by the children of Israel?

我所吩咐献在我居所的祭物，你们为何践踏。尊重你的儿子过于尊重我，将我民以色列所献美好的祭物肥己呢？
Why then are you looking with envy on my offerings of meat and of meal which were ordered by my word, honouring your sons before me, and making yourselves fat with all the best of the offerings of Israel, my people?

因此，耶和华以色列的神说，我曾说，你和你父家必永远行在我面前。现在我却说，决不容你们这样行。因为尊重我的，我必重看他。藐视我的，他必被轻视。
For this reason the Lord God of Israel has said, Truly I did say that your family and your father's people would have their place before me for ever: but now the Lord says, Let it not be so; I will give honour to those by whom I am honoured, and those who have no respect for me will be of small value in my eyes.

日子必到，我要折断你的膀臂和你父家的膀臂，使你家中没有一个老年人。
See, the days are coming when your arm and the arm of your father's people will be cut off;

在神使以色列人享福的时候，你必看见我居所的败落。在你家中必永远没有一个老年人。
And never again will there be an old man in your family.

我必不从我坛前灭尽你家中的人。那未灭的必使你眼目干瘪，心中忧伤。你家中所生的人都必死在中年。
But one man of your family will not be cut off by my hand, and his eyes will be made dark, and grief will be in his heart: and all the offspring of your family will come to their end by the sword of men.

你的两个儿子何弗尼，非尼哈所遭遇的事可作你的证据，他们二人必一日同死。
And this will be the sign to you, which will come on Hophni and Phinehas, your sons; death will overtake them on the same day.

我要为自己立一个忠心的祭司。他必照我的心意而行。我要为他建立坚固的家。他必永远行在我的受膏者面前。
And I will make a true priest for myself, one who will do what is in my heart and in my mind: and I will make for him a family which will not come to an end; and his place will be before my holy one for ever.

你家所剩下的人都必来叩拜他，求块银子，求个饼，说，求你赐我祭司的职分，好叫我得点饼吃。
Then it will be that the rest of your family, anyone who has not been cut off, will go down on his knees to him for a bit of silver or a bit of bread, and say, Be pleased to put me into one of the priest's places so that I may have a little food.

童子撒母耳在以利面前事奉耶和华。当那些日子，耶和华的言语稀少，不常有默示。
Now the young Samuel was the servant of the Lord before Eli. In those days the Lord kept his word secret from men; there was no open vision.

一日，以利睡卧在自己的地方。他眼目昏花，看不分明。
And at that time, when Eli was resting in his place, (now his eyes were becoming clouded so that he was not able to see,)

神的灯在神耶和华殿内约柜那里，还没有熄灭，撒母耳已经睡了。
And the light of God was still burning, while Samuel was sleeping in the Temple of the Lord where the ark of God was,

耶和华呼唤撒母耳。撒母耳说，我在这里。
The voice of the Lord said Samuel's name; and he said, Here am I.

就跑到以利那里，说，你呼唤我。我在这里。以利回答说，我没有呼唤你，你去睡吧。他就去睡了。
And running to Eli he said, Here am I, for you said my name. And Eli said, I did not say your name; go to your rest again. So he went back to his bed.

耶和华又呼唤撒母耳。撒母耳起来，到以利那里，说，你呼唤我。我在这里。以利回答说，我的儿，我没有呼唤你，你去睡吧。
And again the Lord said, Samuel. And Samuel got up and went to Eli and said, Here am I; for you certainly said my name. But he said in answer, I said nothing, my son; go to your rest again.

那时撒母耳还未认识耶和华，也未得耶和华的默示。
Now at that time Samuel had no knowledge of the Lord, and the revelation of the word of the Lord had not come to him.

耶和华第三次呼唤撒母耳。撒母耳起来，到以利那里，说，你又呼唤我。我在这里。以利才明白是耶和华呼唤童子。
And for the third time the Lord said Samuel's name. And he got up and went to Eli and said, Here am I; for you certainly said my name. Then it was clear to Eli that the voice which had said the child's name was the Lord's.

因此以利对撒母耳说，你仍去睡吧。若再呼唤你，你就说，耶和华阿，请说，仆人敬听。撒母耳就去，仍睡在原处。
So Eli said to Samuel, Go back: and if the voice comes again, let your answer be, Say on, Lord; for the ears of your servant are open. So Samuel went back to his bed.

耶和华又来站着，像前三次呼唤说，撒母耳阿。撒母耳阿。撒母耳回答说，请说，仆人敬听。
Then the Lord came and said as before, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel made answer, Say on, Lord; for the ears of your servant are open.

耶和华对撒母耳说，我在以色列中必行一件事，叫听见的人都必耳鸣。
And the Lord said to Samuel, See, I will do a thing in Israel at which the ears of everyone hearing of it will be burning.

我指着以利家所说的话，到了时候，我必始终应验在以利身上。
In that day I will do to Eli everything which I have said about his family, from first to last.

我曾告诉他必永远降罚与他的家，因他知道儿子作孽，自招咒诅，却不禁止他们。
And you are to say to him that I will send punishment on his family for ever, for the sin which he had knowledge of; because his sons have been cursing God and he had no control over them.

所以我向以利家起誓说，以利家的罪孽，虽献祭奉礼物，永不能得赎去。
So I have made an oath to the family of Eli that no offering of meat or of meal which they may make will ever take away the sin of his family.

撒母耳睡到天亮，就开了耶和华的殿门，不敢将默示告诉以利。
And Samuel kept where he was, not moving till the time came for opening the doors of the house of God in the morning. And fear kept him from giving Eli an account of his vision.

以利呼唤撒母耳说，我儿撒母耳阿。撒母耳回答说，我在这里。
Then Eli said, Samuel, my son. And Samuel answering said, Here am I.

以利说，耶和华对你说什么，你不要向我隐瞒。你若将神对你所说的隐瞒一句，愿他重重地降罚与你。
And he said, What did the Lord say to you? Do not keep it from me: may God's punishment be on you if you keep from me anything he said to you.

撒母耳就把一切话都告诉了以利，并没有隐瞒。以利说，这是出于耶和华，愿他凭自己的意旨而行。
Then Samuel gave him an account of everything, keeping nothing back. And he said, It is the Lord; let him do what seems good to him.

撒母耳长大了，耶和华与他同在，使他所说的话一句都不落空。
And Samuel became older, and the Lord was with him and let not one of his words be without effect.

从但到别是巴所有的以色列人，都知道耶和华立撒母耳为先知。
And it was clear to all Israel from Dan to Beer-sheba that Samuel had been made a prophet of the Lord.

耶和华又在示罗显现。因为耶和华将自己的话默示撒母耳，撒母耳就把这话传遍以色列地。
And the Lord was seen again in Shiloh; for the Lord gave to Samuel in Shiloh the revelation of his word.

以色列人出去与非利士人打仗，安营在以便以谢。非利士人安营在亚弗。
Now at that time the Philistines came together to make war against Israel, and the men of Israel went out to war against the Philistines and took up their position at the side of Eben-ezer: and the Philistines put their forces in position in Aphek.

非利士人向以色列人摆阵。两军交战的时候，以色列人败在非利士人面前。非利士人在战场上杀了他们的军兵约有四千人。
And the Philistines put their forces in order against Israel, and the fighting was hard, and Israel was overcome by the Philistines, who put to the sword about four thousand of their army in the field.

百姓回到营里，以色列的长老说，耶和华今日为何使我们败在非利士人面前呢？我们不如将耶和华的约柜从示罗抬到我们这里来，好在我们中间救我们脱离敌人的手。
And when the people came back to their tents, the responsible men of Israel said, Why has the Lord let the Philistines overcome us today? Let us get the ark of the Lord's agreement here from Shiloh, so that it may be with us and give us salvation from the hands of those who are against us.

于是百姓打发人到示罗，从那里将坐在二基路伯上万军之耶和华的约柜抬来。以利的两个儿子何弗尼，非尼哈与神的约柜同来。
So the people sent to Shiloh and got the ark of the agreement of the Lord of armies whose resting-place is between the winged ones; and Hophni and Phinehas, the two sons of Eli, were there with the ark of God's agreement.

耶和华的约柜到了营中，以色列众人就大声欢呼，地便震动。
And when the ark of the Lord's agreement came into the tent-circle, all Israel gave a great cry, so that the earth was sounding with it.

非利士人听见欢呼的声音，就说，在希伯来人营里大声欢呼，是什么缘故呢？随后就知道耶和华的约柜到了营中。
And the Philistines, hearing the noise of their cry, said, What is this great cry among the tents of the Hebrews? Then it became clear to them that the ark of the Lord had come to the tent-circle.

非利士人就惧怕起来，说，有神到了他们营中。又说，我们有祸了。向来不曾有这样的事。
And the Philistines, full of fear, said, God has come into their tents. And they said, Trouble is ours! for never before has such a thing been seen.

我们有祸了。谁能救我们脱离这些大能之神的手呢？从前在旷野用各样灾殃击打埃及人的，就是这些神。
Trouble is ours! Who will give us salvation from the hands of these great gods? These are the gods who sent all sorts of blows on the Egyptians in the waste land.

非利士人哪，你们要刚强，要作大丈夫，免得作希伯来人的奴仆，如同他们作你们的奴仆一样。你们要作大丈夫，与他们争战。
Be strong, O Philistines, be men! Do not be servants to the Hebrews as they have been to you: go forward to the fight without fear.

非利士人和以色列人打仗，以色列人败了，各向各家奔逃，被杀的人甚多，以色列的步兵仆倒了三万。
So the Philistines went to the fight, and Israel was overcome, and every man went in flight to his tent: and great was the destruction, for thirty thousand footmen of Israel were put to the sword.

神的约柜被掳去，以利的两个儿子何弗尼，非尼哈也都被杀了。
And the ark of God was taken; and Hophni and Phinehas, the sons of Eli, were put to the sword.

当日，有一个便雅悯人从阵上逃跑，衣服撕裂，头蒙灰尘，来到示罗。
And a man of Benjamin went running from the fight and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothing out of order and earth on his head.

到了的时候，以利正在道旁坐在自己的位上观望，为神的约柜心里担忧。那人进城报信，合城的人就都呼喊起来。
And when he came, Eli was seated by the wayside watching: and in his heart was fear for the ark of God. And when the man came into the town and gave the news, there was a great outcry.

以利听见呼喊的声音就问说，这喧嚷是什么缘故呢？那人急忙来报信给以利。
And Eli, hearing the noise and the cries, said, What is the reason of this outcry? And the man came quickly and gave the news to Eli.

那时以利九十八岁了，眼目发直，不能看见。
Now Eli was ninety-eight years old, and his eyes were fixed so that he was not able to see.

那人对以利说，我是从阵上来的，今日我从阵上逃回。以利说，我儿，事情怎样。
And the man said to Eli, I have come from the army and have come in flight today from the fight. And he said, How did it go, my son?

报信的回答说，以色列人在非利士人面前逃跑，民中被杀的甚多。你的两个儿子何弗尼，非尼哈也都死了，并且神的约柜被掳去。
And the man said, Israel went in flight from the Philistines, and there has been great destruction among the people, and your two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God has been taken.

他一提神的约柜，以利就从他的位上往后跌倒，在门旁折断颈项而死。因为他年纪老迈，身体沉重。以利作以色列的士师四十年。
And at these words about the ark of God, Eli, falling back off his seat by the side of the doorway into the town, came down on the earth so that his neck was broken and death overtook him, for he was an old man and of great weight. He had been judging Israel for forty years.

以利的儿妇，非尼哈的妻怀孕将到产期，她听见神的约柜被掳去，公公和丈夫都死了，就猛然疼痛，曲身生产。
And his daughter-in-law, the wife of Phinehas, was with child and near the time when she would give birth; and when she had the news that the ark of God had been taken and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, her pains came on her suddenly and she gave birth.

将要死的时候，旁边站着的妇人们对她说，不要怕。你生了男孩子了。她却不回答，也不放在心上。
And when she was very near death the women who were with her said, Have no fear, for you have given birth to a son. But she made no answer and gave no attention to it.

她给孩子起名叫以迦博，说，荣耀离开以色列了。这是因神的约柜被掳去，又因她公公和丈夫都死了。
And she gave the child the name of Ichabod, saying, The glory has gone from Israel: because the ark of God was taken and because of her father-in-law and her husband.

她又说，荣耀离开以色列，因为神的约柜被掳去了。
And she said, The glory is gone from Israel, for the ark of God has been taken.

非利士人将神的约柜从以便以谢抬到亚实突。
Now the Philistines, having taken the ark of God, took it with them from Eben-ezer to Ashdod.

非利士人将神的约柜抬进大衮庙，放在大衮的旁边。
They took the ark of God into the house of Dagon and put it by the side of Dagon.

次日清早，亚实突人起来，见大衮仆倒在耶和华的约柜前，脸伏于地，就把大衮仍立在原处。
And when the people of Ashdod got up early on the morning after, they saw that Dagon had come down to the earth on his face before the ark of the Lord. And they took Dagon up and put him in his place again.

又次日清早起来，见大衮仆倒在耶和华的约柜前，脸伏于地，并且大衮的头和两手都在门槛上折断，只剩下大衮的残体。
And when they got up early on the morning after, Dagon had come down to the earth on his face before the ark of the Lord; and his head and his hands were broken off on the doorstep; only the base was in its place.

因此，大衮的祭司和一切进亚实突，大衮庙的人都不踏大衮庙的门槛，直到今日。
So to this day no priest of Dagon, or any who come into Dagon's house, will put his foot on the doorstep of the house of Dagon in Ashdod.

耶和华的手重重加在亚实突人身上，败坏他们，使他们生痔疮。亚实突和亚实突的四境都是如此。
But the hand of the Lord was hard on the people of Ashdod and he sent disease on them through all the country of Ashdod.

亚实突人见这光景，就说，以色列神的约柜不可留在我们这里，因为他的手重重加在我们和我们神大衮的身上。
And when the men of Ashdod saw how it was, they said, Let not the ark of the God of Israel be with us, for his hand is hard on us and on Dagon our god.

就打发人去请非利士的众首领来聚集，问他们说，我们向以色列神的约柜应当怎样行呢？他们回答说，可以将以色列神的约柜运到迦特去。于是将以色列神的约柜运到那里去。
So they sent for all the lords of the Philistines to come together there, and said, What are we to do with the ark of the God of Israel? And their answer was, Let the ark of the God of Israel be taken away to Gath. So they took the ark of the God of Israel away.

运到之后，耶和华的手攻击那城，使那城的人大大惊慌，无论大小都生痔疮。
But after they had taken it away, the hand of the Lord was stretched out against the town for its destruction: and the signs of disease came out on all the men of the town, small and great.

他们就把神的约柜送到以革伦。神的约柜到了，以革伦人就喊嚷起来说，他们将以色列神的约柜运到我们这里，要害我们和我们的众民。
So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And when the ark of God came to Ekron, the people of the town made an outcry, saying, They have sent the ark of the God of Israel to us for the destruction of us and of our people.

于是打发人去请非利士的众首领来，说，愿你们将以色列神的约柜送回原处，免得害了我们和我们的众民。原来神的手重重攻击那城，城中的人有因惊慌而死的。
So they sent and got together all the lords of the Philistines, and they said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go back to its place, so that it may not be the cause of death to us and to our people: for there was a great fear of death through all the town; the hand of God was very hard on them there.

未曾死的人都生了痔疮。合城呼号，声音上达于天。
And those men who were not overtaken by death were cruelly diseased: and the cry of the town went up to heaven.

耶和华的约柜在非利士人之地七个月。
Now the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines for seven months.

非利士人将祭司和占卜的聚了来，问他们说，我们向耶和华的约柜应当怎样行。请指示我们用何法将约柜送回原处。
And the Philistines sent for the priests and those who were wise in secret arts, and said to them, What are we to do with the ark of the Lord? How are we to send it away to its place?

他们说，若要将以色列神的约柜送回去，不可空空地送去，必要给他献赔罪的礼物，然后你们可得痊愈，并知道他的手为何不离开你们。
And they said, If you send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it without an offering, but send him a sin-offering with it: then you will have peace again, and it will be clear to you why the weight of his hand has not been lifted from you.

非利士人说，应当用什么献为赔罪的礼物呢？他们回答说，当照非利士首领的数目，用五个金痔疮，五个金老鼠，因为在你们众人和你们首领的身上都是一样的灾。
Then they said, What sin-offering are we to send to him? And they said, Five gold images of the growths caused by your disease and five gold mice, one for every lord of the Philistines: for the same disease came on you and on your lords.

所以当制造你们痔疮的像和毁坏你们田地老鼠的像，并要归荣耀给以色列的神，或者他向你们和你们的神，并你们的田地，把手放轻些。
So make images of the growths caused by your disease and of the mice which are damaging your land; and give glory to the God of Israel: it may be that the weight of his hand will be lifted from you and from your gods and from your land.

你们为何硬着心像埃及人和法老一样呢？神在埃及人中间行奇事，埃及人岂不释放以色列人，他们就去了吗？
Why do you make your hearts hard, like the hearts of Pharaoh and the Egyptians? When he had made sport of them, did they not let the people go, and they went away?

现在你们应当造一辆新车，将两只未曾负轭有乳的母牛套在车上，使牛犊回家去，离开母牛。
So now, take and make ready a new cart, and two cows which have never come under the yoke, and have the cows yoked to the cart, and take their young ones away from them:

把耶和华的约柜放在车上，将所献赔罪的金物装在匣子里，放在柜旁，将柜送去。
And put the ark of the Lord on the cart, and the gold images which you are sending as a sin-offering in a chest by its side; and send it away so that it may go.

你们要看看，车若直行以色列的境界到伯示麦去，这大灾就是耶和华降在我们身上的。若不然，便可以知道不是他的手击打我们，是我们偶然遇见的。
If it goes by the land of Israel to Beth-shemesh, then this great evil is his work; but if not, then we may be certain that the evil was not his doing, but was the working of chance.

非利士人就这样行，将两只有乳的母牛套在车上，将牛犊关在家里，
And the men did so; they took two cows, yoking them to the cart and shutting up their young ones in their living-place:

把耶和华的约柜和装金老鼠并金痔疮像的匣子都放在车上。
And they put the ark of the Lord on the cart and the chest with the gold images.

牛直行大道，往伯示麦去，一面走一面叫，不偏左右。非利士的首领跟在后面，直到伯示麦的境界。
And the cows took the straight way, by the road to Beth-shemesh; they went by the highway, not turning to the right or to the left, and the sound of their voices was clear on the road; and the lords of the Philistines went after them as far as the edge of Beth-shemesh.

伯示麦人正在平原收割麦子，举目看见约柜，就欢喜了。
And the people of Beth-shemesh were cutting their grain in the valley, and lifting up their eyes they saw the ark and were full of joy when they saw it.

车到了伯示麦人约书亚的田间，就站住了。在那里有一块大磐石，他们把车劈了，将两只母牛献给耶和华为燔祭。
And the cart came into the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite, and came to a stop there by a great stone: and cutting up the wood of the cart they made a burned offering of the cows to the Lord.

利未人将耶和华的约柜和装金物的匣子拿下来，放在大磐石上。当日伯示麦人将燔祭和平安祭献给耶和华。
Then the Levites took down the ark of the Lord and the chest in which were the gold images, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Beth-shemesh made burned offerings and gave worship that day before the Lord.

非利士人的五个首领看见，当日就回以革伦去了。
And the five lords of the Philistines, having seen it, went back to Ekron the same day.

非利士人献给耶和华作赔罪的金痔疮像，就是这些，一个是为亚实突，一个是为迦萨，一个是为亚实基伦，一个是为迦特，一个是为以革伦。
Now these are the gold images which the Philistines sent as a sin-offering to the Lord; one for Ashdod, one for Gaza, one for Ashkelon, one for Gath, one for Ekron;

金老鼠的数目是照非利士五个首领的城邑，就是坚固的城邑和乡村，以及大磐石。这磐石是放耶和华约柜的，到今日还在伯示麦人约书亚的田间。
And the gold mice, one for every town of the Philistines, the property of the five lords, walled towns as well as country places: and the great stone where they put the ark of the Lord is still in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite to this day.

耶和华因伯示麦人擅观他的约柜，就击杀了他们七十人。那时有五万人在那里（原文作七十人加五万人）。百姓因耶和华大大击杀他们，就哀哭了。
But the Lord sent destruction on seventy men of the people of Beth-shemesh for looking into the ark of the Lord; and great was the sorrow of the people for the destruction which the Lord had sent on them.

伯示麦人说，谁能在耶和华这圣洁的神面前侍立呢？这约柜可以从我们这里送到谁那里去呢？
And the men of Beth-shemesh said, Who is able to keep his place before the Lord, this holy God? and to whom may he go from us?

于是打发人去见基列耶琳的居民，说，非利士人将耶和华的约柜送回来了，你们下来将约柜接到你们那里去吧。
And they sent men to the people living in Kiriath-jearim, saying, The Philistines have sent back the ark of the Lord; come and take it up to your country.

基列耶琳人就下来，将耶和华的约柜接上去，放在山上亚比拿达的家中，分派他儿子以利亚撒看守耶和华的约柜。
So the men of Kiriath-jearim came and took the ark of the Lord to the house of Abinadab in Gibeah, and they made his son Eleazar holy and put the ark in his care.

约柜在基列耶琳许久。过了二十年，以色列全家都倾向耶和华。
And the ark was in Kiriath-jearim for a long time, as much as twenty years: and all Israel was searching after the Lord with weeping.

撒母耳对以色列全家说，你们若一心归顺耶和华，就要把外邦的神和亚斯他录从你们中间除掉，专心归向耶和华，单单地事奉他。他必救你们脱离非利士人的手。
Then Samuel said to all Israel, If with all your hearts you would come back to the Lord, then put away all the strange gods and the Astartes from among you, and let your hearts be turned to the Lord, and be servants to him only: and he will make you safe from the hands of the Philistines.

以色列人就除掉诸巴力和亚斯他录，单单地事奉耶和华。
So the children of Israel gave up the worship of Baal and Astarte, and became worshippers of the Lord only.

撒母耳说，要使以色列众人聚集在米斯巴，我好为你们祷告耶和华。
Then Samuel said, Let all Israel come to Mizpah and I will make prayer to the Lord for you.

他们就聚集在米斯巴，打水浇在耶和华面前，当日禁食，说，我们得罪了耶和华。于是撒母耳在米斯巴审判以色列人。
So they came together to Mizpah, and got water, draining it out before the Lord, and they took no food that day, and they said, We have done evil against the Lord. And Samuel was judge of the children of Israel in Mizpah.

非利士人听见以色列人聚集在米斯巴，非利士的首领就上来要攻击以色列人。以色列人听见，就惧怕非利士人。
Now when the Philistines had news that the children of Israel had come together at Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And the children of Israel, hearing of it, were full of fear.

以色列人对撒母耳说，愿你不住地为我们呼求耶和华我们的神，救我们脱离非利士人的手。
And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Go on crying to the Lord our God for us to make us safe from the hands of the Philistines.

撒母耳就把一只吃奶的羊羔献与耶和华作全牲的燔祭，为以色列人呼求耶和华。耶和华就应允他。
And Samuel took a young lamb, offering all of it as a burned offering to the Lord; and Samuel made prayers to the Lord for Israel and the Lord gave him an answer.

撒母耳正献燔祭的时候，非利士人前来要与以色列人争战。当日，耶和华大发雷声，惊乱非利士人，他们就败在以色列人面前。
And while Samuel was offering the burned offering, the Philistines came near for the attack on Israel; but at the thunder of the Lord's voice that day the Philistines were overcome with fear, and they gave way before Israel.

以色列人从米斯巴出来，追赶非利士人，击杀他们，直到伯甲的下边。
And the men of Israel went out from Mizpah and went after the Philistines, attacking them till they came under Beth-car.

撒母耳将一块石头立在米斯巴和善的中间，给石头起名叫以便以谢，说，到如今耶和华都帮助我们。
Then Samuel took a stone and put it up between Mizpah and Jeshanah, naming it Eben-ezer, and saying, Up to now the Lord has been our help.

从此，非利士人就被制伏，不敢再入以色列人的境内。撒母耳作士师的时候，耶和华的手攻击非利士人。
So the Philistines were overcome, and did not come into the country of Israel again: and all the days of Samuel the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines.

非利士人所取以色列人的城邑，从以革伦直到迦特，都归以色列人了。属这些城的四境，以色列人也从非利士人手下收回。那时以色列人与亚摩利人和好。
And the towns which the Philistines had taken were given back to Israel, from Ekron to Gath, and all the country round them Israel made free from the power of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

撒母耳平生作以色列的士师。
And Samuel was judge of Israel all the days of his life.

他每年巡行到伯特利，吉甲，米斯巴，在这几处审判以色列人。
From year to year he went in turn to Beth-el and Gilgal and Mizpah, judging Israel in all those places.

随后回到拉玛，因为他的家在那里。也在那里审判以色列人，且为耶和华筑了一座坛。
And his base was at Ramah, where his house was; there he was judge of Israel and there he made an altar to the Lord.

撒母耳年纪老迈，就立他儿子作以色列的士师。
Now when Samuel was old, he made his sons judges over Israel.

长子名叫约珥，次子名叫亚比亚。他们在别是巴作士师。
The name of his first son was Joel and the name of his second Abijah: they were judges in Beer-sheba.

他儿子不行他的道，贪图财利，收受贿赂，屈枉正直。
And his sons did not go in his ways, but moved by the love of money took rewards, and were not upright in judging.

以色列的长老都聚集，来到拉玛见撒母耳，
Then all the responsible men of Israel got together and went to Samuel at Ramah,

对他说，你年纪老迈了，你儿子不行你的道。现在求你为我们立一个王治理我们，像列国一样。
And said to him, See now, you are old, and your sons do not go in your ways: give us a king now to be our judge, so that we may be like the other nations.

撒母耳不喜悦他们说立一个王治理我们，他就祷告耶和华。
But Samuel was not pleased when they said to him, Give us a king to be our judge. And Samuel made prayer to the Lord.

耶和华对撒母耳说，百姓向你说的一切话，你只管依从。因为他们不是厌弃你，乃是厌弃我，不要我作他们的王。
And the Lord said to Samuel, Give ear to the voice of the people and what they say to you: they have not been turned away from you, but they have been turned away from me, not desiring me to be king over them.

自从我领他们出埃及到如今，他们常常离弃我，事奉别神。现在他们向你所行的，是照他们素来所行的。
As they have done from the first, from the day when I took them out of Egypt till this day, turning away from me and worshipping other gods, so now they are acting in the same way to you.

故此你要依从他们的话，只是当警戒他们，告诉他们将来那王怎样管辖他们。
Give ear now to their voice: but make a serious protest to them, and give them a picture of the sort of king who will be their ruler.

撒母耳将耶和华的话都传给求他立王的百姓，说，
And Samuel said all these words of the Lord to the people who were desiring a king.

管辖你们的王必这样行，他必派你们的儿子为他赶车，跟马，奔走在车前。
And he said, This is the sort of king who will be your ruler: he will take your sons and make them his servants, his horsemen, and drivers of his war-carriages, and they will go running before his war-carriages;

又派他们作千夫长，五十夫长，为他耕种田地，收割庄稼，打造军器和车上的器械。
And he will make them captains of thousands and of fifties; some he will put to work ploughing and cutting his grain and making his instruments of war and building his war-carriages.

必取你们的女儿为他制造香膏，作饭烤饼。
Your daughters he will take to be makers of perfumes and cooks and bread-makers.

也必取你们最好的田地，葡萄园，橄榄园赐给他的臣仆。
He will take your fields and your vine-gardens and your olive-gardens, all the best of them, and give them to his servants.

你们的粮食和葡萄园所出的，他必取十分之一给他的太监和臣仆。
He will take a tenth of your seed and of the fruit of your vines and give it to his servants.

又必取你们的仆人婢女，健壮的少年人和你们的驴，供他的差役。
He will take your men-servants and your servant-girls, and the best of your oxen and your asses and put them to his work.

你们的羊群，他必取十分之一，你们也必作他的仆人。
He will take a tenth of your sheep: and you will be his servants.

那时你们必因所选的王哀求耶和华，耶和华却不应允你们。
Then you will be crying out because of your king whom you have taken for yourselves; but the Lord will not give you an answer in that day.

百姓竟不肯听撒母耳的话，说，不然。我们定要一个王治理我们，
But the people gave no attention to the voice of Samuel; and they said, No, but we will have a king over us,

使我们像列国一样，有王治理我们，统领我们，为我们争战。
So that we may be like the other nations, and so that our king may be our judge and go out before us to war.

撒母耳听见百姓这一切话，就将这话陈明在耶和华面前。
Then Samuel, after hearing all the people had to say, went and gave an account of it to the Lord.

耶和华对撒母耳说，你只管依从他们的话，为他们立王。撒母耳对以色列人说，你们各归各城去吧。
And the Lord said to Samuel, Give ear to their voice and make a king for them. Then Samuel said to the men of Israel, Let every man go back to his town.

有一个便雅悯人，名叫基士，是便雅悯人亚斐亚的玄孙，比歌拉的曾孙，洗罗的孙子，亚别的儿子，是个大能的勇士（或作大财主）。
Now there was a man of Benjamin named Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a man of wealth.

他有一个儿子，名叫扫罗，又健壮，又俊美，在以色列人中没有一个能比他的。身体比众民高过一头。
He had a son named Saul, a specially good-looking young man; there was no one better-looking among the children of Israel: he was taller by a head than any other of the people.

扫罗的父亲基士丢了几头驴，他就吩咐儿子扫罗说，你带一个仆人去寻找驴。
Now the asses of Saul's father Kish had gone wandering away. And Kish said to his son Saul, Take one of the servants with you, and get up and go in search of the asses.

扫罗就走过以法莲山地，又过沙利沙地，都没有找着。又过沙琳地，驴也不在那里。又过便雅悯地，还没有找着。
So they went through the hill-country of Ephraim and through the land of Shalishah, but they saw no sign of them: then they went through the land of Shaalim, but they were not there: and they went through the land of the Benjamites, but they did not come across them.

到了苏弗地，扫罗对跟随他的仆人说，我们不如回去，恐怕我父亲不为驴挂心，反为我们担忧。
And when they had come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to the servant who was with him, Come, let us go back, or my father may give up caring about the asses and be troubled about us.

仆人说，这城里有一位神人，是众人所尊重的，凡他所说的全都应验。我们不如往他那里去，或者他能将我们当走的路指示我们。
But the servant said to him, See now, in this town there is a man of God, who is highly honoured, and everything he says comes true: let us go there now; it may be that he will give us directions about our journey.

扫罗对仆人说，我们若去，有什么可以送那人呢？我们囊中的食物都吃尽了，也没有礼物可以送那神人，我们还有什么没有。
Then Saul said to his servant, But if we go, what are we to take the man? all our bread is gone, and we have no offering to take to the man of God: what are we to do?

仆人回答扫罗说，我手里有银子一舍客勒的四分之一，可以送那神人，请他指示我们当走的路。
But the servant said in answer, I have here a fourth part of a shekel of silver: I will give that to the man of God, and he will give us directions about our way.

（从前以色列中，若有人去问神，就说，我们问先见去吧。现在称为先知的，从前称为先见。）
(In the past in Israel, when a man went to get directions from God, he said, Come let us go to the Seer, for he who now is named Prophet was in those days given the name of Seer.)

扫罗对仆人说，你说的是，我们可以去。于是他们往神人所住的城里去了。
Then Saul said to his servant, You have said well; come, let us go. So they went to the town where the man of God was.

他们上坡要进城，就遇见几个少年女子出来打水，问她们说，先见在这里没有。
And when they were on the way up to the town, they saw some young girls going out to get water and said to them, Is the seer here?

女子回答说，在这里，他在你们前面。快去吧。他今日正到城里，因为今日百姓要在丘坛献祭。
And they said, He is; in fact he is before you: go quickly now, for he has come into the town today, for the people are making an offering in the high place today:

在他还没有上丘坛吃祭物之先，你们一进城必遇见他。因他未到，百姓不能吃，必等他先祝祭，然后请的客才吃。现在你们上去，这时候必遇见他。
When you come into the town you will see him straight away, before he goes up to the high place for the feast: the people are waiting for his blessing before starting the feast, and after that the guests will take part in it. So go up now and you will see him.

二人就上去。将进城的时候，撒母耳正迎着他们来，要上丘坛去。
So they went up to the town, and when they came inside the town, Samuel came face to face with them on his way to the high place.

扫罗未到的前一日，耶和华已经指示撒母耳说，
Now the day before Saul came, the word of God had come to Samuel, saying,

明日这时候，我必使一个人从便雅悯地到你这里来，你要膏他作我民以色列的君。他必救我民脱离非利士人的手。因我民的哀声上达于我，我就眷顾他们。
Tomorrow about this time I will send you a man from the land of Benjamin, and on him you are to put the holy oil, making him ruler over my people Israel, and he will make my people safe from the hands of the Philistines: for I have seen the sorrow of my people, whose cry has come up to me.

撒母耳看见扫罗的时候，耶和华对他说，看哪，这人就是我对你所说的，他必治理我的民。
And when Samuel saw Saul, the Lord said to him, This is the man of whom I gave you word! he it is who is to have authority over my people.

扫罗在城门里走到撒母耳跟前，说，请告诉我，先见的寓所在哪里。
Then Saul came up to Samuel in the doorway of the town and said, Give me directions, if you will be so good, to the house of the seer.

撒母耳回答说，我就是先见。你在我前面上丘坛去，因为你们今日必与我同席。明日早晨我送你去，将你心里的事都告诉你。
Then Samuel said to Saul, I am the seer; go up before me to the high place and take food with me today: and in the morning I will let you go, after opening to you all the secrets of your heart.

至于你前三日所丢的那几头驴，你心里不必挂念，已经找着了。以色列众人所仰慕的是谁呢？不是仰慕你和你父的全家吗？
As for your asses which have been wandering for three days, give no thought to them, for they have come back. And for whom are all the desired things in Israel? are they not for you and your father's family?

扫罗说，我不是以色列支派中至小的便雅悯人吗？我家不是便雅悯支派中至小的家吗？你为何对我说这样的话呢？
And Saul said, Am I not a man of Benjamin, the smallest of all the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of the families of Benjamin? why then do you say these words to me?

撒母耳领扫罗和他仆人进了客堂，使他们在请来的客中坐首位。客约有三十个人。
Then Samuel took Saul and his servant into the guest room, and made them take the chief place among all the guests who were there, about thirty persons.

撒母耳对厨役说，我交给你收存的那一分祭肉现在可以拿来。
And Samuel said to the cook, Give me that part which I gave you orders to keep by you.

厨役就把收存的腿拿来，摆在扫罗面前，撒母耳说，这是所留下的，放在你面前。吃吧。因我请百姓的时候，特意为你存留这肉到此时。当日，扫罗就与撒母耳同席。
And the cook took up the leg with the fat tail on it, and put it before Saul. And Samuel said, This is the part which has been kept for you: take it as your part of the feast; because it has been kept for you till the right time came and till the guests were present. So that day Saul took food with Samuel.

众人从丘坛下来进城，撒母耳和扫罗在房顶上说话。
And when they had come down from the high place into the town, where a bed was made ready for Saul, he went to rest.

次日清早起来，黎明的时候，扫罗在房顶上。撒母耳呼叫他说，起来吧，我好送你回去。扫罗就起来，和撒母耳一同出去。
And about dawn Samuel said to Saul on the roof, Get up so that I may send you away. So Saul got up, and he and Samuel went out together.

二人下到城角，撒母耳对扫罗说，要吩咐仆人先走（仆人就先走了）。你且站在这里，等我将神的话传与你听。
And on their way down to the end of the town, Samuel said to Saul, Give your servant orders to go on in front of us, (so he went on,) but you keep here, so that I may give you the word of God.

撒母耳拿瓶膏油倒在扫罗的头上，与他亲嘴，说，这不是耶和华膏你作他产业的君吗？
Then Samuel took the bottle of oil, and put the oil on his head and gave him a kiss and said, Is not the Lord with the holy oil making you ruler over Israel, his people? and you will have authority over the people of the Lord, and you will make them safe from the hands of their attackers round about them, and this will be the sign for you:

你今日与我离别之后，在便雅悯境内的泄撒，靠近拉结的坟墓，要遇见两个人。他们必对你说，你去找的那几头驴已经找着了。现在你父亲不为驴挂心，反为你担忧，说，我为儿子怎么才好呢？
When you have gone away from me today, you will see two men by the resting-place of Rachel's body, in the land of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say to you, The asses which you went in search of have come back, and now your father, caring no longer for the asses, is troubled about you, saying, What am I to do about my son?

你从那里往前行，到了他泊的橡树那里，必遇见三个往伯特利去拜神的人，一个带着三只山羊羔，一个带着三个饼，一个带着一皮袋酒。
Then you are to go on from there, and when you come to the oak-tree of Tabor, you will see three men going up to God to Beth-el, one having with him three young goats and another three cakes of bread and another a skin full of wine:

他们必问你安，给你两个饼，你就从他们手中接过来。
They will say, Peace be with you, and will give you two cakes of bread, which you are to take from them.

此后你到神的山，在那里有非利士人的防兵。你到了城的时候，必遇见一班先知从丘坛下来，前面有鼓瑟的，击鼓的，吹笛的，弹琴的，他们都受感说话。
After that you will come to Gibeah, the hill of God, where an armed force of the Philistines is stationed: and when you come to the town, you will see a band of prophets coming down from the high place with instruments of music before them; and they will be acting like prophets:

耶和华的灵必大大感动你，你就与他们一同受感说话。你要变为新人。
And the spirit of the Lord will come on you with power, and you will be acting like a prophet with them, and will be changed into another man.

这兆头临到你，你就可以趁时而作，因为神与你同在。
And when these signs come to you, see that you take the chance which is offered you; for God is with you.

你当在我以先下到吉甲，我也必下到那里献燔祭和平安祭。你要等候七日，等我到了那里，指示你当行的事。
Then you are to go down before me to Gilgal, where I will come to you, for the offering of burned offerings and peace-offerings: go on waiting there for seven days till I come to you and make clear to you what you have to do.

扫罗转身离别撒母耳，神就赐他一个新心。当日这一切兆头都应验了。
And it came about, that when he went away from Samuel, God gave him a changed heart: and all those signs took place that day.

扫罗到了那山，有一班先知遇见他，神的灵大大感动他，他就在先知中受感说话。
And when they came to Gibeah, a band of prophets came face to face with him; and the spirit of God came on him with power and he took his place among them as a prophet.

素来认识扫罗的，看见他和先知一同受感说话，就彼此说，基士的儿子遇见什么了。扫罗也列在先知中吗？
Now when Saul's old friends saw him among the band of prophets, the people said to one another, What has come to Saul, the son of Kish? Is even Saul among the prophets?

那地方有一个人说，这些人的父亲是谁呢？此后有句俗语说，扫罗也列在先知中吗？
And one of the people of that place said in answer, And who is their father? So it became a common saying, Is even Saul among the prophets?

扫罗受感说话已毕，就上丘坛去了。
Then going away from the prophets, he came to the house.

扫罗的叔叔问扫罗和他仆人说，你们往哪里去了。回答说，找驴去了。我们见没有驴，就到了撒母耳那里。
And Saul's father's brother said to him and his servant, Where have you been? And he said, Searching for the asses: and when we saw no sign of them, we came to Samuel.

扫罗的叔叔说，请将撒母耳向你们所说的话告诉我。
Then he said, And what did Samuel say to you?

扫罗对他叔叔说，他明明地告诉我们驴已经找着了。至于撒母耳所说的国事，扫罗却没有告诉叔叔。
And Saul, answering him, said, He gave us word that the asses had come back. But he said nothing to him of Samuel's words about the kingdom.

撒母耳将百姓招聚到米斯巴耶和华那里，
Then Samuel sent for the people to come together before the Lord at Mizpah;

对他们说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，我领你们以色列人出埃及，救你们脱离埃及人的手，又救你们脱离欺压你们各国之人的手。
And he said to the children of Israel, The Lord, the God of Israel, has said, I took Israel out of Egypt, and made you free from the hands of the Egyptians and from all the kingdoms which kept you down:

你们今日却厌弃了救你们脱离一切灾难的神，说，求你立一个王治理我们。现在你们应当按着支派，宗族都站在耶和华面前。
But today you are turned away from your God, who himself has been your saviour from all your troubles and sorrows; and you have said to him, Put a king over us. So now, take your places before the Lord by your tribes and by your thousands.

于是，撒母耳使以色列众支派近前来掣签，就掣出便雅悯支派来。
So Samuel made all the tribes of Israel come near, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

又使便雅悯支派按着宗族近前来，就掣出玛特利族，从其中又掣出基士的儿子扫罗。众人寻找他却寻不着，
Then he made the tribe of Benjamin come near by families, and the family of the Matrites was taken: and from them, Saul, the son of Kish, was taken: but when they went in search of him he was nowhere to be seen.

就问耶和华说，那人到这里来了没有。耶和华说，他藏在器具中了。
So they put another question to the Lord, Is the man present here? And the answer of the Lord was, He is keeping himself from view among the goods.

众人就跑去从那里领出他来。他站在百姓中间，身体比众民高过一头。
So they went quickly and made him come out; and when he took his place among the people, he was taller by a head than any of the people.

撒母耳对众民说，你们看耶和华所拣选的人，众民中有可比他的吗？众民就大声欢呼说，愿王万岁。
And Samuel said to all the people, Do you see the man of the Lord's selection, how there is no other like him among all the people? And all the people with loud cries said, Long life to the king!

撒母耳将国法对百姓说明，又记在书上，放在耶和华面前，然后遣散众民，各回各家去了。
Then Samuel gave the people the laws of the kingdom, writing them in a book which he put in a safe place before the Lord. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.

扫罗往基比亚回家去，有神感动的一群人跟随他。
And Saul went to Gibeah, to his house; and with him went the men of war whose hearts had been touched by God.

但有些匪徒说，这人怎能救我们呢？就藐视他，没有送他礼物。扫罗却不理会。
But certain good-for-nothing persons said, How is this man to be our saviour? And having no respect for him, they gave him no offering.

亚扪人的王拿辖上来，对着基列雅比安营。雅比众人对拿辖说，你与我们立约，我们就服事你。
Then about a month after this, Nahash the Ammonite came up and put his forces in position for attacking Jabesh-gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, Make an agreement with us and we will be your servants.

亚扪人拿辖说，你们若由我剜出你们各人的右眼，以此凌辱以色列众人，我就与你们立约。
And Nahash the Ammonite said to them, I will make an agreement with you on this condition, that all your right eyes are put out; so that I may make it a cause of shame to all Israel.

雅比的长老对他说，求你宽容我们七日，等我们打发人往以色列的全境去。若没有人救我们，我们就出来归顺你。
Then the responsible men of Jabesh said to him, Give us seven days, so that we may send men to every part of Israel: and then, if no one comes to our help, we will come out to you.

使者到了扫罗住的基比亚，将这话说给百姓听，百姓就都放声而哭。
So they sent representatives to Saul's town Gibeah, and these gave the news to the people: and all the people gave themselves to weeping.

扫罗正从田间赶牛回来，问说，百姓为什么哭呢？众人将雅比人的话告诉他。
Now Saul came from the field, driving the oxen before him; and he said, Why are the people weeping? And they gave him word of what the men of Jabesh had said.

扫罗听见这话，就被神的灵大大感动，甚是发怒。
And at their words, the spirit of God came on Saul with power, and he became very angry.

他将一对牛切成块子，托付使者传送以色列的全境，说，凡不出来跟随扫罗和撒母耳的，也必这样切开他的牛。于是耶和华使百姓惧怕，他们就都出来，如同一人。
And he took two oxen and, cutting them up, sent them through all the land of Israel by the hand of runners, saying, If any man does not come out after Saul and Samuel, this will be done to his oxen. And the fear of the Lord came on the people and they came out like one man.

扫罗在比色数点他们，以色列人有三十万，犹大人有三万。
And he had them numbered in Bezek: the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.

众人对那使者说，你们要回覆基列雅比人说，明日太阳近午的时候，你们必得解救。使者回去告诉雅比人，他们就欢喜了。
Then he said to the representatives who had come, Say to the men of Jabesh-gilead, Tomorrow, by the time the sun is high, you will be made safe. And the representatives came and gave the news to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.

于是雅比人对亚扪人说，明日我们出来归顺你们，你们可以随意待我们。
So the men of Jabesh said, Tomorrow we will come out to you, and you may do to us whatever seems good to you.

第二日，扫罗将百姓分为三队，在晨更的时候入了亚扪人的营，击杀他们直到太阳近午，剩下的人都逃散，没有二人同在一处的。
Now on the day after, Saul put the people into three bands, and in the morning watch they came to the tents of the Ammonites, and they went on attacking them till the heat of the day: and those who were not put to death were put to flight in every direction, so that no two of them were together.

百姓对撒母耳说，那说扫罗岂能管理我们的是谁呢？可以将他交出来，我们好杀死他。
And the people said to Samuel, Who was it who said, Is Saul to be our king? give the men up, so that we may put them to death.

扫罗说，今日耶和华在以色列中施行拯救，所以不可杀人。
And Saul said, Not a man is to be put to death today: for today the Lord has made Israel safe.

撒母耳对百姓说，我们要往吉甲去，在那里立国。
Then Samuel said to the people, Come, let us go to Gilgal and there make the kingdom strong in the hands of Saul.

众百姓就到了吉甲那里，在耶和华面前立扫罗为王，又在耶和华面前献平安祭。扫罗和以色列众人大大欢喜。
So all the people went to Gilgal; and there in Gilgal they made Saul king before the Lord; and peace-offerings were offered before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of Israel were glad with great joy.

撒母耳对以色列众人说，你们向我所求的，我已应允了，为你们立了一个王。
And Samuel said to all Israel, You see that I have given ear to everything you said to me, and have made a king over you.

现在有这王在你们前面行。我已年老发白，我的儿子都在你们这里。我从幼年直到今日都在你们前面行。
And now, see, the king is before you: and I am old and grey-headed, and my sons are with you: I have been living before your eyes from my early days till now.

我在这里，你们要在耶和华和他的受膏者面前给我作见证。我夺过谁的牛，抢过谁的驴，欺负过谁，虐待过谁，从谁手里受过贿赂因而眼瞎呢？若有，我必偿还。
Here I am: give witness against me before the Lord and before the man on whom he has put the holy oil: whose ox or ass have I taken? to whom have I been untrue? who has been crushed down by me? from whose hand have I taken a price for the blinding of my eyes? I will give it all back to you.

众人说，你未曾欺负我们，虐待我们，也未曾从谁手里受过什么。
And they said, You have never been untrue to us or cruel to us; you have taken nothing from any man.

撒母耳对他们说，你们在我手里没有找着什么，有耶和华和他的受膏者今日为证。他们说，愿他为证。
Then he said, The Lord is witness against you, and the man on whom he has put the holy oil is witness this day that you have seen no wrong in me. And they said, He is witness.

撒母耳对百姓说，从前立摩西，亚伦，又领你们列祖出埃及地的是耶和华。
And Samuel said to the people, The Lord is witness, who gave authority to Moses and Aaron, and who took your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.

现在你们要站住，等我在耶和华面前对你们讲论耶和华向你们和你们列祖所行一切公义的事。
Keep your places now, while I take up the argument with you before the Lord, and give you the story of the righteousness of the Lord, which he has made clear by his acts to you and to your fathers.

从前雅各到了埃及，后来你们列祖呼求耶和华，耶和华就差遣摩西，亚伦领你们列祖出埃及，使他们在这地方居住。
When Jacob and his sons had come into Egypt, and were crushed by the Egyptians, the prayers of your fathers came up to the Lord, and the Lord sent Moses and Aaron, who took your fathers out of Egypt, and he put them into this place.

他们却忘记耶和华他们的神，他就把他们付与夏琐将军西西拉的手里，和非利士人并摩押王的手里。于是这些人常来攻击他们。
But they were false to the Lord their God, and he gave them up into the hands of Sisera, captain of the army of Jabin, king of Hazor, and into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the king of Moab, who made war against them.

他们就呼求耶和华说，我们离弃耶和华，事奉巴力和亚斯他录，是有罪了。现在求你救我们脱离仇敌的手，我们必事奉你。
Then crying out to the Lord, they said, We have done evil, because we have been turned away from the Lord, worshipping the Baals and the Astartes: but now, make us safe from those who are against us and we will be your servants.

耶和华就差遣耶路巴力，比但，耶弗他，撒母耳救你们脱离四围仇敌的手，你们才安然居住。
So the Lord sent Jerubbaal and Barak and Jephthah and Samuel and took you out of the power of those who were fighting against you on every side, and made you safe.

你们见亚扪人的王拿辖来攻击你们，就对我说，我们定要一个王治理我们。其实耶和华你们的神是你们的王。
And when you saw that Nahash, the king of the Ammonites, was coming against you, you said to me, No more of this; we will have a king for our ruler: when the Lord your God was your king.

现在，你们所求所选的王在这里。看哪，耶和华已经为你们立王了。
Here, then, is the king marked out by you: the Lord has put a king over you.

你们若敬畏耶和华，事奉他，听从他的话，不违背他的命令，你们和治理你们的王也都顺从耶和华你们的神就好了。
If in the fear of the Lord you are his servants, hearing his voice and not going against the orders of the Lord, but being true to the Lord your God, you and the king ruling over you, then all will be well:

倘若不听从耶和华的话，违背他的命令，耶和华的手必攻击你们，像从前攻击你们列祖一样。
But if you do not give ear to the voice of the Lord, but go against his orders, then the hand of the Lord will be against you and against your king for your destruction, as it was against your fathers.

现在你们要站住，看耶和华在你们眼前要行一件大事。
Now keep where you are and see this great thing which the Lord will do before your eyes.

这不是割麦子的时候吗？我求告耶和华，他必打雷降雨，使你们又知道又看出，你们求立王的事是在耶和华面前犯大罪了。
Is it not now the time of the grain cutting? My cry will go up to the Lord and he will send thunder and rain: so that you may see and be conscious of your great sin which you have done in the eyes of the Lord in desiring a king for yourselves.

于是撒母耳求告耶和华，耶和华就在这日打雷降雨，众民便甚惧怕耶和华和撒母耳。
So Samuel made prayer to the Lord; and the Lord sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people were in fear of the Lord and of Samuel.

众民对撒母耳说，求你为仆人们祷告耶和华你的神，免得我们死亡，因为我们求立王的事正是罪上加罪了。
And all the people said to Samuel, Make prayer for us to the Lord your God so that death may not overtake us: for in addition to all our sins we have done this evil, in desiring a king.

撒母耳对百姓说，不要惧怕。你们虽然行了这恶，却不要偏离耶和华，只要尽心事奉他。
Then Samuel said to the people, Have no fear: truly you have done evil, but do not be turned away from the Lord; be his servants with all your heart;

若偏离耶和华去顺从那不能救人的虚神是无益的。
And do not go from the right way turning to those false gods in which there is no profit and no salvation, for they are false.

耶和华既喜悦选你们作他的子民，就必因他的大名不撇弃你们。
For the Lord will not give his people up, because of the honour of his name; for it was the Lord's pleasure to make of you a people for himself.

至于我，断不停止为你们祷告，以致得罪耶和华。我必以善道正路指教你们。
And as for me, never will I go against the orders of the Lord by giving up my prayers for you: but I will go on teaching you the good and right way.

只要你们敬畏耶和华，诚诚实实地尽心事奉他，想念他向你们所行的事何等大。
Only go in the fear of the Lord, and be his true servants with all your heart, keeping in mind what great things he has done for you.

你们若仍然作恶，你们和你们的王必一同灭亡。
But if you still do evil, destruction will overtake you and your king.

扫罗登基年四十岁。作以色列王二年的时候，
***

就从以色列中拣选了三千人，二千跟随扫罗在密抹和伯特利山，一千跟随约拿单在便雅悯的基比亚。其余的人扫罗都打发各回各家去了。
And Saul took for himself three thousand men of Israel, of whom he kept two thousand with him in Michmash and in the mountain of Beth-el, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah in the land of Benjamin: the rest of the people he sent back to their tents.

约拿单攻击迦巴，非利士人的防营，非利士人听见了。扫罗就在遍地吹角，意思说，要使希伯来人听见。
And Jonathan made an attack on the armed force of the Philistines stationed at Gibeah; and news was given to the Philistines that the Hebrews were turned against them. And Saul had a horn sounded through all the land,

以色列众人听见扫罗攻击非利士人的防营，又听见以色列人为非利士人所憎恶，就跟随扫罗聚集在吉甲。
And all Israel had the news that Saul had made an attack on the Philistines, and that Israel was bitterly hated by the Philistines. And the people came together after Saul to Gilgal.

非利士人聚集，要与以色列人争战，有车三万辆，马兵六千，步兵像海边的沙那样多，就上来在伯亚文东边的密抹安营。
And the Philistines came together to make war on Israel, three thousand war-carriages and six thousand horsemen and an army of people like the sands of the sea in number: they came up and took up their position in Michmash, to the east of Beth-aven.

以色列百姓见自己危急窘迫，就藏在山洞，丛林，石穴，隐密处，和坑中。
When the men of Israel saw the danger they were in, (for the people were troubled,) they took cover in cracks in the hillsides and in the woods and in rocks and holes and hollows.

有些希伯来人过了约旦河，逃到迦得和基列地。扫罗还是在吉甲，百姓都战战兢兢地跟随他。
And a great number of the people had gone over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead; but Saul was still in Gilgal, and all the people went after him shaking in fear.

扫罗照着撒母耳所定的日期等了七日。撒母耳还没有来到吉甲，百姓也离开扫罗散去了。
And he went on waiting there for seven days, the time fixed by Samuel: but Samuel did not come to Gilgal; and the people were starting to go away from him.

扫罗说，把燔祭和平安祭带到我这里来。扫罗就献上燔祭。
Then Saul said, Come here and give me the burned offering and the peace-offerings. And he made a burned offering to the Lord.

刚献完燔祭，撒母耳就到了。扫罗出去迎接他，要问他好。
And when the burned offering was ended, Samuel came; and Saul went out to see him and to give him a blessing.

撒母耳说，你作的是什么事呢？扫罗说，因为我见百姓离开我散去，你也不照所定的日期来到，而且非利士人聚集在密抹。
And Samuel said, What have you done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were going away from me, and you had not come at the time which had been fixed, and the Philistines had come together at Michmash;

所以我心里说，恐怕我没有祷告耶和华。非利士人下到吉甲攻击我，我就勉强献上燔祭。
I said, Now the Philistines will come down on me at Gilgal, and I have made no prayer for help to the Lord: and so, forcing myself to do it, I made a burned offering.

撒母耳对扫罗说，你作了糊涂事了，没有遵守耶和华你神所吩咐你的命令。若遵守，耶和华必在以色列中坚立你的王位，直到永远。
And Samuel said to Saul, You have done a foolish thing: you have not kept the rules which the Lord your God gave you; it was the purpose of the Lord to make your authority over Israel safe for ever.

现在你的王位必不长久。耶和华已经寻着一个合他心意的人，立他作百姓的君，因为你没有遵守耶和华所吩咐你的。
But now, your authority will not go on: the Lord, searching for a man who is pleasing to him in every way, has given him the place of ruler over his people, because you have not done what the Lord gave you orders to do.

撒母耳就起来，从吉甲上到便雅悯的基比亚。扫罗数点跟随他的，约有六百人。
Then Samuel went up from Gilgal and the rest of the people went up after Saul against the men of war, and they came from Gilgal to Gibeah in the land of Benjamin: and Saul took the number of the people who were with him, about six hundred men.

扫罗和他儿子约拿单，并跟随他们的人，都住在便雅悯的迦巴。但非利士人安营在密抹。
And Saul, with Jonathan his son and the people who were with them, was waiting in Geba in the land of Benjamin: but the tents of the Philistines were in Michmash.

有掠兵从非利士营中出来，分为三队，一队往俄弗拉向书亚地去，
And three bands of men came out from the Philistines to make an attack; one band went by the road which goes to Ophrah, into the land of Shual:

一队往伯和仑去，一队往洗波音谷对面的地境向旷野去。
And another went in the direction of Beth-horon: and another went by the hill looking down on the valley of Zeboiim, in the direction of the waste land.

那时，以色列全地没有一个铁匠。因为非利士人说，恐怕希伯来人制造刀枪。
Now there was no iron-worker in all the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, For fear the Hebrews make themselves swords or spears:

以色列人要磨锄，犁，斧，铲，就下到非利士人那里去磨。
But all the Israelites had to go to the Philistines to get their ploughs and blades and axes and hooks made sharp;

但有锉可以锉铲，犁，三齿叉，斧子，并赶牛锥。
For they had instruments for putting an edge on their ploughs and blades and forks and axes, and for putting iron points on their ox-driving rods.

所以到了争战的日子，跟随扫罗和约拿单的人没有一个手里有刀有枪的，惟独扫罗和他儿子约拿单有。
So on the day of the fight at Michmash, not a sword or a spear was to be seen in the hands of any of the people with Saul and Jonathan: only Saul and his son Jonathan had them.

非利士人的一队防兵到了密抹的隘口。
And the armed force of the Philistines went out to the narrow way of Michmash.

有一日，扫罗的儿子约拿单对拿他兵器的少年人说，我们不如过到那边，到非利士人的防营那里去。但他没有告诉父亲。
Now one day Jonathan, the son of Saul, said to the young man who was with him, looking after his arms, Come, let us go over to the Philistine force over there. But he said nothing to his father.

扫罗在基比亚的尽边，坐在米矶仑的石榴树下，跟随他的约有六百人。
And Saul was still waiting in the farthest part of Geba, under the fruit-tree in Migron: there were about six hundred men with him;

在那里有亚希突的儿子亚希亚，穿着以弗得。亚希突是以迦博的哥哥，非尼哈的儿子，以利的孙子。以利从前在示罗作耶和华的祭司。约拿单去了，百姓却不知道。
And Ahijah, the son of Ahitub, brother of Ichabod, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of the Lord in Shiloh, who had the ephod. And the people had no idea that Jonathan had gone.

约拿单要从隘口过到非利士防营那里去。这隘口两边各有一个山峰，一名播薛，一名西尼。
Now between the narrow roads over the mountains by which Jonathan was making his way to the Philistines' forces, there was a sharp overhanging rock on one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: one was named Bozez and the other Seneh.

一峰向北，与密抹相对，一峰向南，与迦巴相对。
The one rock went up on the north in front of Michmash and the other on the south in front of Geba.

约拿单对拿兵器的少年人说，我们不如过到未受割礼人的防营那里去，或者耶和华为我们施展能力。因为耶和华使人得胜，不在乎人多人少。
And Jonathan said to his young servant who had his arms, Come, let us go over to the armies of these men who have no circumcision: it may be that the Lord will give us help, for there is no limit to his power; the Lord is able to give salvation by a great army or by a small band.

拿兵器的对他说，随你的心意行吧。你可以上去，我必跟随你，与你同心。
And his servant said to him, Do whatever is in your mind: see, I am with you in every impulse of your heart.

约拿单说，我们要过到那些人那里去，使他们看见我们。
Then Jonathan said, Now we will go over to these men and let them see us.

他们若对我们说，你们站住，等我们到你们那里去，我们就站住，不上他们那里去。
If they say to us, Keep quiet where you are till we come to you; then we will keep our places and not go up to them.

他们若说，你们上到我们这里来，这话就是我们的证据。我们便上去，因为耶和华将他们交在我们手里了。
But if they say, Come up to us; then we will go up, for the Lord has given them into our hands: and this will be the sign to us.

二人就使非利士的防兵看见。非利士人说，希伯来人从所藏的洞穴里出来了。
And they let the Philistine force see the two of them: and the Philistines said, Look! the Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they have taken cover.

防兵对约拿单和拿兵器的人说，你们上到这里来，我们有一件事指示你们。约拿单就对拿兵器的人说，你跟随我上去，因为耶和华将他们交在以色列人手里了。
And the armed men of the force gave Jonathan and his servant their answer, saying, Come up here to us, and we will let you see something. Then Jonathan said to his servant, Come up after me: for the Lord has given them up into the hands of Israel.

约拿单就爬上去，拿兵器的人跟随他。约拿单杀倒非利士人，拿兵器的人也随着杀他们。
And Jonathan went up, gripping with his hands and his feet, his servant going up after him; and the Philistines gave way before Jonathan when he made an attack on them, and his servant put them to death after him.

约拿单和拿兵器的人起头所杀的约有二十人，都在一亩地的半犁沟之内。
And at their first attack, Jonathan and his servant put to the sword about twenty men, all inside the space of half an acre of land.

于是在营中，在田野，在众民内都有战兢，防兵和掠兵也都战兢，地也震动，战兢之势甚大。
And there was great fear in the tents and in the field and among all the men of the armed force, and the attackers were shaking with fear; even the earth was moved with a great shaking and there was a fear as from God.

在便雅悯的基比亚，扫罗的守望兵看见非利士的军众溃散，四围乱窜。
And the watchmen of Saul, looking out from Geba in the land of Benjamin, saw all the army flowing away and running here and there.

扫罗就对跟随他的民说，你们查点查点，看从我们这里出去的是谁。他们一查点，就知道约拿单和拿兵器的人没有在这里。
Then Saul said to the people who were with him, Let everyone be numbered and let us see who has gone from us. And when they had been numbered, it was seen that Jonathan and his servant were not there.

那时神的约柜在以色列人那里。扫罗对亚希亚说，你将神的约柜运了来。
And Saul said to Ahijah, Let the ephod come here. For he went before Israel with the ephod at that time.

扫罗正与祭司说话的时候，非利士营中的喧嚷越发大了。扫罗就对祭司说，停手吧。
Now while Saul was talking to the priest, the noise in the tents of the Philistines became louder and louder; and Saul said to the priest, Take back your hand.

扫罗和跟随他的人都聚集，来到战场，看见非利士人用刀互相击杀，大大惶乱。
And Saul and all the people with him came together and went forward to the fight: and every man's sword was turned against the man at his side, and there was a very great noise.

从前由四方来跟随非利士军的希伯来人现在也转过来，帮助跟随扫罗和约拿单的以色列人了。
Then the Hebrews who had been with the Philistines for some time, and had gone up with them to their tents, turning round were joined to those who were with Saul and Jonathan.

那藏在以法莲山地的以色列人听说非利士人逃跑，就出来紧紧地追杀他们。
And all the men of Israel who had taken cover in the hill-country of Ephraim, hearing that the Philistines had been put to flight, went after them, attacking them.

那日，耶和华使以色列人得胜，一直战到伯亚文。
So the Lord made Israel safe that day: and the fight went over to Beth-aven.

扫罗叫百姓起誓说，凡不等到晚上向敌人报完了仇吃什么的，必受咒诅。因此这日百姓没有吃什么，就极其困惫。
And all the people were with Saul, about twenty thousand men, and the fight was general through all the hill-country of Ephraim; but Saul made a great error that day, by putting the people under an oath, saying, Let that man be cursed who takes food before evening comes and I have given punishment to those who are against me. So the people had not a taste of food.

众民进入树林，见有蜜在地上。
And there was honey on the face of the field, and all the people came to the honey, the bees having gone from it;

他们进了树林，见有蜜流下来，却没有人敢用手取蜜入口，因为他们怕那誓言。
But not a man put his hand to his mouth for fear of the curse.

约拿单没有听见他父亲叫百姓起誓，所以伸手中的杖，用杖头蘸在蜂房里，转手送入口内，眼睛就明亮了。
But Jonathan, having no knowledge of the oath his father had put on the people, stretching out the rod which was in his hand, put the end of it in the honey, and put it to his mouth; then his eyes were made bright.

百姓中有一人对他说，你父亲曾叫百姓严严地起誓说，今日吃什么的，必受咒诅。因此百姓就疲乏了。
Then one of the people said to him, Your father put the people under an oath, saying, Let that man be cursed who takes any food this day. And the people were feeble, needing food.

约拿单说，我父亲连累你们了。你看，我尝了这一点蜜，眼睛就明亮了。
Then Jonathan said, My father has made trouble come on the land: now see how bright my eyes have become because I have taken a little of this honey.

今日百姓若任意吃了从仇敌所夺的物，击杀的非利士人岂不更多吗？
How much more if the people had freely taken their food from the goods of those who were fighting against them! would there not have been much greater destruction among the Philistines?

这日，以色列人击杀非利士人，从密抹直到亚雅仑。百姓甚是疲乏，
That day they overcame the Philistines from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were feeble from need of food.

就急忙将所夺的牛羊和牛犊宰于地上，肉还带血就吃了。
And rushing at the goods taken in the fight, the people took oxen and sheep and young oxen, and put them to death there on the earth, and had a meal, taking the flesh with the blood in it.

有人告诉扫罗说，百姓吃带血的肉，得罪耶和华了。扫罗说，你们有罪了，今日要将大石头滚到我这里来。
Then it was said to Saul, See, the people are sinning against the Lord, taking the blood with the flesh. And he said to those who gave him the news, Now let a great stone be rolled to me here.

扫罗又说，你们散在百姓中，对他们说，你们各人将牛羊牵到我这里来宰了吃，不可吃带血的肉得罪耶和华。这夜，百姓就把牛羊牵到那里宰了。
And Saul said, Go about among the people and say to them, Let every man come here to me with his ox and his sheep, and put them to death here, and take his meal: do no sin against the Lord by taking the blood with the flesh. So all the people took their oxen with them that night and put them to death there.

扫罗为耶和华筑了一座坛，这是他初次为耶和华筑的坛。
And Saul put up an altar to the Lord: this was the first altar which he put up to the Lord.

扫罗说，我们不如夜里下去追赶非利士人，抢掠他们，直到天亮，不留他们一人。众民说，你看怎样好就去行吧。祭司说，我们先当亲近神。
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, attacking them till the morning, till there is not a man of them living. And they said, Do whatever seems right to you. Then the priest said, Let us come near to God.

扫罗求问神说，我下去追赶非利士人可以不可以。你将他们交在以色列人手里不交。这日神没有回答他。
And Saul, desiring directions from God, said, Am I to go down after the Philistines? will you give them up into the hands of Israel? But he gave him no answer that day.

扫罗说，你们百姓中的长老都上这里来，查明今日是谁犯了罪。
And Saul said, Come near, all you chiefs of the people, and let us get word from God and see in whom is this sin today.

我指着救以色列永生的耶和华起誓，就是我儿子约拿单犯了罪，他也必死。但百姓中无一人回答他。
For, by the living Lord, the saviour of Israel, even if the sinner is Jonathan, my son, death will certainly be his fate. But not a man among all the people gave him any answer.

扫罗就对以色列众人说，你们站在一边，我与我儿子约拿单也站在一边。百姓对扫罗说，你看怎样好就去行吧。
Then he said to all Israel, You be on one side, and I with Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said to Saul, Do whatever seems good to you.

扫罗祷告耶和华以色列的神说，求你指示实情。于是掣签掣出扫罗和约拿单来。百姓尽都无事。
Then Saul said to the Lord, the God of Israel, Why have you not given me an answer today? If the sin is in me or in Jonathan my son, O Lord God of Israel, give Urim, and if it is in your people Israel, give Thummim. And by the decision of the Lord, Saul and Jonathan were marked out, and the people went free.

扫罗说，你们再掣签，看是我，是我儿子约拿单，就掣出约拿单来。
And Saul said, Give your decision between my son Jonathan and me. And Jonathan was taken.

扫罗对约拿单说，你告诉我，你作了什么事。约拿单说，我实在以手里的杖，用杖头蘸了一点蜜尝了一尝。这样我就死吗（吗或作吧）。
Then Saul said to Jonathan, Give me an account of what you have done. And Jonathan gave him the story and said, Certainly I took a little honey on the end of my rod; and now death is to be my fate.

扫罗说，约拿单哪，你定要死。若不然，愿神重重地降罚与我。
And Saul said, May God's punishment be on me if death is not your fate, Jonathan.

百姓对扫罗说，约拿单在以色列人中这样大行拯救，岂可使他死呢？断乎不可。我们指着永生的耶和华起誓，连他的一根头发也不可落地，因为他今日与神一同作事。于是百姓救约拿单免了死亡。
And the people said to Saul, Is death to come to Jonathan, the worker of this great salvation for Israel? Let it not be so: by the living Lord, not one hair of his head is to be touched, for he has been working with God today. So the people kept Jonathan from death.

扫罗回去，不追赶非利士人。非利士人也回本地去了。
Then Saul, turning back, went after the Philistines no longer: and the Philistines went back to their place.

扫罗执掌以色列的国权，常常攻击他四围的一切仇敌，就是摩押人，亚扪人，以东人，和琐巴诸王，并非利士人。他无论往何处去，都打败仇敌。
Now when Saul had taken his place as ruler of Israel, he made war on those who were against him on every side, Moab and the Ammonites and Edom and the kings of Zobah and the Philistines: and whichever way he went, he overcame them.

扫罗奋勇攻击亚玛力人，救了以色列人脱离抢掠他们之人的手。
And he did great things, and overcame the Amalekites, and made Israel safe from the hands of their attackers.

扫罗的儿子是约拿单，亦施韦，麦基舒亚。他的两个女儿，长女名米拉，次女名米甲。
Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan and Ishvi and Malchi-shua; and these are the names of his daughters: the older was named Merab and the younger Michal;

扫罗的妻名叫亚希暖，是亚希玛斯的女儿。扫罗的元帅名叫押尼珥，是尼珥的儿子。尼珥是扫罗的叔叔。
The name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz; the captain of his army was Abner, the son of Ner, brother of Saul's father.

扫罗的父亲基士，押尼珥的父亲尼珥，都是亚别的儿子。
Kish, the father of Saul, and Ner, the father of Abner, were sons of Abiel.

扫罗平生常与非利士人大大争战。扫罗遇见有能力的人或勇士，都招募了来跟随他。
All through the life of Saul there was bitter war against the Philistines; and whenever Saul saw any strong man or any good fighting man, he kept him near himself.

撒母耳对扫罗说，耶和华差遣我膏你为王，治理他的百姓以色列。所以你当听从耶和华的话。
And Samuel said to Saul, The Lord sent me to put the holy oil on you and to make you king over his people, over Israel: so give ear now to the words of the Lord.

万军之耶和华如此说，以色列人出埃及的时候，在路上亚玛力人怎样待他们，怎样抵挡他们，我都没忘。
The Lord of armies says, I will give punishment to Amalek for what he did to Israel, fighting against him on the way when Israel came out of Egypt.

现在你要去击打亚玛力人，灭尽他们所有的，不可怜惜他们，将男女，孩童，吃奶的，并牛，羊，骆驼，和驴尽行杀死。
Go now and put Amalek to the sword, putting to the curse all they have, without mercy: put to death every man and woman, every child and baby at the breast, every ox and sheep, camel and ass.

于是扫罗招聚百姓在提拉因，数点他们，共有步兵二十万，另有犹大人一万。
And Saul sent for the people and had them numbered in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen and ten thousand men of Judah.

扫罗到了亚玛力的京城，在谷中设下埋伏。
And Saul came to the town of Amalek, and took up his position in the valley secretly.

扫罗对基尼人说，你们离开亚玛力人下去吧，恐怕我将你们和亚玛力人一同杀灭。因为以色列人出埃及的时候，你们曾恩待他们。于是基尼人离开亚玛力人去了。
And Saul said to the Kenites, Go away, take yourselves out from among the Amalekites, or destruction will overtake you with them: for you were kind to the children of Israel when they came out of Egypt. So the Kenites went away from among the Amalekites.

扫罗击打亚玛力人，从哈腓拉直到埃及前的书珥，
And Saul made an attack on the Amalekites from Havilah on the road to Shur, which is before Egypt.

生擒了亚玛力王亚甲，用刀杀尽亚玛力的众民。
He took Agag, king of the Amalekites, prisoner, and put all the people to the sword without mercy.

扫罗和百姓却怜惜亚甲，也爱惜上好的牛，羊，牛犊，羊羔，并一切美物，不肯灭绝。凡下贱瘦弱的，尽都杀了。
But Saul and the people did not put Agag to death, and they kept the best of the sheep and the oxen and the fat beasts and the lambs, and whatever was good, not desiring to put them to the curse: but everything which was bad and of no use they put to the curse.

耶和华的话临到撒母耳说，
Then the Lord said to Samuel,

我立扫罗为王，我后悔了。因为他转去不跟从我，不遵守我的命令。撒母耳便甚忧愁，终夜哀求耶和华。
It is no longer my pleasure for Saul to be king; for he is turned back from going in my ways, and has not done my orders. And Samuel was very sad, crying to the Lord in prayer all night.

撒母耳清早起来，迎接扫罗。有人告诉撒母耳说，扫罗到了迦密，在那里立了记念碑，又转身下到吉甲。
And early in the morning he got up and went to Saul; and word was given to Samuel that Saul had come to Carmel and put up a pillar, and had gone from there down to Gilgal.

撒母耳到了扫罗那里，扫罗对他说，愿耶和华赐福与你，耶和华的命令我已遵守了。
And Samuel came to Saul; and Saul said to him, May the blessing of the Lord be with you: I have done what was ordered by the Lord.

撒母耳说，我耳中听见有羊叫，牛鸣，是从哪里来的呢？
And Samuel said, What then is this sound of the crying of sheep and the noise of oxen which comes to my ears?

扫罗说，这是百姓从亚玛力人那里带来的。因为他们爱惜上好的牛羊，要献与耶和华你的神。其余的，我们都灭尽了。
And Saul said, They have taken them from the Amalekites: for the people have kept the best of the sheep and of the oxen as an offering to the Lord your God; all the rest we have given up to destruction.

撒母耳对扫罗说，你住口吧。等我将耶和华昨夜向我所说的话告诉你。扫罗说，请讲。
Then Samuel said to Saul, Say no more! Let me give you word of what the Lord has said to me this night. And he said to him, Say on.

撒母耳对扫罗说，从前你虽然以自己为小，岂不是被立为以色列支派的元首吗？耶和华膏你作以色列的王。
And Samuel said, Though you may seem little to yourself, are you not head of the tribes of Israel? for the Lord with the holy oil made you king over Israel,

耶和华差遣你，吩咐你说，你去击打那些犯罪的亚玛力人，将他们灭绝净尽。
And the Lord sent you on a journey and said, Go and put to the curse those sinners, the Amalekites, fighting against them till every one is dead.

你为何没有听从耶和华的命令，急忙掳掠财物，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事呢？
Why then did you not do the orders of the Lord, but by violently taking their goods did evil in the eyes of the Lord?

扫罗对撒母耳说，我实在听从了耶和华的命令，行了耶和华所差遣我行的路，擒了亚玛力王亚甲来，灭尽了亚玛力人。
And Saul said, Truly, I have done the orders of the Lord and have gone the way the Lord sent me; I have taken Agag, the king of Amalek, and have given the Amalekites up to destruction.

百姓却在所当灭的物中取了最好的牛羊，要在吉甲献与耶和华你的神。
But the people took some of their goods, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which were put to the curse, to make an offering of them to the Lord your God in Gilgal.

撒母耳说，耶和华喜悦燔祭和平安祭，岂如喜悦人听从他的话呢？听命胜于献祭。顺从胜于公羊的脂油。
And Samuel said, Has the Lord as much delight in offerings and burned offerings as in the doing of his orders? Truly, to do his pleasure is better than to make offerings, and to give ear to him than the fat of sheep.

悖逆的罪与行邪术的罪相等。顽梗的罪与拜虚神和偶像的罪相同。你既厌弃耶和华的命令，耶和华也厌弃你作王。
For to go against his orders is like the sin of those who make use of secret arts, and pride is like giving worship to images. Because you have put away from you the word of the Lord, he has put you from your place as king.

扫罗对撒母耳说，我有罪了，我因惧怕百姓，听从他们的话，就违背了耶和华的命令和你的言语。
And Saul said to Samuel, Great is my sin: for I have gone against the orders of the Lord and against your words: because, fearing the people, I did what they said.

现在求你赦免我的罪，同我回去，我好敬拜耶和华。
So now, let my sin have forgiveness, and go back with me to give worship to the Lord.

撒母耳对扫罗说，我不同你回去。因为你厌弃耶和华的命令，耶和华也厌弃你作以色列的王。
And Samuel said to Saul, I will not go back with you: for you have put away from you the word of the Lord, and the Lord has put you from your place as king over Israel.

撒母耳转身要走，扫罗就扯住他外袍的衣襟，衣襟就撕断了。
And when Samuel was turning round to go away, Saul took the skirt of his robe in his hand, and the cloth came away.

撒母耳对他说，如此，今日耶和华使以色列国与你断绝，将这国赐与比你更好的人。
And Samuel said to him, The Lord has taken away the kingdom of Israel from you this day by force, and has given it to a neighbour of yours who is better than you.

以色列的大能者必不至说谎，也不至后悔。因为他迥非世人，决不后悔。
And further, the Glory of Israel will not say what is false, and his purpose may not be changed: for he is not a man, whose purpose may be changed.

扫罗说，我有罪了，虽然如此，求你在我百姓的长老和以色列人面前抬举我，同我回去，我好敬拜耶和华你的神。
Then he said, Great is my sin: but still, give me honour now before the heads of my people and before Israel, and come back with me so that I may give worship to the Lord your God.

于是撒母耳转身跟随扫罗回去，扫罗就敬拜耶和华。
So Samuel went back after Saul, and Saul gave worship to the Lord.

撒母耳说，要把亚玛力王亚甲带到我这里来。亚甲就欢欢喜喜地来到他面前，心里说，死亡的苦难必定过去了。
Then Samuel said, Make Agag, the king of the Amalekites, come here to me. And Agag came to him shaking with fear. And Agag said, Truly the pain of death is past.

撒母耳说，你既用刀使妇人丧子，这样，你母亲在妇人中也必丧子。于是，撒母耳在吉甲耶和华面前将亚甲杀死。
And Samuel said, As your sword has made women without children, so now your mother will be without children among women. And Agag was cut up by Samuel, bone from bone, before the Lord in Gilgal.

撒母耳回了拉玛。扫罗上他所住的基比亚，回自己的家去了。
Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house in Gibeah, in the land of Saul.

撒母耳直到死的日子，再没有见扫罗。但撒母耳为扫罗悲伤，是因耶和华后悔立他为以色列的王。
And Samuel never saw Saul again till the day of his death; but Samuel was sorrowing for Saul: and it was no longer the Lord's pleasure for Saul to be king over Israel.

耶和华对撒母耳说，我既厌弃扫罗作以色列的王，你为他悲伤要到几时呢？你将膏油盛满了角，我差遣你往伯利恒人耶西那里去。因为我在他众子之内，预定一个作王的。
And the Lord said to Samuel, How long will you go on sorrowing for Saul, seeing that I have put him from his place as king over Israel? Take oil in your vessel and go; I will send you to Jesse, the Beth-lehemite: for I have got a king for myself among his sons.

撒母耳说，我怎能去呢？扫罗若听见，必要杀我。耶和华说，你可以带一只牛犊去，就说，我来是要向耶和华献祭。
And Samuel said, How is it possible for me to go? If Saul gets news of it he will put me to death. And the Lord said, Take a young cow with you and say, I have come to make an offering to the Lord.

你要请耶西来吃祭肉，我就指示你所当行的事。我所指给你的人，你要膏他。
And send for Jesse to be present at the offering, and I will make clear to you what you are to do: and you are to put the holy oil on him whose name I give you.

撒母耳就照耶和华的话去行。到了伯利恒，那城里的长老都战战兢兢地出来迎接他，问他说，你是为平安来的吗？
And Samuel did as the Lord said and came to Beth-lehem. And the responsible men of the town came out to him in fear and said, Do you come in peace?

他说，为平安来的，我是给耶和华献祭。你们当自洁，来与我同吃祭肉。撒母耳就使耶西和他众子自洁，请他们来吃祭肉。
And he said, In peace: I have come to make an offering to the Lord: make yourselves clean and come with me to make the offering. And he made Jesse and his sons clean, and sent for them to be present at the offering.

他们来的时候，撒母耳看见以利押，就心里说，耶和华的受膏者必定在他面前。
Now when they came, looking at Eliab, he said, Clearly the man of the Lord's selection is before him.

耶和华却对撒母耳说，不要看他的外貌和他身材高大，我不拣选他。因为，耶和华不像人看人，人是看外貌。耶和华是看内心。
But the Lord said to Samuel, Do not take note of his face or how tall he is, because I will not have him: for the Lord's view is not man's; man takes note of the outer form, but the Lord sees the heart.

耶西叫亚比拿达从撒母耳面前经过，撒母耳说，耶和华也不拣选他。
Then Jesse sent for Abinadab and made him come before Samuel. And he said, The Lord has not taken this one.

耶西又叫沙玛从撒母耳面前经过，撒母耳说，耶和华也不拣选他。
Then Jesse made Shammah come before him. And he said, The Lord has not taken this one.

耶西叫他七个儿子都从撒母耳面前经过，撒母耳说，这都不是耶和华所拣选的。
And Jesse made his seven sons come before Samuel. And Samuel said to Jesse, The Lord has not taken any of these.

撒母耳对耶西说，你的儿子都在这里吗？他回答说，还有个小的，现在放羊。撒母耳对耶西说，你打发人去叫他来。他若不来，我们必不坐席。
Then Samuel said to Jesse, Are all your children here? And he said, There is still the youngest, and he is looking after the sheep. And Samuel said to Jesse, Send and make him come here: for we will not take our seats till he is here.

耶西就打发人去叫了他来。他面色光红，双目清秀，容貌俊美。耶和华说，这就是他，你起来膏他。
So he sent and made him come in. Now he had red hair and beautiful eyes and pleasing looks. And the Lord said, Come, put the oil on him, for this is he.

撒母耳就用角里的膏油，在他诸兄中膏了他。从这日起，耶和华的灵就大大感动大卫。撒母耳起身回拉玛去了。
Then Samuel took the bottle of oil, and put the oil on him there among his brothers: and from that day the spirit of the Lord came on David with power. So Samuel went back to Ramah.

耶和华的灵离开扫罗，有恶魔从耶和华那里来扰乱他。
Now the spirit of the Lord had gone from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord was troubling him.

扫罗的臣仆对他说，现在有恶魔从神那里来扰乱你。
And Saul's servants said to him, See now, an evil spirit from God is troubling you.

我们的主可以吩咐面前的臣仆，找一个善于弹琴的来，等神那里来的恶魔临到你身上的时候，使他用手弹琴，你就好了。
Now give orders to your servants who are here before you to go in search of a man who is an expert player on a corded instrument: and it will be that when the evil spirit from God is on you, he will make music for you on his instrument, and you will get well.

扫罗对臣仆说，你们可以为我找一个善于弹琴的，带到我这里来。
And Saul said to his servants, Then get me a man who is an expert player, and make him come to me.

其中有一个少年人说，我曾见伯利恒人耶西的一个儿子善于弹琴，是大有勇敢的战士，说话合宜，容貌俊美，耶和华也与他同在。
Then one of the servants in answer said, I have seen a son of Jesse, the Beth-lehemite, who is expert at playing, and a strong man and a man of war; and he is wise in his words, and pleasing in looks, and the Lord is with him.

于是扫罗差遣使者去见耶西，说，请你打发你放羊的儿子大卫到我这里来。
So Saul sent his servants to Jesse and said, Send me your son David who is with the sheep.

耶西就把几个饼和一皮袋酒，并一只山羊羔，都驮在驴上，交给他儿子大卫，送与扫罗。
And Jesse took five cakes of bread and a skin of wine and a young goat and sent them to Saul by David.

大卫到了扫罗那里，就侍立在扫罗面前。扫罗甚喜爱他，他就作了扫罗拿兵器的人。
And David came to Saul, waiting before him: and he became very dear to Saul, who made him his servant, giving him the care of his arms.

扫罗差遣人去见耶西，说，求你容大卫侍立在我面前，因为他在我眼前蒙了恩。
And Saul sent to Jesse saying, Let David be with me, for he is pleasing to me.

从神那里来的恶魔临到扫罗身上的时候，大卫就拿琴，用手而弹，扫罗便舒畅爽快，恶魔离了他。
And whenever the evil spirit from God came on Saul, David took his instrument and made music: so new life came to Saul, and he got well, and the evil spirit went away from him.

非利士人招聚他们的军旅，要来争战。聚集在属犹大的梭哥，安营在梭哥和亚西加中间的以弗大悯。
Now the Philistines got their armies together for war, and came together at Socoh in the land of Judah, and took up their position between Socoh and Azekah in Ephes-dammim.

扫罗和以色列人也聚集，在以拉谷安营，摆列队伍，要与非利士人打仗。
And Saul and the men of Israel came together and took up their position in the valley of Elah, and put their forces in order against the Philistines.

非利士人站在这边山上，以色列人站在那边山上，当中有谷。
The Philistines were stationed on the mountain on one side and Israel on the mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between them.

从非利士营中出来一个讨战的人，名叫歌利亚，是迦特人，身高六肘零一虎口。
And a fighter came out from the tents of the Philistines, named Goliath of Gath; he was more than six cubits tall.

头戴铜盔，身穿铠甲，甲重五千舍客勒。
And he had a head-dress of brass on his head, and he was dressed in a coat of metal, the weight of which was five thousand shekels of brass.

腿上有铜护膝，两肩之中背负铜戟。
His legs were covered with plates of brass and hanging on his back was a javelin of brass.

枪杆粗如织布的机轴，铁枪头重六百舍客勒。有一个拿盾牌的人在他前面走。
The stem of his spear was as long as a cloth-worker's rod, and its head was made of six hundred shekels' weight of iron: and one went before him with his body-cover.

歌利亚对着以色列的军队站立，呼叫说，你们出来摆列队伍作什么呢？我不是非利士人吗？你们不是扫罗的仆人吗？可以从你们中间拣选一人，使他下到我这里来。
He took up his position and in a loud voice said to the armies of Israel, Why have you come out to make war? Am I not a Philistine and you servants of Saul? Send out a man for yourselves and let him come down to me.

他若能与我战斗，将我杀死，我们就作你们的仆人。我若胜了他，将他杀死，你们就作我们的仆人，服事我们。
If he is able to have a fight with me and overcome me, then we will be your servants: but if I am able to overcome him, then you will be our servants and do work for us.

那非利士人又说，我今日向以色列人的军队骂阵。你们叫一个人出来，与我战斗。
And the Philistine said, I have put to shame the armies of Israel this day; give me a man so that we may have a fight together.

扫罗和以色列众人听见非利士人的这些话，就惊惶，极其害怕。
And Saul and all Israel, hearing those words of the Philistine, were troubled and full of fear.

大卫是犹大，伯利恒的以法他人耶西的儿子。耶西有八个儿子。当扫罗的时候，耶西已经老迈。
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Beth-lehem-judah named Jesse, who had eight sons; and he was an old man in Saul's day, and far on in years.

耶西的三个大儿子跟随扫罗出征。这出征的三个儿子，长子名叫以利押，次子名叫亚比拿达，三子名叫沙玛。
And the three oldest sons of Jesse had gone with Saul to the fight: the names of the three who went to the fight were Eliab, the oldest, and Abinadab the second, and Shammah the third.

大卫是最小的。那三个大儿子跟随扫罗。
And David was the youngest: and the three oldest were with Saul's army.

大卫有时离开扫罗，回伯利恒放他父亲的羊。
Now David went to and from Saul, looking after his father's sheep at Beth-lehem.

那非利士人早晚都出来站着，如此四十日。
And the Philistine came near every morning and evening for forty days.

一日，耶西对他儿子大卫说，你拿一伊法烘了的穗子和十个饼，速速地送到营里去，交给你哥哥们。
And Jesse said to his son David, Take now for your brothers an ephah of this dry grain and these ten cakes of bread, and go quickly with them to the tents to your brothers;

再拿这十块奶饼，送给他们的千夫长，且问你哥哥们好，向他们要一封信来。
And take these ten cheeses to the captain of their thousand, and see how your brothers are and come back with a sign to say how they are.

扫罗与大卫的三个哥哥和以色列众人，在以拉谷与非利士人打仗。
Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

大卫早晨起来，将羊交托一个看守的人，照着他父亲所吩咐的话，带着食物去了。到了辎重营，军兵刚出到战场，呐喊要战。
And David got up early in the morning, and, giving the sheep into the care of a keeper, took the things and went as Jesse had said; and he came to the lines where the carts were, when the army was going out to the fight giving their war-cry.

以色列人和非利士人都摆列队伍，彼此相对。
And Israel and the Philistines had put their forces in position, army against army.

大卫把他带来的食物留在看守物件人的手下，跑到战场，问他哥哥们安。
And David gave his parcels into the hands of the keeper of the army stores, and went running to the army and came to his brothers to get knowledge about them.

与他们说话的时候，那讨战的，就是属迦特的非利士人歌利亚，从非利士队中出来，说从前所说的话。大卫都听见了。
And while he was talking to them, the fighter, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, came out from the Philistines' lines and said the same words, in David's hearing.

以色列众人看见那人，就逃跑，极其害怕。
And all the men of Israel, when they saw him, went in flight, overcome with fear.

以色列人彼此说，这上来的人你看见了吗？他上来是要向以色列人骂阵。若有能杀他的，王必赏赐他大财，将自己的女儿给他为妻，并在以色列人中免他父家纳粮当差。
And the men of Israel said, Have you seen this man? Clearly he has come out to put shame on Israel: and it is certain that if any man overcomes him, the king will give that man great wealth, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's family free in Israel.

大卫问站在旁边的人说，有人杀这非利士人，除掉以色列人的耻辱，怎样待他呢？这未受割礼的非利士人是谁呢？竟敢向永生神的军队骂阵吗？
And David said to the men near him, What will be done to the man who overcomes this Philistine and takes away the shame from Israel? for who is this Philistine, a man without circumcision, that he has put shame on the armies of the living God?

百姓照先前的话回答他说，有人能杀这非利士人，必如此如此待他。
And the people gave him this answer, So it will be done to the man who overcomes him.

大卫的长兄以利押听见大卫与他们所说的话，就向他发怒，说，你下来作什么呢？在旷野的那几只羊，你交托了谁呢？我知道你的骄傲和你心里的恶意，你下来特为要看争战。
And Eliab, his oldest brother, hearing what David said to the men, was moved to wrath against David, and said, Why have you come here? Into whose care have you given that little flock of sheep in the waste land? I have knowledge of your pride and the evil of your heart, you have come down to see the fight.

大卫说，我作了什么呢？我来岂没有缘故吗？
And David said, What have I done now? was it not only a word?

大卫就离开他转向别人，照先前的话而问。百姓仍照先前的话回答他。
And turning away from him to one of the other men, he said the same words: and the people gave him the same answer.

有人听见大卫所说的话，就告诉了扫罗。扫罗便打发人叫他来。
And, hearing what David said, they gave Saul word of it: and he sent for him.

大卫对扫罗说，人都不必因那非利士人胆怯。你的仆人要去与那非利士人战斗。
And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart become feeble because of him; I, your servant, will go out and have a fight with this Philistine.

扫罗对大卫说，你不能去与那非利士人战斗。因为你年纪太轻，他自幼就作战士。
And Saul said to David, You are not able to go out against this Philistine and have a fight with him: for you are only a boy, and he has been a man of war from his earliest days.

大卫对扫罗说，你仆人为父亲放羊，有时来了狮子，有时来了熊，从群中衔一只羊羔去。
And David said to Saul, Your servant has been keeper of his father's sheep; and if a lion or a bear came and took a lamb from the flock,

我就追赶它，击打它，将羊羔从它口中救出来。它起来要害我，我就揪着它的胡子，将它打死。
I went out after him, and overcame him, and took it out of his mouth: and if, turning on me, he came at me, I took him by the hair and overcame him and put him to death.

你仆人曾打死狮子和熊，这未受割礼的非利士人向永生神的军队骂阵，也必像狮子和熊一般。
Your servant has overcome lion and bear: and the fate of this Philistine, who is without circumcision, will be like theirs, seeing that he has put shame on the armies of the living God.

大卫又说，耶和华救我脱离狮子和熊的爪，也必救我脱离这非利士人的手。扫罗对大卫说，你可以去吧。耶和华必与你同在。
And David said, The Lord, who kept me safe from the grip of the lion and the bear, will be my saviour from the hands of this Philistine. And Saul said to David, Go! and may the Lord be with you.

扫罗就把自己的战衣给大卫穿上，将铜盔给他戴上，又给他穿上铠甲。
Then Saul gave David his clothing of war, and put a head-dress of brass on his head and had him clothed with a coat of metal.

大卫把刀跨在战衣外，试试能走不能走。因为素来没有穿惯，就对扫罗说，我穿戴这些不能走，因为素来没有穿惯。于是摘脱了。
And David took Saul's sword and put the band round him over the metal coat, and was unable to go forward; for he was not used to them. Then David said to Saul, It is not possible for me to go out with these, for I am not used to them. So David took them off.

他手中拿杖，又在溪中挑选了五块光滑石子，放在袋里，就是牧人带的囊里。手中拿着甩石的机弦，就去迎那非利士人。
Then he took his stick in his hand, and got five smooth stones from the bed of the stream and put them in a bag such as is used by sheep-keepers; and in his hand was a leather band used for sending stones: and so he went in the direction of the Philistine.

非利士人也渐渐地迎着大卫来，拿盾牌的走在前头。
And the Philistine came nearer to David; and the man who had his body-cover went before him.

非利士人观看，见了大卫，就藐视他。因为他年轻，面色光红，容貌俊美。
And when the Philistine, taking note, saw David, he had a poor opinion of him: for he was only a boy, red-haired and good-looking.

非利士人对大卫说，你拿杖到我这里来，我岂是狗呢？非利士人就指着自己的神咒诅大卫。
And the Philistine said to David, Am I a dog, that you come out to me with sticks? And the Philistine put curses on David by all his gods.

非利士人又对大卫说，来吧。我将你的肉给空中的飞鸟，田野的走兽吃。
And the Philistine said to David, Come here to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the air and the beasts of the field.

大卫对非利士人说，你来攻击我，是靠着刀枪和铜戟。我来攻击你，是靠着万军之耶和华的名，就是你所怒骂带领以色列军队的神。
Then David said to the Philistine, You come to me with a sword and a spear and a javelin: but I come to you in the name of the Lord of armies, the God of the armies of Israel on which you have put shame.

今日耶和华必将你交在我手里。我必杀你，斩你的头，又将非利士军兵的尸首给空中的飞鸟，地上的野兽吃，使普天下的人都知道以色列中有神。
This day the Lord will give you up into my hands, and I will overcome you, and take your head off you; and I will give the bodies of the Philistine army to the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth today, so that all the earth may see that Israel has a God;

又使这众人知道耶和华使人得胜，不是用刀用枪，因为争战的胜败全在乎耶和华。他必将你们交在我们手里。
And all these people who are here today may see that the Lord does not give salvation by sword and spear: for the fight is the Lord's, and he will give you up into our hands.

非利士人起身，迎着大卫前来。大卫急忙迎着非利士人，往战场跑去。
Now when the Philistine made a move and came near to David, David quickly went at a run in the direction of the army, meeting the Philistine face to face.

大卫用手从囊中掏出一块石子来，用机弦甩去，打中非利士人的额，石子进入额内，他就仆倒，面伏于地。
And David put his hand in his bag and took out a stone and sent it from his leather band straight at the Philistine, and the stone went deep into his brow, and he went down to the earth, falling on his face.

这样，大卫用机弦甩石，胜了那非利士人，打死他。大卫手中却没有刀。
So David overcame the Philistine with his leather band and a stone, wounding the Philistine and causing his death: but David had no sword in his hand.

大卫跑去，站在非利士人身旁，将他的刀从鞘中拔出来，杀死他，割了他的头。非利士众人看见他们讨战的勇士死了，就都逃跑。
So running up to the Philistine and putting his foot on him, David took his sword out of its cover, and put him to death, cutting off his head with it. And when the Philistines saw that their fighter was dead, they went in flight.

以色列人和犹大人便起身呐喊，追赶非利士人，直到迦特（或作该）和以革伦的城门。被杀的非利士人倒在沙拉音的路上，直到迦特和以革伦。
And the men of Israel and of Judah got up, and gave a cry, and went after the Philistines as far as Gath and the town doors of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines were falling down by the road from Shaaraim all the way to Gath and Ekron.

以色列人追赶非利士人回来，就夺了他们的营盘。
Then the children of Israel came back from going after the Philistines, and took their goods from the tents.

大卫将那非利士人的头拿到耶路撒冷，却将他军装放在自己的帐棚里。
And David took the head of the Philistine to Jerusalem, but the metal war-dress and the arms he put in his tent.

扫罗看见大卫去攻击非利士人，就问元帅押尼珥说，押尼珥阿，那少年人是谁的儿子。押尼珥说，我敢在王面前起誓，我不知道。
And when Saul saw David going out against the Philistine, he said to Abner, the captain of the army, Abner, whose son is this young man? And Abner said, On your life, O king, I have no idea.

王说，你可以问问那幼年人是谁的儿子。
And the king said, Make search and see whose son this young man is.

大卫打死非利士人回来，押尼珥领他到扫罗面前，他手中拿着非利士人的头。
And when David was coming back after the destruction of the Philistine, Abner took him to Saul, with the head of the Philistine in his hand.

扫罗问他说，少年人哪，你是谁的儿子。大卫说，我是你仆人伯利恒人耶西的儿子。
And Saul said to him, Young man, whose son are you? And David in answer said, I am the son of your servant Jesse of Beth-lehem.

大卫对扫罗说完了话，约拿单的心与大卫的心深相契合。约拿单爱大卫，如同爱自己的性命。
Now after David's talk with Saul was ended, the soul of Jonathan was joined with the soul of David, and David became as dear to him as his very life.

那日扫罗留住大卫，不容他再回父家。
And that day Saul took David and would not let him go back to his father's house.

约拿单爱大卫如同爱自己的性命，就与他结盟。
Then Jonathan and David made an agreement together, because of Jonathan's love for David.

约拿单从身上脱下外袍，给了大卫，又将战衣，刀，弓，腰带都给了他。
And Jonathan took off the robe he had on and gave it to David, with all his military dress, even to his sword and his bow and the band round his body.

扫罗无论差遣大卫往何处去，他都作事精明。扫罗就立他作战士长，众百姓和扫罗的臣仆无不喜悦。
And David went wherever Saul sent him, and did wisely: and Saul put him at the head of his men of war, and this was pleasing to all the people as well as to Saul's servants.

大卫打死了那非利士人，同众人回来的时候，妇女们从以色列各城里出来，欢欢喜喜，打鼓击磬，歌唱跳舞，迎接扫罗王。
Now on their way, when David came back after the destruction of the Philistine, the women came out of all the towns of Israel, with songs and dances, meeting David with melody and joy and instruments of music.

众妇女舞蹈唱和，说，扫罗杀死千千，大卫杀死万万。
And the women, answering one another in their song, said, Saul has put to death his thousands and David his tens of thousands.

扫罗甚发怒，不喜悦这话，就说，将万万归大卫，千千归我，只剩下王位没有给他了。
And Saul was very angry and this saying was unpleasing to him; and he said, They have given David credit for tens of thousands, and to me for only thousands: what more is there for him but the kingdom?

从这日起，扫罗就怒视大卫。
And from that day Saul was looking with envy on David.

次日，从神那里来的恶魔大大降在扫罗身上，他就在家中胡言乱语。大卫照常弹琴，扫罗手里拿着枪。
Now on the day after, an evil spirit from God came on Saul with great force and he was acting like a prophet among the men of his house, while David was making music for him, as he did day by day: and Saul had his spear in his hand.

扫罗把枪一抡，心里说，我要将大卫刺透，钉在墙上。大卫躲避他两次。
And Saul, balancing the spear in his hand, said, I will give David a blow, pinning him to the wall. And David got away from him twice.

扫罗惧怕大卫。因为耶和华离开自己，与大卫同在。
And Saul went in fear of David, because the Lord was with David and had gone away from Saul.

所以扫罗使大卫离开自己，立他为千夫长，他就领兵出入。
So Saul sent him away, and made him a captain over a thousand; and he went about his business before the people.

大卫作事无不精明，耶和华也与他同在。
And in all his undertakings David did wisely; and the Lord was with him.

扫罗见大卫作事精明，就甚怕他。
And when Saul saw how wisely he did, he was in fear of him.

但以色列和犹大众人都爱大卫，因为他领他们出入。
But David was loved by all Israel and Judah, for he went out and came in before them.

扫罗对大卫说，我将大女儿米拉给你为妻，只要你为我奋勇，为耶和华争战。扫罗心里说，我不好亲手害他，要借非利士人的手害他。
And Saul said to David, Here is my oldest daughter Merab, whom I will give you for your wife: only be strong for me, fighting in the Lord's wars. For Saul said, Let it not be through me that his fate comes to him, but through the Philistines.

大卫对扫罗说，我是谁？我是什么出身，我父家在以色列中是何等的家，岂敢作王的女婿呢？
And David said to Saul, Who am I, and what is my father's family in Israel, that I am to be son-in-law to the king?

扫罗的女儿米拉到了当给大卫的时候，扫罗却给了米何拉人亚得列为妻。
But when the time came to give Merab, Saul's daughter, to David, she was given to Adriel of Meholath.

扫罗的次女米甲爱大卫。有人告诉扫罗，扫罗就喜悦。
And Saul's daughter Michal was in love with David: and Saul had word of it and was pleased.

扫罗心里说，我将这女儿给大卫，作他的网罗，好借非利士人的手害他。所以扫罗对大卫说，你今日可以第二次作我的女婿。
And Saul said, I will give her to him, so that she may be a cause of danger to him, and so that the hands of the Philistines may be against him. So Saul said to David, Today you are to become my son-in-law for the second time.

扫罗吩咐臣仆说，你们暗中对大卫说，王喜悦你，王的臣仆也都喜爱你，所以你当作王的女婿。
And Saul gave his servants orders saying, Have talk with David secretly and say to him, See how the king has delight in you, and how you are loved by all his servants: then be the king's son-in-law.

扫罗的臣仆就照这话说给大卫听。大卫说，你们以为作王的女婿是一件小事吗？我是贫穷卑微的人。
And Saul's servants said these things to David. And David said, Does it seem to you a small thing to be the king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man, of no great name?

扫罗的臣仆回奏说，大卫所说的如此如此。
And the servants of Saul gave him an account of what David had said.

扫罗说，你们要对大卫这样说，王不要什么聘礼，只要一百非利士人的阳皮，好在王的仇敌身上报仇。扫罗的意思要使大卫丧在非利士人的手里。
And Saul said, Then say to David, The king has no desire for any bride-price, but only for the private parts of a hundred Philistines so that the king may get the better of his haters. But it was in Saul's mind that David might come to his end by the hands of the Philistines.

扫罗的臣仆将这话告诉大卫，大卫就欢喜作王的女婿。日期还没有到，
And when his servants said these words to David, he was well pleased to be the son-in-law of the king. And the days were still not past.

大卫和跟随他的人起身前往，杀了二百非利士人，将阳皮满数交给王，为要作王的女婿。于是扫罗将女儿米甲给大卫为妻。
So David and his men got up and went, and put to death two hundred of the Philistines; and David took their private parts and gave the full number of them to the king, so that he might be the king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him his daughter Michal for his wife.

扫罗见耶和华与大卫同在，又知道女儿米甲爱大卫，
And it was clear to Saul that the Lord was with David; and he was loved by all Israel.

就更怕大卫，常作大卫的仇敌。
And Saul's fear of David became all the greater, and he went on hating him, day by day.

每逢非利士军长出来打仗，大卫比扫罗的臣仆作事精明，因此他的名被人尊重。
Then the rulers of the Philistines went out to war: and whenever they went out, David did more wisely than all the other servants of Saul, so that his name became greatly honoured.

扫罗对他儿子约拿单和众臣仆说，要杀大卫。扫罗的儿子约拿单却甚喜爱大卫。
And Saul gave orders to his son Jonathan and to all his servants to put David to death. But Saul's son Jonathan had great delight in David.

约拿单告诉大卫说，我父扫罗想要杀你，所以明日早晨你要小心，到一个僻静地方藏身。
And Jonathan said to David, Saul, my father, is purposing your death: so now, take care in the morning, and keep yourself safe in a secret place:

我就出到你所藏的田里，站在我父亲旁边与他谈论。我看他情形怎样，我必告诉你。
And I will go out and take my place by my father's side in the field near where you are; and I will get into talk with my father about you, and when I see how things are, I will give you word.

约拿单向他父亲扫罗替大卫说好话，说，王不可得罪王的仆人大卫。因为他未曾得罪你，他所行的都与你大有益处。
And Jonathan gave his father Saul a good account of David, and said to him, Let not the king do wrong against his servant, against David; because he has done you no wrong, and all his acts have had a good outcome for you:

他拚命杀那非利士人，耶和华为以色列众人大行拯救。那时你看见，甚是欢喜，现在为何无故要杀大卫，流无辜人的血，自己取罪呢？
For he put his life in danger and overcame the Philistine, and the Lord gave all Israel salvation: you saw it and were glad: why then are you sinning against him who has done no wrong, desiring the death of David without cause?

扫罗听了约拿单的话，就指着永生的耶和华起誓说，我必不杀他。
And Saul gave ear to the voice of Jonathan, and said with an oath, By the living Lord, he is not to be put to death.

约拿单叫大卫来，把这一切事告诉他，带他去见扫罗。他就仍然侍立在扫罗面前。
Then Jonathan sent for David and gave him word of all these things. And Jonathan took David to Saul, who kept him by his side as in the past.

此后又有争战的事。大卫出去与非利士人打仗，大大杀败他们，他们就在他面前逃跑。
And there was war again: and David went out fighting the Philistines, causing great destruction among them; and they went in flight before him.

从耶和华那里来的恶魔又降在扫罗身上（扫罗手里拿枪坐在屋里），大卫就用手弹琴。
And an evil spirit from the Lord came on Saul, when he was seated in his house with his spear in his hand; and David made music for him.

扫罗用枪想要刺透大卫，钉在墙上。他却躲开，扫罗的枪刺入墙内。当夜大卫逃走，躲避了。
And Saul would have sent his spear through him, pinning him to the wall, but he got away and the spear went into the wall: and that night David went in flight and got away.

扫罗打发人到大卫的房屋那里窥探他，要等到天亮杀他。大卫的妻米甲对他说，你今夜若不逃命，明日你要被杀。
Then in that night Saul sent men to David's house to keep watch on him so as to put him to death in the morning: and David's wife Michal said to him, If you do not go away to a safe place tonight you will be put to death in the morning.

于是米甲将大卫从窗户里缒下去。大卫就逃走，躲避了。
So Michal let David down through the window, and he went in flight and got away.

米甲把家中的神像放在床上，头枕在山羊毛装的枕头上，用被遮盖。
Then Michal took the image and put it in the bed, with a cushion of goat's hair at its head, and she put clothing over it.

扫罗打发人去捉拿大卫，米甲说，他病了。
And when Saul sent men to take David, she said, He is ill.

扫罗又打发人去看大卫，说，当连床将他抬来，我好杀他。
And Saul sent his men to see David, saying, Do not come back without him, take him in his bed, so that I may put him to death.

使者进去，看见床上有神像，头枕在山羊毛装的枕头上。
And when the men came in, there was the image in the bed, with the cushion of goat's hair at its head

扫罗对米甲说，你为什么这样欺哄我，放我仇敌逃走呢？米甲回答说，他对我说，你放我走，不然我要杀你。
And Saul said to Michal, why have you been false to me, letting my hater go and get safely away? And in answer Michal said to Saul, He said to me, Let me go, or I will put you to death.

大卫逃避，来到拉玛见撒母耳，将扫罗向他所行的事述说了一遍。他和撒母耳就往拿约去居住。
So David went in flight and got away and came to Ramah, to Samuel, and gave him an account of all Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and were living in Naioth.

有人告诉扫罗，说大卫在拉玛的拿约。
And word was given to Saul that David was at Naioth in Ramah.

扫罗打发人去捉拿大卫。去的人见有一班先知都受感说话，撒母耳站在其中监管他们。打发去的人也受神的灵感动说话。
And Saul sent men to take David; and when they saw the band of prophets at work, with Samuel in his place at their head, the spirit of God came on Saul's men, and they became like prophets.

有人将这事告诉扫罗，他又打发人去，他们也受感说话。扫罗第三次打发人去，他们也受感说话。
And Saul, having news of this, sent other men, who in the same way became like prophets. And a third time Saul sent men, and they like the others became like prophets.

然后扫罗自己往拉玛去，到了西沽的大井，问人说，撒母耳和大卫在哪里呢？有人说，在拉玛的拿约。
Then he himself went to Ramah, and came to the great water-spring in Secu; and questioning the people he said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, They are at Naioth in Ramah.

他就往拉玛的拿约去。神的灵也感动他，一面走一面说话，直到拉玛的拿约。
And he went on from there to Naioth in Ramah: and the spirit of God came on him, and he went on, acting like a prophet, till he came to Naioth in Ramah.

他就脱了衣服，在撒母耳面前受感说话，一昼一夜露体躺卧。因此有句俗语说，扫罗也列在先知中吗？
And he took off his clothing, acting like a prophet before Samuel, and falling down he was stretched out, without his clothing, all that day and all that night. This is the reason for the saying, Is even Saul among the prophets?

大卫从拉玛的拿约逃跑，来到约拿单那里，对他说，我作了什么。有什么罪孽呢？在你父亲面前犯了什么罪，他竟寻索我的性命呢？
And David went in flight from Naioth in Ramah and came to Jonathan and said, What have I done? What is my crime and my sin against your father that he is attempting to take my life?

约拿单回答说，断然不是。你必不至死。我父作事，无论大小，没有不叫我知道的。怎么独有这事隐瞒我呢？决不如此。
And he said to him, Far be the thought: you will not be put to death: see, my father does nothing, great or small, without giving me word of it: would he keep this secret from me? It is not so.

大卫又起誓说，你父亲准知我在你眼前蒙恩。他心里说，不如不叫约拿单知道，恐怕他愁烦。我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓，我离死不过一步。
But David took his oath again and said, Your father sees that I am dear to you; so he says to himself, Let Jonathan have no idea of this, for it will be a grief to him; but as the Lord is living, and as your soul is living, there is only a step between me and death.

约拿单对大卫说，你心里所求的，我必为你成就。
Then Jonathan said to David, Whatever your desire is, I will do it for you.

大卫对约拿单说，明日是初一，我当与王同席，求你容我去藏在田野，直到第三日晚上。
And David said to Jonathan, Tomorrow is the new moon, and I will not be seated with the king at his table: but let me go to a safe place in the country till the evening.

你父亲若见我不在席上，你就说，大卫切求我许他回本城伯利恒去，因为他全家在那里献年祭。
And if your father takes note of the fact that I am away, say, David made a request to me for himself that he might go to Beth-lehem, to his town: for it is the time when his family make their offering year by year.

你父亲若说好，仆人就平安了。他若发怒，你就知道他决意要害我。
If he says, It is well, your servant will be at peace: but if he is angry, then it will be clear to you that he has an evil purpose in mind against me.

求你施恩与仆人，因你在耶和华面前曾与仆人结盟。我若有罪，不如你自己杀我，何必将我交给你父亲呢？
So, then, be kind to your servant; for you have been united with your servant in an agreement made before the Lord: but if there is any wrongdoing in me, put me to death yourself; why take me to your father?

约拿单说，断无此事。我若知道我父亲决意害你，我岂不告诉你呢？
And Jonathan said, Do not have such a thought: for if I saw that my father was designing evil against you, would I not give you word of it?

大卫对约拿单说，你父亲若用厉言回答你，谁来告诉我呢？
Then David said to Jonathan, Who will give me word if your father gives you a rough answer?

约拿单对大卫说，你我且往田野去。二人就往田野去了。
And Jonathan said to David, Come, let us go out into the country. And the two of them went out together into the open country.

约拿单对大卫说，愿耶和华以色列的神为证。明日约在这时候，或第三日，我探我父亲的意思，若向你有好意，我岂不打发人告诉你吗？
And Jonathan said to David, May the Lord, the God of Israel, be witness; when I have had a chance of talking to my father, about this time tomorrow, if his feelings to David are good, will I not send and give you the news?

我父亲若有意害你，我不告诉你使你平平安安地走，愿耶和华重重地降罚与我。愿耶和华与你同在，如同从前与我父亲同在一样。
May the Lord's punishment be on Jonathan, if it is my father's pleasure to do you evil and I do not give you word of it and send you away so that you may go in peace: and may the Lord be with you, as he has been with my father.

你要照耶和华的慈爱恩待我，不但我活着的时候免我死亡，
And may you, while I am still living, O may you be kind to me, as the Lord is kind, and keep me from death!

就是我死后，耶和华从地上剪除你仇敌的时候，你也永不可向我家绝了恩惠。
And let not your mercy ever be cut off from my family, even when the Lord has sent destruction on all David's haters, cutting them off from the face of the earth.

于是约拿单与大卫家结盟，说，愿耶和华借大卫的仇敌追讨背约的罪。
And if it comes about that the name of Jonathan is cut off from the family of David, the Lord will make David responsible.

约拿单因爱大卫如同爱自己的性命，就使他再起誓。
And Jonathan again took an oath to David, because of his love for him: for David was as dear to him as his very soul.

约拿单对他说，明日是初一，你的座位空设，人必理会你不在那里。
Then Jonathan said to him, Tomorrow is the new moon: and it will be seen that you are not present, for there will be no one in your seat.

你等三日，就要速速下去，到你从前遇事所藏的地方，在以色磐石那里等候。
And on the third day it will be specially noted, and you will go to the place where you took cover when the other business was in hand, waiting by the hill over there.

我要向磐石旁边射三箭，如同射箭靶一样。
And on the third day I will send arrows from my bow against its side as if at a mark.

我要打发童子，说，去把箭找来。我若对童子说，箭在后头，把箭拿来，你就可以回来。我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你必平安无事。
And I will send my boy to have a look for the arrow. And if I say to him, See, the arrow is on this side of you; take it up! then you may come; for there is peace for you and no evil, by the living Lord.

我若对童子说，箭在前头，你就要去，因为是耶和华打发你去的。
But if I say to the boy, See, the arrow has gone past you: then go on your way, for the Lord has sent you away.

至于你我今日所说的话，有耶和华在你我中间为证，直到永远。
As for what you and I were talking of, the Lord is between you and me for ever.

大卫就去藏在田野。到了初一日，王坐席要吃饭。
So David went to a secret place in the country: and when the new moon came, the king took his place at the feast.

王照常坐在靠墙的位上，约拿单侍立，押尼珥坐在扫罗旁边，大卫的座位空设。
And the king took his seat, as at other times, by the wall: and Jonathan was in front, and Abner was seated by Saul's side, but there was no one in David's seat.

然而这日扫罗没有说什么，他想大卫遇事，偶染不洁，他必定是不洁。
But Saul said nothing that day, for his thought was, Something has taken place making him unclean; it is clear that he is not clean.

初二日大卫的座位还空设。扫罗问他儿子约拿单说，耶西的儿子为何昨日，今日没有来吃饭呢？
And on the day after the new moon, that is, the second day, there was still no one in David's seat: and Saul said to his son Jonathan, Why has the son of Jesse not come to the feast yesterday or today?

约拿单回答扫罗说，大卫切求我容他往伯利恒去。
And answering Saul, Jonathan said, He made a request to me that he might go to Beth-lehem,

他说，求你容我去，因为我家在城里有献祭的事。我长兄吩咐我去。如今我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你容我去见我的弟兄。所以大卫没有赴王的席。
Saying, Our family is making an offering in the town, and my brothers have given me orders to be there: so now, if I have grace in your eyes, let me go away and see my brothers. This is why he has not come to the king's table.

扫罗向约拿单发怒，对他说，你这顽梗背逆之妇人所生的，我岂不知道你喜悦耶西的儿子，自取羞辱，以至你母亲露体蒙羞吗？
Then Saul was moved to wrath against Jonathan, and he said to him, You son of an evil and uncontrolled woman, have I not seen how you have given your love to the son of Jesse, to your shame and the shame of your mother?

耶西的儿子若在世间活着，你和你的国位必站立不住。现在你要打发人去，将他捉拿交给我。他是该死的。
For while the son of Jesse is living on the earth, your position is unsafe and your kingdom is in danger. So make him come here to me, for it is certainly right for him to be put to death.

约拿单对父亲扫罗说，他为什么该死呢？他作了什么呢？
And Jonathan, answering his father Saul, said to him, Why is he to be put to death? What has he done?

扫罗向约拿单抡枪要刺他，约拿单就知道他父亲决意要杀大卫。
And Saul, pointing his spear at him, made an attempt to give him a wound: from which it was clear to Jonathan that his father's purpose was to put David to death.

于是约拿单气忿忿地从席上起来，在这初二日没有吃饭。他因见父亲羞辱大卫，就为大卫愁烦。
So Jonathan got up from the table, burning with wrath, and took no part in the feast the second day of the month, being full of grief for David because his father had put shame on him.

次日早晨，约拿单按着与大卫约会的时候出到田野，有一个童子跟随。
Now in the morning, Jonathan went out into the fields at the time he had said to David, and he had a little boy with him.

约拿单对童子说，你跑去，把我所射的箭找来。童子跑去，约拿单就把箭射在童子前头。
And he said to the boy, Go and get the arrow I let loose from my bow. And while the boy was running, he sent an arrow past him.

童子到了约拿单落箭之地，约拿单呼叫童子说，箭不是在你前头吗？
And when the boy came to the place where the arrow was, Jonathan, crying out after the boy, said, Has it not gone past you?

约拿单又呼叫童子说，速速地去，不要迟延。童子就拾起箭来，回到主人那里。
And Jonathan went on crying out after the boy, Be quick, do not keep waiting about, go quickly. And Jonathan's boy got the arrow and came back to his master.

童子却不知道这是什么意思，只有约拿单和大卫知道。
But the boy had no idea what was going on; only Jonathan and David had knowledge of it.

约拿单将弓箭交给童子，吩咐说，你拿到城里去。
And Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the boy, and said to him, Take these and go back to the town.

童子一去，大卫就从磐石的南边出来，俯伏在地，拜了三拜。二人亲嘴，彼此哭泣，大卫哭得更恸。
And when the boy had gone, David came from his secret place by the hill, and falling to the earth went down on his face three times: and they gave one another a kiss, weeping together, till David's grief was the greater.

约拿单对大卫说，我们二人曾指着耶和华的名起誓说，愿耶和华在你我中间，并你我后裔中间为证，直到永远。如今你平平安安地去吧。大卫就起身走了。约拿单也回城里去了。
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, for we two have taken an oath, in the name of the Lord, saying, The Lord will be between me and you, and between my seed and your seed for ever. Then David went away, and Jonathan went into the town.

大卫到了挪伯祭司亚希米勒那里，亚希米勒战战兢兢地出来迎接他，问他说，你为什么独自来，没有人跟随呢？
Then David came to Nob, to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was full of fear at meeting David, and said to him, Why are you by yourself, having no man with you?

大卫回答祭司亚希米勒说，王吩咐我一件事说，我差遣你委托你的这件事，不要使人知道。故此我已派定少年人在某处等候我。
And David said to Ahimelech the priest, The king has given me orders and has said to me, Say nothing to anyone about the business on which I am sending you and the orders I have given you: and a certain place has been fixed to which the young men are to go.

现在你手下有什么。求你给我五个饼或是别样的食物。
So now, if you have here five cakes of bread, give them into my hand, or whatever you have.

祭司对大卫说，我手下没有寻常的饼，只有圣饼。若少年人没有亲近妇人才可以给。
And the priest, answering David, said, I have no common bread here but there is holy bread; if only the young men have kept themselves from women.

大卫对祭司说，实在约有三日我们没有亲近妇人。我出来的时候，虽是寻常行路，少年人的器皿还是洁净的。何况今日不更是洁净吗？
And David in answer said to the priest, Certainly women have been kept from us; and as has been done before when I have gone out the arms of the young men were made holy, even though it was a common journey; how much more today will their arms be made holy.

祭司就拿圣饼给他。因为在那里没有别样饼，只有更换新饼，从耶和华面前撤下来的陈设饼。
So the priest gave him the holy bread: there was no other, only the holy bread which had been taken from before the Lord, so that new bread might be put in its place on the day when it was taken away.

当日有扫罗的一个臣子留在耶和华面前。他名叫多益，是以东人，作扫罗的司牧长。
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, kept back before the Lord; his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the strongest of Saul's runners.

大卫问亚希米勒说，你手下有枪有刀没有。因为王的事甚急，连刀剑器械我都没有带。
And David said to Ahimelech, Have you no sword or spear with you here? for I have come without my sword and other arms, because the king's business had to be done quickly.

祭司说，你在以拉谷杀非利士人歌利亚的那刀在这里，裹在布中，放在以弗得后边，你要就可以拿去。除此以外，再没有别的。大卫说，这刀没有可比的。求你给我。
And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you put to death in the valley of Elah, is here folded in a cloth at the back of the ephod: take that, if you will, for there is no other sword here. And David said, there is no other sword like that; give it to me.

那日大卫起来，躲避扫罗，逃到迦特王亚吉那里。
Then David got up and went in flight that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish, the king of Gath.

亚吉的臣仆对亚吉说，这不是以色列国王大卫吗？那里的妇女跳舞唱和，不是指着他说扫罗杀死千千，大卫杀死万万吗？
And the servants of Achish said to him, Is not this David, the king of the land? did they not make songs about him in their dances, saying, Saul has put to death thousands, and David tens of thousands?

大卫将这话放在心里，甚惧怕迦特王亚吉，
And David took these words to heart, fearing Achish, the king of Gath.

就在众人面前改变了寻常的举动，在他们手下假装疯癫，在城门的门扇上胡写乱画，使唾沫流在胡子上。
So changing his behaviour before them, he made it seem as if he was off his head, hammering on the doors of the town, and letting the water from his mouth go down his chin.

亚吉对臣仆说，你们看，这人是疯子。为什么带他到我这里来呢？
Then Achish said to his servants, Look! the man is clearly off his head; why have you let him come before me?

我岂缺少疯子，你们带这人来在我面前疯癫吗？这人岂可进我的家呢？
Are there not enough unbalanced men about me, that you have let this person come and do such tricks before me? is such a man to come into my house?

大卫就离开那里，逃到亚杜兰洞。他的弟兄和他父亲的全家听见了，就都下到他那里。
So David went away from there and took cover in a strong place at Adullam; and his brothers and all his father's people, hearing of it, went down to him there.

凡受窘迫的，欠债的，心里苦恼的都聚集到大卫那里。大卫就作他们的头目，跟随他的约有四百人。
And everyone who was in trouble, and everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was bitter in soul, came together to him, and he became captain over them: about four hundred men were joined to him.

大卫从那里往摩押的米斯巴去，对摩押王说，求你容我父母搬来，住在你们这里，等我知道神要为我怎样行。
And from there David went to Mizpeh in the land of Moab: and he said to the king of Moab, Let my father and mother come and make their living-place with you till it is clear to me what God will do for me.

大卫领他父母到摩押王面前。大卫住山寨多少日子，他父母也住摩押王那里多少日子。
And he took them to the king of Moab and they went on living with him while David was in his safe place.

先知迦得对大卫说，你不要住在山寨，要往犹大地去。大卫就离开那里，进入哈列的树林。
And the prophet Gad said to David, Do not go on living in this place but go into the land of Judah. Then David went away and came to the woodland of Hereth.

扫罗在基比亚的拉玛，坐在垂丝柳树下，手里拿着枪，众臣仆侍立在左右。扫罗听见大卫和跟随他的人在何处，
And news was given to Saul that David had been seen, and the men who were with him: now Saul was in Gibeah, seated under the tree in the high place, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were in their places before him.

就对左右侍立的臣仆说，便雅悯人哪，你们要听我的话。耶西的儿子能将田地和葡萄园赐给你们各人吗？能立你们各人作千夫长百夫长吗？
Then Saul said to his servants who were there about him, Give ear now, you Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give to every one of you fields and vine-gardens, will he make you all captains of hundreds and captains of thousands;

你们竟都结党害我。我的儿子与耶西的儿子结盟的时候，无人告诉我。我的儿子挑唆我的臣子谋害我，就如今日的光景，也无人告诉我，为我忧虑。
That all of you have made designs against me, and not one of you gave me word when my son made an agreement with the son of Jesse, and not one of you has pity for me or has made my eyes open to the fact that my servant has been moved by my son against me, as at this day?

那时以东人多益站在扫罗的臣仆中，对他说，我曾看见耶西的儿子到了挪伯，亚希突的儿子亚希米勒那里。
Then Doeg, the Edomite, who was by the side of the servants of Saul, in answer said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub.

亚希米勒为他求问耶和华，又给他食物，并给他杀非利士人歌利亚的刀。
And he got directions from the Lord for him, and gave him food, and put in his hand the sword of Goliath the Philistine.

王就打发人将祭司亚希突的儿子亚希米勒和他父亲的全家，就是住挪伯的祭司都召了来。他们就来见王。
Then the king sent for Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and for all the men of his father's family who were priests in Nob: and they all came to the king.

扫罗说，亚希突的儿子，要听我的话。他回答说，主阿，我在这里。
And Saul said, Give ear now, O son of Ahitub. And answering he said, Here I am, my lord.

扫罗对他说，你为什么与耶西的儿子结党害我，将食物和刀给他，又为他求问神，使他起来谋害我，就如今日的光景。
And Saul said to him, Why have you made designs against me with the son of Jesse, giving him food and a sword and getting directions from the Lord for him, and helping him to take up arms against me, and to be on the watch to make a secret attack on me as he is doing now?

亚希米勒回答王说，王的臣仆中有谁比大卫忠心呢？他是王的女婿，又是王的参谋，并且在王家中是尊贵的。
Then Ahimelech answering said to the king, Who among all your servants is so true to you as David, who is the king's son-in-law, and is a captain of your armed men, and has a place of honour in your house?

我岂是从今日才为他求问神呢？断不是这样。王不要将罪归我和我父的全家。因为这事，无论大小，仆人都不知道。
Is this the first time I have got directions from God for him? Far be the thought! let the king make no such statement against his servant or my father's family, for your servant has no knowledge, great or small, of this thing.

王说，亚希米勒阿，你和你父的全家都是该死的。
And the king said, You will certainly be put to death, Ahimelech, you and all your father's family.

王就吩咐左右的侍卫说，你们去杀耶和华的祭司。因为他们帮助大卫，又知道大卫逃跑，竟没有告诉我。扫罗的臣子却不肯伸手杀耶和华的祭司。
Then the king said to the runners who were waiting near him, Put the priests of the Lord to death; because they are on David's side, and having knowledge of his flight, did not give me word of it. But the king's servants would not put out their hands to make an attack on the Lord's priests.

王吩咐多益说，你去杀祭司吧。以东人多益就去杀祭司，那日杀了穿细麻布以弗得的八十五人。
Then the king said to Doeg, You are to put the priests to death. And Doeg the Edomite, turning on the priests and attacking them, put to death that day eighty-five men who took up the ephod.

又用刀将祭司城挪伯中的男女，孩童，吃奶的，和牛，羊，驴尽都杀灭。
And Nob, the town of the priests, he put to the sword, all the men and women, children and babies at the breast, and oxen and asses and sheep.

亚希突的儿子亚希米勒有一个儿子，名叫亚比亚他，逃到大卫那里。
And Abiathar, one of the sons of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, got away and went in flight after David;

亚比亚他将扫罗杀耶和华祭司的事告诉大卫。
And gave him the news of how Saul had put to death the Lord's priests.

大卫对亚比亚他说，那日我见以东人多益在那里，就知道他必告诉扫罗。你父的全家丧命，都是因我的缘故。
And David said to Abiathar, I was certain that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would take the news to Saul: I am responsible for the lives of all your father's family.

你可以住在我这里，不要惧怕。因为寻索你命的就是寻索我的命。你在我这里可得保全。
Keep here with me and have no fear; for he who has designs on my life has designs on yours: but with me you will be safe.

有人告诉大卫说，非利士人攻击基伊拉，抢夺禾场。
And they sent word to David, saying, The Philistines are fighting against Keilah and taking the grain from the grain-floors.

所以大卫求问耶和华说，我去攻打那些非利士人可以不可以。耶和华对大卫说，你可以去攻打非利士人，拯救基伊拉。
So David, questioning the Lord, said, Am I to go and make an attack on these Philistines? And the Lord said to David, Go and make an attack on the Philistines so that Keilah may be kept from falling into their hands.

跟随大卫的人对他说，我们在犹大地这里尚且惧怕，何况往基伊拉去攻打非利士人的军旅呢？
And David's men said to him, Even here in Judah we are full of fear: how much more then if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?

大卫又求问耶和华。耶和华回答说，你起身下基伊拉去，我必将非利士人交在你手里。
Then David put the question to the Lord again, and the Lord answering said, Up! go down to Keilah; for I will give the Philistines into your hands.

大卫和跟随他的人往基伊拉去，与非利士人打仗，大大杀败他们，又夺获他们的牲畜。这样，大卫救了基伊拉的居民。
So David and his men went to Keilah, and had a fight with the Philistines, and took away their cattle, and put them to the sword with great destruction. So David was the saviour of the people of Keilah.

亚希米勒的儿子亚比亚他逃到基伊拉见大卫的时候，手里拿着以弗得。
Now when Abiathar, the son of Ahimelech, went in flight to David, he came down to Keilah with the ephod in his hand.

有人告诉扫罗说，大卫到了基伊拉。扫罗说，他进了有门有闩的城，困闭在里头。这是神将他交在我手里了。
And news was given to Saul that David had come to Keilah. And Saul said, Now God has given him into my hands; for by going into a walled town with locked doors, he has let himself be shut in.

于是扫罗招聚众民，要下去攻打基伊拉城，围困大卫和跟随他的人。
And Saul sent for all the people to come to the fight, and go down to Keilah to make an attack on David and his men.

大卫知道扫罗设计谋害他，就对祭司亚比亚他说，将以弗得拿过来。
And it was clear to David that Saul had evil designs against him, and he said to Abiathar the priest, Come here with the ephod.

大卫祷告说，耶和华以色列的神阿，你仆人听真了扫罗要往基伊拉来，为我的缘故灭城。
Then David said, O Lord, the God of Israel, news has been given to your servant that it is Saul's purpose to come to Keilah and send destruction on the town because of me.

基伊拉人将我交在扫罗手里不交。扫罗照着你仆人所听的话下来不下来。耶和华以色列的神阿，求你指示仆人。耶和华说，扫罗必下来。
And now, is it true, as they have said to me, that Saul is coming? O Lord, the God of Israel, give ear to your servant, and say if these things are so. And the Lord said, He is coming down.

大卫又说，基伊拉人将我和跟随我的人交在扫罗手里不交。耶和华说，必交出来。
Then David said, Will the men of Keilah give me and my men up to Saul? and the Lord said, They will give you up.

大卫和跟随他的约有六百人，就起身出了基伊拉，往他们所能往的地方去。有人告诉扫罗，大卫离开基伊拉逃走。于是扫罗不出来了。
Then David and his men, about six hundred of them, went out of Keilah, and got away wherever they were able to go. And Saul, hearing that David had got away from Keilah, did not go there.

大卫住在旷野的山寨里，常在西弗旷野的山地。扫罗天天寻索大卫，神却不将大卫交在他手里。
And David kept in the waste land, in safe places, waiting in the hill-country in the waste land of Ziph. And Saul was searching for him every day, but God did not give him up into his hands.

大卫知道扫罗出来寻索他的命。那时，他住在西弗旷野的树林里。
And David was full of fear, in the knowledge that Saul had come out to take his life; and David was in the waste land of Ziph, in Horesh.

扫罗的儿子约拿单起身，往那树林里去见大卫，使他倚靠神得以坚固，
And Saul's son Jonathan went to David in Horesh, and made his hands strong in God;

对他说，不要惧怕。我父扫罗的手必不加害于你。你必作以色列的王，我也作你的宰相。这事我父扫罗知道了。
And said to him, Have no fear, for Saul my father will not get you into his power; and you will be king of Israel, and I will be by your side, and my father Saul is certain of this.

于是二人在耶和华面前立约。大卫仍住在树林里，约拿单回家去了。
And the two of them made an agreement before the Lord: and David went on living in Horesh, and Jonathan went back to his house.

西弗人上到基比亚见扫罗，说，大卫不是在我们那里的树林里山寨中，旷野南边的哈基拉山藏着吗？
Then the Ziphites came up to Gibeah to see Saul, and said, Is not David living secretly among us in the strong places in Horesh, in the hill of Hachilah to the south of the waste land?

王阿，请你随你的心愿下来，我们必亲自将他交在王的手里。
So now, O king, have your soul's desire and come down, and we, for our part, will give him up into the king's hands.

扫罗说，愿耶和华赐福与你们，因你们顾恤我。
And Saul said, The Lord's blessing will be yours, for you have had pity on me.

请你们回去，再确实查明他的住处和行踪，是谁看见他在那里，因为我听见人说他甚狡猾。
Go now, and take more steps, and see where he is living: for they say that he is expert in deceit.

所以要看准他藏匿的地方，回来据实地告诉我，我就与你们同去。他若在犹大的境内，我必从千门万户中搜出他来。
So take care to get knowledge of all the secret places where he is taking cover, and be certain to come back to me, and I will go with you: and without doubt, if he is anywhere in the land, I will get him, among all the families of Judah.

西弗人就起身，在扫罗以先往西弗去。大卫和跟随他的人却在玛云旷野南边的亚拉巴。
And they went back and came to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the waste land of Maon, in the dry land south of the waste land.

扫罗和跟随他的人去寻找大卫。有人告诉大卫，他就下到磐石，住在玛云的旷野。扫罗听见，便在玛云的旷野追赶大卫。
And Saul and his men went in search of him. And David had word of it, so he came down to the rock in the waste land of Maon. And Saul, hearing of this, went after David into the waste land of Maon.

扫罗在山这边走，大卫和跟随他的人在山那边走。大卫急忙躲避扫罗。因为扫罗和跟随他的人，四面围住大卫和跟随他的人，要拿获他们。
And Saul and his men went on one side of the mountain, and David and his men went on the other: and David's purpose was to get away as quickly as possible, for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men were making a circle round David and his men in order to take them.

忽有使者来报告扫罗说，非利士人犯境抢掠，请王快快回去。
But a man came to Saul saying, Be quick and come; for the Philistines have made an attack on the land.

于是扫罗不追赶大卫，回去攻打非利士人。因此那地方名叫西拉哈玛希罗结。
So turning back from going after David, Saul went against the Philistines: so that place was named Sela-hammah-lekoth.

大卫从那里上去，住在隐基底的山寨里。
And from there, David went up and took cover in the safe place of En-gedi.

扫罗追赶非利士人回来，有人告诉他说，大卫在隐基底的旷野。
Now when Saul came back from fighting the Philistines, news was given him that David was in the waste land of En-gedi.

扫罗就从以色列人中挑选三千精兵，率领他们往野羊的磐石去，寻索大卫和跟随他的人。
Then Saul took three thousand of the best men out of all Israel, and went in search of David and his men on the rocks of the mountain goats.

到了路旁的羊圈，在那里有洞，扫罗进去大解。大卫和跟随他的人正藏在洞里的深处。
And on the way he came to a place where sheep were kept, where there was a hollow in the rock; and Saul went in for a private purpose. Now David and his men were in the deepest part of the hollow.

跟随的人对大卫说，耶和华曾应许你说，我要将你的仇敌交在你手里，你可以任意待他。如今时候到了。大卫就起来，悄悄地割下扫罗外袍的衣襟。
And David's men said to him, Now is the time when the Lord says to you, I will give up your hater into your hands to do with him whatever seems good to you. Then David, getting up, took the skirt of Saul's robe in his hand, cutting off the end of it without his knowledge.

随后大卫心中自责，因为割下扫罗的衣襟。
And later, David was full of regret for cutting off Saul's skirt.

对跟随他的人说，我的主乃是耶和华的受膏者，我在耶和华面前万不敢伸手害他，因他是耶和华的受膏者。
And David said to his men, Before the Lord, never let it be said that my hand was lifted up against my lord, the man of the Lord's selection, for the Lord's holy oil has been put on him.

大卫用这话拦住跟随他的人，不容他们起来害扫罗。扫罗起来，从洞里出去行路。
So with these words David kept his servants back, and did not let them make an attack on Saul. And Saul got up and went on his way.

随后大卫也起来，从洞里出去，呼叫扫罗说，我主，我王。扫罗回头观看，大卫就屈身，脸伏于地下拜。
And after that David came out of the hollow rock, and crying after Saul said, My lord the king. And when Saul gave a look back, David went down on his face and gave him honour.

大卫对扫罗说，你为何听信人的谗言，说大卫想要害你呢？
And David said to Saul, Why do you give any attention to those who say that it is my desire to do you wrong?

今日你亲眼看见在洞中，耶和华将你交在我手里。有人叫我杀你，我却爱惜你，说，我不敢伸手害我的主，因为他是耶和华的受膏者。
Look! you have seen today how the Lord gave you up into my hands even now in the hollow of the rocks: and some would have had me put you to death, but I had pity on you: for I said, Never will my hand be lifted up against my lord, who has been marked with the holy oil.

我父阿，看看你外袍的衣襟在我手中。我割下你的衣襟，没有杀你。你由此可以知道我没有恶意叛逆你。你虽然猎取我的命，我却没有得罪你。
And see, my father, see the skirt of your robe in my hand: for the fact that I took off the skirt of your robe and did not put you to death is witness that I have no evil purpose, and I have done you no wrong, though you are waiting for my life to take it.

愿耶和华在你我中间判断是非，在你身上为我伸冤，我却不亲手加害于你。
May the Lord be judge between me and you, and may the Lord give me my rights against you, but my hand will never be lifted up against you.

古人有句俗语说，恶事出于恶人。我却不亲手加害于你。
There is an old saying, From the evil-doer comes evil: but my hand will never be lifted up against you.

以色列王出来要寻找谁呢？追赶谁呢？不过追赶一条死狗，一个虼蚤就是了。
After whom has the king of Israel come out? for whom are you searching? for a dead dog, an insect.

愿耶和华在你我中间施行审判，断定是非，并且鉴察，为我伸冤，救我脱离你的手。
So let the Lord be judge, and give a decision between me and you, and see and give support to my cause, and keep me from falling into your hands.

大卫向扫罗说完这话，扫罗说，我儿大卫，这是你的声音吗？就放声大哭，
Now when David had said these words to Saul, Saul said, Is this your voice, David, my son? And Saul was overcome with weeping.

对大卫说，你比我公义。因为你以善待我，我却以恶待你。
And he said to David, You are right and I am wrong: for you have given me back good, but I have given you evil.

你今日显明是以善待我。因为耶和华将我交在你手里，你却没有杀我。
And you have made clear to me how good you have been to me today: because, when the Lord gave me up into your hands, you did not put me to death.

人若遇见仇敌，岂肯放他平安无事地去呢？愿耶和华因你今日向我所行的，以善报你。
If a man comes across his hater, will he let him get away safe? so may you be rewarded by the Lord for what you have done for me today.

我也知道你必要作王，以色列的国必坚立在你手里。
And now I am certain that you will be king, and that the kingdom of Israel will be made strong under your authority.

现在你要指着耶和华向我起誓，不剪除我的后裔，在我父家不灭没我的名。
So give me your oath by the Lord, that you will not put an end to my seed after me or let my name be cut off from my father's family.

于是大卫向扫罗起誓，扫罗就回家去。大卫和跟随他的人上山寨去了。
And David gave Saul his oath. And Saul went back to his house; but David and his men went up to their safe place.

撒母耳死了，以色列众人聚集，为他哀哭，将他葬在拉玛他自己的坟墓里（坟墓原文作房屋）。大卫起身，下到巴兰的旷野。
And death came to Samuel; and all Israel came together, weeping for him, and put his body in its resting-place in his house at Ramah. Then David went down to the waste land of Maon.

在玛云有一个人，他的产业在迦密，是一个大富户，有三千绵羊，一千山羊。他正在迦密剪羊毛。
Now there was a man in Maon whose business was in Carmel; he was a great man and had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats: and he was cutting the wool of his sheep in Carmel.

那人名叫拿八，是迦勒族的人。他的妻名叫亚比该，是聪明俊美的妇人。拿八为人刚愎凶恶。
Now this man was named Nabal, and his wife's name was Abigail: she was a woman of good sense and pleasing looks: but the man was cruel and evil in his ways; he was of the family of Caleb.

大卫在旷野听见说拿八剪羊毛，
And David had word in the waste land that Nabal was cutting the wool of his sheep.

大卫就打发十个仆人，吩咐他们说，你们上迦密去见拿八，提我的名问他安。
And David sent ten young men, and said to them, Go up to Carmel and go to Nabal, and say kind words to him in my name;

要对那富户如此说，愿你平安，愿你家平安，愿你一切所有的都平安。
And say this to my brother, May all be well for you: peace be to you and your house and all you have.

现在我听说有人为你剪羊毛，你的牧人在迦密的时候和我们在一处，我们没有欺负他们，他们也未曾失落什么。
I have had word that you have wool-cutters: now the keepers of your sheep have been with us, and we have done them no evil, and taken nothing of theirs while they were in Carmel.

可以问你的仆人，他们必告诉你。所以愿我的仆人在你眼前蒙恩，因为是在好日子来的。求你随手取点赐与仆人和你儿子大卫。
If your young men are questioned they will say the same thing. So now, let my young men have grace in your eyes, for we are come at a good time; please give anything you may have by you to your servants and to your son David.

大卫的仆人到了，将这话提大卫的名都告诉了拿八，就住了口。
And when David's young men came, they said all this to Nabal, in David's name, and said nothing more.

拿八回答大卫的仆人说，大卫是谁。耶西的儿子是谁。近来悖逆主人奔逃的仆人甚多，
And Nabal gave them his answer and said, Who is David? who is the son of Jesse? there are a number of servants in these days running away from their masters.

我岂可将饮食和为我剪羊毛人所宰的肉给我不知道从哪里来的人呢？
Am I to take my bread and my wine and the meat I have got ready for my wool-cutters and give it to men coming from I have no idea where?

大卫的仆人就转身从原路回去，照这话告诉大卫。
So David's young men, turning away, went back and gave him an account of everything he had said.

大卫向跟随他的人说，你们各人都要带上刀。众人就都带上刀，大卫也带上刀。跟随大卫上去的约有四百人，留下二百人看守器具。
And David said to his men, Put on your swords, every one of you. And every man put on his sword; and David did the same; and about four hundred men went up with David, and two hundred kept watch over their goods.

有拿八的一个仆人告诉拿八的妻亚比该说，大卫从旷野打发使者来问我主人的安，主人却辱骂他们。
But one of the young men said to Nabal's wife Abigail, David sent men from the waste land to say kind words to our master, and he gave them a rough answer.

但是那些人待我们甚好。我们在田野与他们来往的时候，没有受他们的欺负，也未曾失落什么。
But these men have been very good to us; they did us no wrong and nothing of ours was touched while we were with them in the fields:

我们在他们那里牧羊的时候，他们昼夜作我们的保障。
But day and night they were like a wall round us while we were with them, looking after the sheep.

所以你当筹划，看怎样行才好。不然，祸患定要临到我主人和他全家。他性情凶暴，无人敢与他说话。
So now, give thought to what you are going to do; for evil is in store for our master and all his house: for he is such a good-for-nothing person that it is not possible to say anything to him.

亚比该急忙将二百饼，两皮袋酒，五只收拾好了的羊，五细亚烘好了的穗子，一百葡萄饼，二百无花果饼，都驮在驴上，
Then Abigail quickly took two hundred cakes of bread and two skins full of wine and five sheep ready for cooking and five measures of dry grain and a hundred parcels of dry grapes and two hundred cakes of figs, and put them on asses.

对仆人说，你们前头走，我随着你们去。这事她却没有告诉丈夫拿八。
And she said to her young men, Go on in front of me and I will come after you. But she said nothing to her husband Nabal.

亚比该骑着驴，正下山坡，见大卫和跟随他的人从对面下来，亚比该就迎接他们。
Now while she was going down under cover of the mountain on her ass, David and his men came down against her, and suddenly she came face to face with them.

大卫曾说，我在旷野为那人看守所有的，以致他一样不失落，实在是徒然了。他向我以恶报善。
Now David had said, What was the use of my taking care of this man's goods in the waste land, so that there was no loss of anything which was his? he has only given me back evil for good.

凡属拿八的男丁，我若留一个到明日早晨，愿神重重降罚与我。
May God's punishment be on David, if when morning comes there is so much as one male of his people still living.

亚比该见大卫，便急忙下驴，在大卫面前脸伏于地叩拜，
And when Abigail saw David, she quickly got off her ass, falling down on her face before him.

俯伏在大卫的脚前，说，我主阿，愿这罪归我。求你容婢女向你进言，更求你听婢女的话。
And falling at his feet she said, May the wrong be on me, my lord, on me: let your servant say a word to you, and give ear to the words of your servant.

我主不要理这坏人拿八，他的性情与他的名相称。他名叫拿八（就是愚顽的意思），他为人果然愚顽。但我主所打发的仆人，婢女并没有看见。
Let my lord give no attention to Nabal, that good-for-nothing: for as his name is, so is he, a man without sense: but I, your servant, did not see the young men whom my lord sent.

我主阿，耶和华既然阻止你亲手报仇，取流血的罪，所以我指着永生的耶和华，又敢在你面前起誓说，愿你的仇敌和谋害你的人都像拿八一样。
So now, my lord, by the living God and by your living soul, seeing that the Lord has kept you from the crime of blood and from taking into your hands the punishment for your wrongs, may all your haters, and those who would do evil to my lord, be like Nabal.

如今求你将婢女送来的礼物给跟随你的仆人。
And let this offering, which your servant gives to my lord, be given to the young men who are with my lord.

求你饶恕婢女的罪过。耶和华必为我主建立坚固的家，因我主为耶和华争战。并且在你平生的日子查不出有什么过来。
And may the sin of your servant have forgiveness: for the Lord will certainly make your family strong, because my lord is fighting in the Lord's war; and no evil will be seen in you all your days.

虽有人起来追逼你，寻索你的性命，你的性命却在耶和华你的神那里蒙保护，如包裹宝器一样。你仇敌的性命，耶和华必抛去，如用机弦甩石一样。
And though a man has taken up arms against you, putting your life in danger, still the soul of my lord will be kept safe among the band of the living with the Lord your God; and the souls of those who are against you he will send violently away from him, like stones from a bag.

我主现在若不亲手报仇流无辜人的血，到了耶和华照所应许你的话赐福与你，立你作以色列的王，那时我主必不至心里不安，觉得良心有亏。耶和华赐福与我主的时候，求你记念婢女。
And when the Lord has done for my lord all those good things which he has said he will do for you, and has made you a ruler over Israel;


Then you will have no cause for grief, and my lord's heart will not be troubled because you have taken life without cause and have yourself given punishment for your wrongs: and when the Lord has been good to you, then give a thought to your servant.

大卫对亚比该说，耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的，因为他今日使你来迎接我。
And David said to Abigail, May the Lord, the God of Israel, be praised, who sent you to me today:

你和你的见识也当称赞。因为你今日拦阻我亲手报仇，流人的血。
A blessing on your good sense and on you, who have kept me today from the crime of blood and from taking into my hands the punishment for my wrongs.

我指着阻止我加害于你的耶和华以色列永生的神起誓，你若不速速地来迎接我，到明日早晨，凡属拿八的男丁必定不留一个。
For truly, by the living Lord, the God of Israel, who has kept me from doing you evil, if you had not been so quick in coming to me and meeting me, by dawn there would not have been in Nabal's house so much as one male living.

大卫受了亚比该送来的礼物，就对她说，我听了你的话，准了你的情面，你可以平平安安地回家吧。
Then David took from her hands her offering: and he said to her, Go back to your house in peace; see, I have given ear to your voice, and taken your offering with respect.

亚比该到拿八那里，见他在家里设摆筵席，如同王的筵席。拿八快乐大醉。亚比该无论大小事都没有告诉他，就等到次日早晨。
And Abigail went back to Nabal; and he was feasting in his house like a king; and Nabal's heart was full of joy, for he had taken much wine; so she said nothing to him till dawn came.

到了早晨，拿八醒了酒，他的妻将这些事都告诉他，他就魂不附体，身僵如石头一般。
And in the morning, when the effect of the wine was gone, Nabal's wife gave him an account of all these things, and all the heart went out of him, and he became like stone.

过了十天，耶和华击打拿八，他就死了。
And about ten days after, the Lord sent disease on Nabal and death came to him.

大卫听见拿八死了，就说，应当称颂耶和华，因他伸了拿八羞辱我的冤，又阻止仆人行恶。也使拿八的恶归到拿八的头上。于是大卫打发人去，与亚比该说，要娶她为妻。
And David, hearing that Nabal was dead, said, May the Lord be praised, who has taken up my cause against Nabal for the shame which he put on me, and has kept back his servant from evil, and has sent on Nabal's head the reward of his evil-doing. And David sent word to Abigail, desiring to take her as his wife.

大卫的仆人到了迦密见亚比该，对她说，大卫打发我们来见你，想要娶你为妻。
And when David's servants came to Carmel, to Abigail, they said to her, David has sent us to you to take you to him as his wife.

亚比该就起来，俯伏在地，说，我情愿作婢女，洗我主仆人的脚。
And she got up, and going down on her face to the earth, said, See, I am ready to be a servant-girl, washing the feet of the servants of my lord.

亚比该立刻起身，骑上驴，带着五个使女，跟从大卫的使者去了，就作了大卫的妻。
Then Abigail got up quickly and went on her ass, with five of her young women, after the men whom David had sent; and she became David's wife.

大卫先娶了耶斯列人亚希暖，她们二人都作了他的妻。
And David had taken Ahinoam of Jezreel, to be his wife; these two were his wives.

扫罗已将他的女儿米甲，就是大卫的妻，给了迦琳人拉亿的儿子帕提为妻。
Now Saul had given his daughter Michal, David's wife, to Palti the son of Laish of Gallim.

西弗人到基比亚见扫罗，说，大卫不是在旷野前的哈基拉山藏着吗？
And the Ziphites came to Saul at Gibeah, and said, Is not David waiting secretly near us in the hill of Hachilah, before the waste land?

扫罗就起身，带领以色列人中挑选的三千精兵下到西弗的旷野，要在那里寻索大卫。
Then Saul went down to the waste land of Ziph, taking with him three thousand of the best men of Israel, to make search for David in the waste land of Ziph.

扫罗在旷野前的哈基拉山，在道路上安营。大卫住在旷野，听说扫罗到旷野来追寻他，
And Saul put up his tents on the hill of Hachilah, which is in front of the waste land on the road. But David was in the waste land, and he saw that Saul was coming after him.

就打发人去探听，便知道扫罗果然来到。
And so David sent out watchers, and got word from them that Saul was certainly coming.

大卫起来，到扫罗安营的地方，看见扫罗和他的元帅尼珥的儿子押尼珥睡卧之处。扫罗睡在辎重营里，百姓安营在他周围。
And David got up and came to the place where Saul's tents were: and David had a view of the place where Saul was sleeping with Abner, the son of Ner, the captain of his army: and Saul was sleeping inside the ring of carts, and the tents of the people were all round him.

大卫对赫人亚希米勒和洗鲁雅的儿子约押的兄弟亚比筛说，谁同我下到扫罗营里去。亚比筛说，我同你下去。
Then David said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, Who will go down with me to the tents of Saul? And Abishai said, I will go down with you.

于是大卫和亚比筛夜间到了百姓那里，见扫罗睡在辎重营里。他的枪在头旁，插在地上。押尼珥和百姓睡在他周围。
So David and Abishai came down to the army by night: and Saul was sleeping inside the ring of carts with his spear planted in the earth by his head: and Abner and the people were sleeping round him.

亚比筛对大卫说，现在神将你的仇敌交在你手里，求你容我拿枪将他刺透在地，一刺就成，不用再刺。
Then Abishai said to David, God has given up your hater into your hands today; now let me give him one blow through to the earth with his spear, and there will be no need to give him a second.

大卫对亚比筛说，不可害死他。有谁伸手害耶和华的受膏者而无罪呢？
And David said to Abishai Do not put him to death; for who, without sin, may put out his hand against the man on whom the Lord has put the holy oil?

大卫又说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，他或被耶和华击打，或是死期到了，或是出战阵亡。
And David said, By the living Lord, the Lord will send destruction on him; the natural day of his death will come, or he will go into the fight and come to his end.

我在耶和华面前，万不敢伸手害耶和华的受膏者。现在你可以将他头旁的枪和水瓶拿来，我们就走。
Never will my hand be stretched out against the man marked with the holy oil; but take the spear which is by his head and the vessel of water, and let us go.

大卫从扫罗的头旁拿了枪和水瓶，二人就走了，没有人看见，没有人知道，也没有人醒起，都睡着了，因为耶和华使他们沉沉地睡了。
So David took the spear and the vessel of water from Saul's head; and they got away without any man seeing them, or being conscious of their coming, or awaking; for they were all sleeping because a deep sleep from the Lord had come on them.

大卫过到那边去，远远地站在山顶上，与他们相离甚远。
Then David went over to the other side, and took his place on the top of a mountain some distance away, with a great space between them;

大卫呼叫百姓和尼珥的儿子押尼珥说，押尼珥阿，你为何不答应呢？押尼珥说，你是谁。竟敢呼叫王呢？
And crying out to the people and to Abner, the son of Ner, David said, Have you no answer to give, Abner? Then Abner said, Who is that crying out to the king?

大卫对押尼珥说，你不是个勇士吗？以色列中谁能比你呢？民中有人进来要害死王你的主，你为何没有保护王你的主呢？
And David said to Abner, Are you not a man of war? is there any other like you in Israel? why then have you not kept watch over your lord the king? for one of the people came in to put the king your lord to death.

你这样是不好的。我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你们都是该死的。因为没有保护你们的主，就是耶和华的受膏者。现在你看看王头旁的枪和水瓶在哪里。
What you have done is not good. By the living Lord, death is the right fate for you, because you have not kept watch over your lord, the man on whom the Lord has put the holy oil. Now see, where is the king's spear, and the vessel of water which was by his head?

扫罗听出是大卫的声音，就说，我儿大卫，这是你的声音吗？大卫说，主我的王阿，是我的声音。
And Saul, conscious that the voice was David's, said, Is that your voice, David, my son? And David said, It is my voice, O my lord king.

又说，我作了什么。我手里有什么恶事。我主竟追赶仆人呢？
And he said, Why does my lord go armed against his servant? what have I done? or what evil is there in me?

求我主我王听仆人的话，若是耶和华激发你攻击我，愿耶和华收纳祭物。若是人激发你，愿他在耶和华面前受咒诅。因为他现今赶逐我，不容我在耶和华的产业上有分，说，你去事奉别神吧。
Let my lord the king give ear now to the words of his servant. If it is the Lord who is moving you against me, let him take an offering: but if it is the children of men, may they be cursed before the Lord, for driving me out today and keeping me from my place in the heritage of the Lord, saying, Go, be the servant of other gods.

现在求王不要使我的血流在离耶和华远的地方。以色列王出来是寻找一个虼蚤，如同人在山上猎取一个鹧鸪一般。
Then do not let my blood be drained out on the earth away from the face of the Lord: for the king of Israel has come out to take my life, like one going after birds in the mountains.

扫罗说，我有罪了。我儿大卫，你可以回来，因你今日看我的性命为宝贵。我必不再加害于你。我是糊涂人，大大错了。
Then Saul said, I have done wrong: come back to me, David my son: I will do you no more wrong, because my life was dear to you today truly, I have been foolish and my error is very great.

大卫说，王的枪在这里，可以吩咐一个仆人过来拿去。
Then David said, Here is the king's spear! let one of the young men come over and get it.

今日耶和华将王交在我手里，我却不肯伸手害耶和华的受膏者。耶和华必照各人的公义诚实报应他。
And the Lord will give to every man the reward of his righteousness and his faith: because the Lord gave you into my hands today, and I would not put out my hand against the man who has been marked with the holy oil.

我今日重看你的性命，愿耶和华也重看我的性命，并且拯救我脱离一切患难。
And so, as your life was dear to me today, may my life be dear to the Lord, and may he make me free from all my troubles.

扫罗对大卫说，我儿大卫，愿你得福。你必作大事，也必得胜。于是大卫起行，扫罗回他的本处去了。
Then Saul said to David, May a blessing be on you, David, my son; you will do great things and without doubt you will overcome. Then David went on his way, and Saul went back to his place.

大卫心里说，必有一日我死在扫罗手里，不如逃奔非利士地去。扫罗见我不在以色列的境内，就必绝望，不再寻索我。这样我可以脱离他的手。
And David said to himself, Some day death will come to me by the hand of Saul: the only thing for me to do is to get away into the land of the Philistines; then Saul will give up hope of taking me in any part of the land of Israel: and so I may be able to get away from him.

于是大卫起身，和跟随他的六百人投奔迦特王玛俄的儿子亚吉去了。
So David and the six hundred men who were with him went over to Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.

大卫和他的两个妻，就是耶斯列人亚希暖和作过拿八妻的迦密人亚比该，并跟随他的人，连各人的眷属，都住在迦特亚吉那里。
And David and his men were living with Achish at Gath; every man had his family with him, and David had his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail of Carmel, who had been the wife of Nabal.

有人告诉扫罗说，大卫逃到迦特。扫罗就不再寻索他了。
And Saul, hearing that David had gone to Gath, went after him no longer.

大卫对亚吉说，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你在京外的城邑中赐我一个地方居住。仆人何必与王同住京都呢？
Then David said to Achish, If now I have grace in your eyes, let me have a place in one of the smaller towns of your land, to be my living-place; for it is not right for your servant to be living with you in the king's town.

当日亚吉将洗革拉赐给他，因此洗革拉属犹大王，直到今日。
So Achish straight away gave him Ziklag: and for that reason Ziklag has been the property of the kings of Judah to this day.

大卫在非利士地住了一年零四个月。
And David was living in the land of the Philistines for the space of a year and four months.

大卫和跟随他的人上去，侵夺基述人，基色人，亚玛力人之地。这几族历来住在那地，从书珥直到埃及。
And David and his men went up and made attacks on the Geshurites and the Girzites and the Amalekites; for these were the people who were living in the land from Telam on the way to Shur, as far as Egypt.

大卫击杀那地的人，无论男女都没有留下一个，又夺获牛，羊，骆驼，驴，并衣服，回来见亚吉。
And David again and again made attacks on the land till not a man or a woman was still living; and he took away the sheep and the oxen and the asses and the camels and the clothing; and he came back to Achish.

亚吉说，你们今日侵夺了什么地方呢？大卫说，侵夺了犹大的南方，耶拉篾的南方，基尼的南方。
And every time Achish said, Where have you been fighting today? David said, Against the South of Judah and the South of the Jerahmeelites and the South of the Kenites.

无论男女，大卫没有留下一个带到迦特来。他说，恐怕他们将我们的事告诉人，说大卫住在非利士地的时候常常这样行。
Not one living man or woman did David ever take back with him to Gath, fearing that they might give an account of what had taken place, and say, This is what David did, and so has he been doing all the time while he has been living in the land of the Philistines.

亚吉信了大卫，心里说，大卫使本族以色列人憎恶他，所以他必永远作我的仆人了。
And Achish had belief in what David said, saying, He has made himself hated by all his people Israel, and so he will be my servant for ever.

那时，非利士人聚集军旅，要与以色列人打仗。亚吉对大卫说，你当知道，你和跟随你的人都要随我出战。
Now in those days the Philistines got their forces together to make war on Israel. And Achish said to David, Certainly you and your men are to go out with me to the fight.

大卫对亚吉说，仆人所能作的事，王必知道。亚吉对大卫说，这样，我立你永远作我的护卫长。
And David said to Achish, You will see now what your servant will do. And Achish said to David, Then I will make you keeper of my head for ever.

那时撒母耳已经死了，以色列众人为他哀哭，葬他在拉玛，就是在他本城里。扫罗曾在国内不容有交鬼的和行巫术的人。
Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel, after weeping for him, had put his body in its last resting-place in Ramah, his town. And Saul had put away from the land all those who had control of spirits and who made use of secret arts.

非利士人聚集，来到书念安营。扫罗聚集以色列众人在基利波安营。
And the Philistines came together and put their forces in position in Shunem; and Saul got all Israel together and they took up their positions in Gilboa.

扫罗看见非利士的军旅就惧怕，心中发颤。
And when Saul saw the Philistine army he was troubled, and his heart was moved with fear.

扫罗求问耶和华，耶和华却不借梦，或乌陵，或先知回答他。
And when Saul went for directions to the Lord, the Lord gave him no answer, by a dream or by the Urim or by the prophets.

扫罗吩咐臣仆说，当为我找一个交鬼的妇人，我好去问她。臣仆说，在隐多珥有一个交鬼的妇人。
Then Saul said to his servants, Get me a woman who has control of a spirit so that I may go to her and get directions. And his servants said to him, There is such a woman at En-dor.

于是扫罗改了装，穿上别的衣服，带着两个人，夜里去见那妇人。扫罗说，求你用交鬼的法术，将我所告诉你的死人，为我招上来。
So Saul, putting on other clothing, so that he might not be seen to be the king, took two men with him and went to the woman by night; and he said, Now, with the help of the spirit which you have, make the person whose name I will give you come up.

妇人对他说，你知道扫罗从国中剪除交鬼的和行巫术的。你为何陷害我的性命，使我死呢？
And the woman said to him, But you have knowledge of what Saul has done, how he has put away out of the land those who have control of spirits and the users of secret arts: why would you, by a trick, put me in danger of death?

扫罗向妇人指着耶和华起誓说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你必不因这事受刑。
And Saul made an oath to her by the Lord, saying, By the living Lord, no punishment will come to you for this.

妇人说，我为你招谁上来呢？回答说，为我招撒母耳上来。
Then the woman said, Who am I to let you see? And he said, Make Samuel come up for me.

妇人看见撒母耳，就大声呼叫，对扫罗说，你是扫罗，为什么欺哄我呢？
And the woman saw that it was Saul, and she gave a loud cry, and said to Saul, Why have you made use of deceit? for you are Saul.

王对妇人说，不要惧怕，你看见了什么呢？妇人对扫罗说，我看见有神从地里上来。
And the king said to her, Have no fear: what do you see? And the woman said to Saul, I see a god coming up out of the earth.

扫罗说，他是怎样的形状。妇人说，有一个老人上来，身穿长衣。扫罗知道是撒母耳，就屈身，脸伏于地下拜。
And he said to her, What is his form? And she said, It is an old man coming up covered with a robe. And Saul saw that it was Samuel, and with his face bent down to the earth he gave him honour.

撒母耳对扫罗说，你为什么搅扰我，招我上来呢？扫罗回答说，我甚窘急。因为非利士人攻击我，神也离开我，不再借先知或梦回答我。因此请你上来，好指示我应当怎样行。
And Samuel said to Saul, Why have you made me come up, troubling my rest? And Saul in answer said, I am in great danger; for the Philistines are making war on me, and God has gone away from me and will no longer give me any answer, by the prophets or by dreams: so I have sent for you to make clear to me what I am to do.

撒母耳说，耶和华已经离开你，且与你为敌，你何必问我呢？
And Samuel said, Why do you put your questions to me, seeing that God has gone away from you and is on the side of him who is against you?

耶和华照他借我说的话，已经从你手里夺去国权，赐与别人，就是大卫。
And the Lord himself has done what I said: the Lord has taken the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbour David;

因你没有听从耶和华的命令。他恼怒亚玛力人，你没有灭绝他们，所以今日耶和华向你这样行，
Because you did not do what the Lord said, and did not give effect to his burning wrath against Amalek. So the Lord has done this thing to you today.

并且耶和华必将你和以色列人交在非利士人的手里。明日你和你众子必与我在一处了。耶和华必将以色列的军兵交在非利士人手里。
And more than this, the Lord will give Israel up with you into the hands of the Philistines: and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me: and the Lord will give up the army of Israel into the hands of the Philistines.

扫罗猛然仆倒，挺身在地，因撒母耳的话甚是惧怕。那一昼一夜没有吃什么，就毫无气力。
Then Saul went down flat on the earth, and was full of fear because of Samuel's words: and there was no strength in him, for he had taken no food all that day or all that night.

妇人到扫罗面前，见他极其惊恐，对他说，婢女听从你的话，不顾惜自己的性命，遵从你所吩咐的。
And the woman came to Saul and saw that he was in great trouble, and said to him, See now, your servant has given ear to your words, and I have put my life in danger by doing what you said.

现在求你听婢女的话，容我在你面前摆上一点食物，你吃了，可以有气力行路。
So now, give ear to the voice of your servant, and let me give you a little bread; and take some food to give you strength when you go on your way.

扫罗不肯，说，我不吃。但他的仆人和妇人再三劝他，他才听了他们的话，从地上起来，坐在床上。
But he would not, saying, I have no desire for food. But his servants, together with the woman, made him take food, and he gave way to them. So he got up from the earth, and took his seat on the bed.

妇人急忙将家里的一只肥牛犊宰了，又拿面抟成无酵饼烤了，
And the woman had in the house a young cow, made fat for food; and she put it to death straight away; and she took meal and got it mixed and made unleavened bread;

摆在扫罗和他仆人面前。他们吃完，当夜就起身走了。
And she put it before Saul and his servants, and they had a meal. Then they got up and went away the same night.

非利士人将他们的军旅聚到亚弗。以色列人在耶斯列的泉旁安营。
Now the Philistines got all their army together at Aphek: and the Israelites put their forces in position by the fountain in Jezreel.

非利士人的首领各率军队，或百或千，挨次前进。大卫和跟随他的人同着亚吉跟在后边。
And the lords of the Philistines went on with their hundreds and their thousands, and David and his men came after with Achish.

非利士人的首领说，这些希伯来人在这里作什么呢？亚吉对他们说，这不是以色列王扫罗的臣子大卫吗？他在我这里有些年日了。自从他投降我直到今日，我未曾见他有过错。
Then the rulers of the Philistines said, What are these Hebrews doing here? And Achish said to the rulers of the Philistines, Is this not David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, who has been with me for a year or two, and I have never seen any wrong in him from the time when he came to me till now?

非利士人的首领向亚吉发怒，对他说，你要叫这人回你所安置他的地方，不可叫他同我们出战，恐怕他在阵上反为我们的敌人。他用什么与他主人复和呢？岂不是用我们这些人的首级吗？
But the rulers of the Philistines were angry with him, and said to him, Make the man go back to the place you have given him; do not let him go down with us to the fight, or he may be turned against us and be false to us: for how will this man make peace with his lord? will it not be with the heads of these men?

从前以色列的妇女跳舞唱和说，扫罗杀死千千，大卫杀死万万，所说的不是这个大卫吗？
Is this not David, who was named in their songs, when in the dance they said to one another, Saul has put to death thousands, and David tens of thousands?

亚吉叫大卫来，对他说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你是正直人。你随我在军中出入，我看你甚好。自从你投奔我到如今，我未曾见你有什么过失。只是众首领不喜悦你。
Then Achish sent for David and said to him, By the living Lord, you are upright, and everything you have done with me in the army has been pleasing to me: I have seen no evil in you from the day when you came to me till now: but still, the lords are not pleased with you.

现在你可以平平安安地回去，免得非利士人的首领不欢喜你。
So now go back, and go in peace, so that you do not make the lords of the Philistines angry.

大卫对亚吉说，我作了什么呢？自从仆人到你面前，直到今日，你查出我有什么过错，使我不去攻击主我王的仇敌呢？
And David said to Achish, But what have I done? what have you seen in your servant while I have been with you till this day, that I may not go and take up arms against those who are now making war on my lord the king?

亚吉说，我知道你在我眼前是好人，如同神的使者一般。只是非利士人的首领说，这人不可同我们出战。
And Achish in answer said, It is true that in my eyes you are good, like an angel of God: but still, the rulers of the Philistines have said, He is not to go up with us to the fight.

故此你和跟随你的人，就是你本主的仆人，要明日早晨起来，等到天亮回去吧。
So get up early in the morning, with the servants of your lord who are with you, and go to the place I have given you, and have no evil design in your heart, for you are good in my eyes; but when there is light enough in the morning, go away.

于是大卫和跟随他的人早晨起来，回往非利士地去。非利士人也上耶斯列去了。
So David and his men got up early in the morning to go back to the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.

第三日，大卫和跟随他的人到了洗革拉。亚玛力人已经侵夺南地，攻破洗革拉，用火焚烧，
Now when David and his men came to Ziklag on the third day, the Amalekites had made an attack on the South and on Ziklag, and had overcome Ziklag and put it on fire;

掳了城内的妇女和其中的大小人口，却没有杀一个，都带着走了。
And had made the women and all who were there, small and great, prisoners: they had not put any of them to death, but had taken them all away.

大卫和跟随他的人到了那城，不料，城已烧毁，他们的妻子儿女都被掳去了。
And when David and his men came to the town, they saw that it had been burned down, and their wives and their sons and daughters had been made prisoners.

大卫和跟随他的人就放声大哭，直哭得没有气力。
Then David and the people who were with him gave themselves up to weeping till they were able to go on weeping no longer.

大卫的两个妻耶斯列人亚希暖和作过拿八妻的迦密人亚比该，也被掳去了。
And David's two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel, had been made prisoners.

大卫甚是焦急，因众人为自己的儿女苦恼，说，要用石头打死他。大卫却倚靠耶和华他的神，心里坚固。
And David was greatly troubled; for the people were talking of stoning him, because their hearts were bitter, every man sorrowing for his sons and his daughters: but David made himself strong in the Lord his God.

大卫对亚希米勒的儿子祭司亚比亚他说，请你将以弗得拿过来。亚比亚他就将以弗得拿到大卫面前。
And David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, Come here to me with the ephod. And Abiathar took the ephod to David.

大卫求问耶和华说，我追赶敌军，追得上追不上呢？耶和华说，你可以追，必追得上，都救得回来。
Then David, questioning the Lord, said, Am I to go after this band? will I be able to overtake them? And in answer he said, Go after them, for you will certainly overtake them, and get back everything.

于是，大卫和跟随他的六百人来到比梭溪。有不能前去的就留在那里。
So David went, and his six hundred men went with him, and they came to the stream Besor.

大卫却带着四百人往前追赶，有二百人疲乏，不能过比梭溪，所以留在那里。
And David, with four hundred men, went on: but two hundred of them were overcome with weariness, and not able to go across the stream.

这四百人在田野遇见一个埃及人，就带他到大卫面前，给他饼吃，给他水喝，
And in the fields they saw an Egyptian whom they took to David, and they gave him bread, and he had a meal, and they gave him water for drink;

又给他一块无花果饼，两个葡萄饼。他吃了，就精神复原。因为他三日三夜没有吃饼，没有喝水。
And they gave him part of a cake of figs and some dry grapes; and after the food, his spirit came back to him, for he had had no food or drink for three days and nights.

大卫问他说，你是属谁的。你是哪里的人。他回答说，我是埃及的少年人，是亚玛力人的奴仆。因我三日前患病，我主人就把我撇弃了。
And David said to him, Whose man are you and where do you come from? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master went on without me because three days back I became ill.

我们侵夺了基利提的南方和属犹大的地，并迦勒地的南方，又用火烧了洗革拉。
We made an attack on the south part of the country of the Cherethites, and on the land which is Judah's, and on the south of Caleb; and we put Ziklag on fire.

大卫问他说，你肯领我们到敌军那里不肯。他回答说，你要向我指着神起誓，不杀我，也不将我交在我主人手里，我就领你上到敌军那里。
And David said to him, Will you take me down to this band? And he said, If you give me your oath that you will not put me to death or give me up to my master, I will take you to them.

那人领大卫下去，见他们散在地上，吃喝跳舞，因为从非利士地和犹大地所掳来的财物甚多。
And when he had taken him down, they saw them all, seated about on all sides, feasting and drinking among all the mass of goods which they had taken from the land of the Philistines and the land of Judah.

大卫从黎明直到次日晚上，击杀他们，除了四百骑骆驼的少年人之外，没有一个逃脱的。
And David went on fighting them from evening till the evening of the day after; and not one of them got away but only four hundred young men who went in flight on camels.

亚玛力人所掳去的财物，大卫全都夺回，并救回他的两个妻来。
And David got back everything the Amalekites had taken; and he got back his two wives.

凡亚玛力人所掳去的，无论大小，儿女，财物，大卫都夺回来，没有失落一个。
There was no loss of anything, small or great, sons or daughters or goods or anything which they had taken away: David got it all back.

大卫所夺来的牛群羊群，跟随他的人赶在原有的群畜前边，说，这是大卫的掠物。
And they took all the flocks and herds, and driving them in front of him, said, These are David's.

大卫到了那疲乏不能跟随，留在比梭溪的二百人那里。他们出来迎接大卫并跟随的人。大卫前来问他们安。
And David came to the two hundred men, who because of weariness had not gone with him, but were waiting at the stream Besor: and they went out, meeting David and the people who were with him; and when they came near them, they said, How are you?

跟随大卫人中的恶人和匪类说，这些人既然没有和我们同去，我们所夺的财物就不分给他们，只将他们各人的妻子儿女给他们，使他们带去就是了。
Then the bad and good-for-nothing men among those who went with David said, Because they did not go with us, we will give them nothing of the goods which we have got back, but only to every man his wife and children, so that he may take them and go.

大卫说，弟兄们，耶和华所赐给我们的，不可不分给他们。因为他保佑我们，将那攻击我们的敌军交在我们手里。
Then David said, You are not to do this, my brothers, after what the Lord has given us, who has kept us safe and given up the band which came against us into our hands.

这事谁肯依从你们呢？上阵的得多少，看守器具的也得多少。应当大家平分。
Who is going to give any attention to you in this question? for an equal part will be given to him who went to the fight and to him who was waiting by the goods: they are all to have the same.

大卫定此为以色列的律例典章，从那日直到今日。
And so he made it a rule and an order for Israel from that day till now.

大卫到了洗革拉，从掠物中取些送给他朋友犹大的长老，说，这是从耶和华仇敌那里夺来的，送你们为礼物。
And when David came to Ziklag, he sent some of the goods to the responsible men of Judah, and to his friends, saying, Here is an offering for you from the goods of those who were fighting against the Lord;

他送礼物给住伯特利的，南地拉末的，雅提珥的。
He sent to those who were in Beth-el, and in Ramah of the South, and in Jattir;

住亚罗珥的，息末的，以实提莫的。
And to those in Arara and Eshtemoa

住拉哈勒的，耶拉篾各城的，基尼各城的。
and Carmel and in the towns of the Jerahmeelites, and in the towns of the Kenites;

住何珥玛的，歌拉珊的，亚挞的。
And to those who were in Hormah and in Bor-ashan and in Athach;

住希伯仑的，并大卫和跟随他的人素来所到之处的人。
And in Hebron, and to all the places where David and his men had been living.

非利士人与以色列人争战。以色列人在非利士人面前逃跑，在基利波有被杀仆倒的。
Now the Philistines were fighting against Israel: and the men of Israel went in flight before the Philistines, falling down wounded in Mount Gilboa.

非利士人紧追扫罗和他儿子们，就杀了扫罗的儿子约拿单，亚比拿达，麦基舒亚。
And the Philistines overtook Saul and his sons; and they put to death Jonathan and Abinadab and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.

势派甚大，扫罗被弓箭手追上，射伤甚重，
And the fight was going badly for Saul, and the archers came across him, and he was wounded by the archers.

就吩咐拿他兵器的人说，你拔出刀来，将我刺死，免得那些未受割礼的人来刺我，凌辱我。但拿兵器的人甚惧怕，不肯刺他。扫罗就自己伏在刀上死了。
Then Saul said to the servant who had the care of his arms, Take out your sword and put it through me, before these men without circumcision come and make sport of me. But his servant, full of fear, would not do so. Then Saul took out his sword, and falling on it, put an end to himself.

拿兵器的人见扫罗已死，也伏在刀上死了。
And when his servant saw that Saul was dead, he did the same, and was united with him in death.

这样，扫罗和他三个儿子，与拿他兵器的人，以及跟随他的人，都一同死亡。
So death overtook Saul and his three sons and his servant on the same day.

住平原那边并约旦河西的以色列人，见以色列军兵逃跑，扫罗和他儿子都死了，也就弃城逃跑。非利士人便来住在其中。
And when the men of Israel across the valley and on the other side of Jordan saw that the army of Israel was in flight and that Saul and his sons were dead, they came out of their towns and went in flight; and the Philistines came and took them for themselves.

次日，非利士人来剥那被杀之人的衣服，看见扫罗和他三个儿子仆倒在基利波山，
Now on the day after, when the Philistines came to take their goods from the dead, they saw Saul and his three sons dead on the earth in Mount Gilboa.

就割下他的首级，剥了他的军装，打发人到非利士地的四境（到或作送到），报信与他们庙里的偶像和众民。
And cutting off his head and taking away his war-dress, they sent word into the land of the Philistines round about, to take the news to their gods and to the people.

又将扫罗的军装放在亚斯他录庙里，将他的尸身钉在伯珊的城墙上。
His war-dress they put in the house of Astarte; and his body was fixed on the wall of Beth-shan.

基列雅比的居民听见非利士人向扫罗所行的事，
And when the people of Jabesh-gilead had news of what the Philistines had done to Saul,

他们中间所有的勇士就起身，走了一夜，将扫罗和他儿子的尸身从伯珊城墙上取下来，送到雅比那里，用火烧了。
All the fighting men got up and, travelling all night, took Saul's body and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan; and they came to Jabesh and had them burned there.

将他们骸骨葬在雅比的垂丝柳树下，就禁食七日。
And their bones they put in the earth under a tree in Jabesh; and for seven days they took no food.d put it through me, before these men without circumcision come and make sport of me. But his servant, full of fear, would not do so. Then Saul took out his sword, and falling on it, put an end to himself.

拿兵器的人见扫罗已死，也伏在刀上死了。
And when his servant saw that Saul was dead, he did the same, and was united with him in death.

这样，扫罗和他三个儿子，与拿他兵器的人，以及跟随他的人，都一同死亡。
So death overtook Saul and his three sons and his servant on the same day.

住平原那边并约旦河西的以色列人，见以色列军兵逃跑，扫罗和他儿子都死了，也就弃城逃跑。非利士人便来住在其中。
And when the men of Israel across the valley and on the other side of Jordan saw that the army of Israel was in flight and that Saul and his sons were dead, they came out of their towns and went in flight; and the Philistines came and took them for themselves.

次日，非利士人来剥那被杀之人的衣服，看见扫罗和他三个儿子仆倒在基利波山，
Now on the day after, when the Philistines came to take their goods from the dead, they saw Saul and his three sons dead on the earth in Mount Gilboa.

就割下他的首级，剥了他的军装，打发人到非利士地的四境（到或作送到），报信与他们庙里的偶像和众民。
And cutting off his head and taking away his war-dress, they sent word into the land of the Philistines round about, to take the news to their gods and to the people.

又将扫罗的军装放在亚斯他录庙里，将他的尸身钉在伯珊的城墙上。
His war-dress they put in the house of Astarte; and his body was fixed on the wall of Beth-shan.

基列雅比的居民听见非利士人向扫罗所行的事，
And when the people of Jabesh-gilead had news of what the Philistines had done to Saul,

他们中间所有的勇士就起身，走了一夜，将扫罗和他儿子的尸身从伯珊城墙上取下来，送到雅比那里，用火烧了。
All the fighting men got up and, travelling all night, took Saul's body and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan; and they came to Jabesh and had them burned there.

将他们骸骨葬在雅比的垂丝柳树下，就禁食七日。
And their bones they put in the earth under a tree in Jabesh; and for seven days they took no food.