撒母耳记下 Samuel


扫罗死后，大卫击杀亚玛力人回来，在洗革拉住了两天。
Now after the death of Saul, when David, having come back from the destruction of the Amalekites, had been in Ziklag for two days;

第三天，有一人从扫罗的营里出来，衣服撕裂，头蒙灰尘，到大卫面前伏地叩拜。
On the third day a man came from Saul's tents, with his clothing out of order and earth on his head: and when he came to David, he went down on the earth and gave him honour.

大卫问他说，你从哪里来。他说，我从以色列的营里逃来。
And David said to him, Where have you come from? And he said, I have come in flight from the tents of Israel.

大卫又问他说，事情怎样。请你告诉我。他回答说，百姓从阵上逃跑，也有许多人仆倒死亡。扫罗和他儿子约拿单也死了。
And David said to him, How did things go? Give me the news. And in answer he said, The people have gone in flight from the fight, and a great number of them are dead; and Saul and his son Jonathan are dead.

大卫问报信的少年人说，你怎么知道扫罗和他儿子约拿单死了呢？
And David said to the young man who gave him the news, Why are you certain that Saul and his son Jonathan are dead?

报信的少年人说，我偶然到基利波山，看见扫罗伏在自己枪上，有战车，马兵紧紧地追他。
And the young man said, I came by chance to Mount Gilboa, and I saw Saul supporting himself on his spear; and the war-carriages and horsemen overtook him.

他回头看见我，就呼叫我。我说，我在这里。
And looking back, he saw me and gave a cry to me. And answering him I said, Here am I.

他问我说，你是什么人。我说，我是亚玛力人。
And he said to me, Who are you? And I said, I am an Amalekite.

他说，请你来，将我杀死。因为痛苦抓住我，我的生命尚存。
Then he said to me, Come here to my side, and put me to death, for the pain of death has me in its grip but my life is still strong in me.

我准知他仆倒必不能活，就去将他杀死，把他头上的冠冕，臂上的镯子拿到我主这里。
So I put my foot on him and gave him his death-blow, because I was certain that he would not go on living after his fall: and I took the crown from his head and the band from his arm, and I have them here for my lord.

大卫就撕裂衣服，跟随他的人也是如此，
Then David gave way to bitter grief, and so did all the men who were with him:

而且悲哀哭号，禁食到晚上，是因扫罗和他儿子约拿单，并耶和华的民以色列家的人，倒在刀下。
And till evening they gave themselves to sorrow and weeping, and took no food, weeping for Saul and for Jonathan, his son, and for the people of the Lord and for the men of Israel; because they had come to their end by the sword.

大卫问报信的少年人说，你是哪里的人。他说，我是亚玛力客人的儿子。
And David said to the young man who had given him the news, Where do you come from? And he said, I am the son of a man from a strange land; I am an Amalekite.

大卫说，你伸手杀害耶和华的受膏者，怎么不畏惧呢？
And David said to him, Had you no fear of stretching out your hand to put to death the one marked with the holy oil?

大卫叫了一个少年人来，说，你去杀他吧。
And David sent for one of his young men and said, Go near and put an end to him. And he put him to death.

大卫对他说，你流人血的罪归到自己的头上，因为你亲口作见证说，我杀了耶和华的受膏者。少年人就把他杀了。
And David said to him, May your blood be on your head; for your mouth has given witness against you, saying, I have put to death the man marked with the holy oil.

大卫作哀歌，吊扫罗和他儿子约拿单，
Then David made this song of grief for Saul and Jonathan, his son:

且吩咐将这歌教导犹大人。这歌名叫弓歌，写在雅煞珥书上。
(It is recorded in the book of Jashar for teaching to the sons of Judah) and he said:

歌中说，以色列阿，你尊荣者在山上被杀。大英雄何竟死亡。
The glory, O Israel, is dead on your high places! How have the great ones been made low!

不要在迦特报告。不要在亚实基伦街上传扬。免得非利士的女子欢乐。免得未受割礼之人的女子矜夸。
Give no news of it in Gath, let it not be said in the streets of Ashkelon; or the daughters of the Philistines will be glad, the daughters of men without circumcision will be uplifted in joy.

基利波山哪，愿你那里没有雨露。愿你田地无土产可作供物。因为英雄的盾牌在那里被污丢弃。扫罗的盾牌仿佛未曾抹油。
O mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew or rain on you, you fields of death: for there the arms of the strong have been shamed, the arms of Saul, as if he had not been marked with the holy oil.

约拿单的弓箭非流敌人的血不退缩。扫罗的刀剑非剖勇士的油不收回。
From the blood of the dead, from the fat of the strong, the bow of Jonathan was not turned back, the sword of Saul did not come back unused.

扫罗和约拿单，活时相悦相爱，死时也不分离。他们比鹰更快，比狮子还强。
Saul and Jonathan were loved and pleasing; in their lives and in their death they were not parted; they went more quickly than eagles, they were stronger than lions.

以色列的女子阿，当为扫罗哭号。他曾使你们穿朱红色的美衣，使你们衣服有黄金的妆饰。
O daughters of Israel, have sorrow for Saul, by whom you were delicately clothed in robes of red, with ornaments of gold on your dresses.

英雄何竟在阵上仆倒。约拿单何竟在山上被杀。
How have the great ones been made low in the fight! Jonathan is dead on your high places.

我兄约拿单哪，我为你悲伤。我甚喜悦你。你向我发的爱情奇妙非常，过于妇女的爱情。
I am full of grief for you, my brother Jonathan: very dear have you been to me: your love for me was a wonder, greater than the love of women.

英雄何竟仆倒。战具何竟灭没。
How have the great ones been made low, and the arms of war broken!

此后，大卫问耶和华说，我上犹大的一个城去可以吗？耶和华说，可以。大卫说，我上哪一个城去呢？耶和华说，上希伯仑去。
Now after this, David, questioning the Lord, said, Am I to go up into any of the towns of Judah? And the Lord said to him, Go up. And David said, Where am I to go? And he said, To Hebron.

于是大卫和他的两个妻，一个是耶斯列人亚希暖，一个是作过迦密人拿八妻的亚比该，都上那里去了。
So David went there, taking with him his two wives, Ahinoam of Jezreel, and Abigail, the wife of Nabal of Carmel.

大卫也将跟随他的人和他们各人的眷属一同带上去，住在希伯仑的城邑中。
And David took all his men with him, every man with his family: and they were living in the towns round Hebron.

犹大人来到希伯仑，在那里膏大卫作犹大家的王。有人告诉大卫说，葬埋扫罗的是基列雅比人。
And the men of Judah came there, and with the holy oil made David king over the people of Judah. And word came to David that it was the men of Jabesh-gilead who put Saul's body in its last resting-place.

大卫就差人去见基列雅比人，对他们说，你们厚待你们的主扫罗，将他葬埋。愿耶和华赐福与你们。
And David sent to the men of Jabesh-gilead and said to them, May the Lord give you his blessing, because you have done this kind act to Saul your lord, and have put his body to rest!

你们既行了这事，愿耶和华以慈爱诚实待你们，我也要为此厚待你们。
May the Lord be good and true to you: and I myself will see that your kind act is rewarded, because you have done this thing.

现在你们的主扫罗死了，犹大家已经膏我作他们的王，所以你们要刚强奋勇。
Then let your hands be strong, and have no fear: though Saul your lord is dead, the people of Judah have made me their king.

扫罗的元帅尼珥的儿子押尼珥，曾将扫罗的儿子伊施波设带过河，到玛哈念，
Now Abner, the son of Ner, captain of Saul's army, had taken Saul's son Ish-bosheth over to Mahanaim,

立他作王，治理基列，亚书利，耶斯列，以法莲，便雅悯，和以色列众人。
And made him king over Gilead and the Asherites and over Jezreel and Ephraim and Benjamin, that is, over all Israel.

扫罗的儿子伊施波设登基的时候年四十岁，作以色列王二年。惟独犹大家归从大卫。
(Saul's son Ish-bosheth was forty years old when he became king over Israel, and he was ruler for two years.) But Judah was on the side of David.

大卫在希伯仑作犹大家的王，共七年零六个月。
And the time when David was king in Hebron over the people of Judah was seven years and six months.

尼珥的儿子押尼珥和扫罗的儿子伊施波设的仆人从玛哈念出来，往基遍去。
And Abner, the son of Ner, with the servants of Saul's son Ish-bosheth, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

洗鲁雅的儿子约押和大卫的仆人也出来，在基遍池旁与他们相遇。一班坐在池这边，一班坐在池那边。
And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out and came face to face with them by the pool of Gibeon; and they took up their position, facing one another on opposite sides of the pool.

押尼珥对约押说，让少年人起来，在我们面前戏耍吧。约押说，可以。
And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men give a test of their strength before us. And Joab said, Let them do so.

就按着定数起来，属扫罗儿子伊施波设的便雅悯人过去十二名，大卫的仆人也过去十二名，
So they got up and went over by number: twelve for Benjamin and Ish-bosheth and twelve of the servants of David.

彼此揪头，用刀刺肋，一同仆倒。所以，那地叫作希利甲哈素林，就在基遍。
And every one got the other by the head, driving his sword into the other's side, so they all went down together: and that place was named the Field of Sides, and it is in Gibeon.

那日的战事凶猛，押尼珥和以色列人败在大卫的仆人面前。
And there was hard fighting that day; and Abner and the men of Israel gave way before the servants of David.

在那里有洗鲁雅的三个儿子，约押，亚比筛，亚撒黑。亚撒黑脚快如野鹿一般。
There were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab and Abishai and Asahel: and Asahel was as quick-footed as a roe of the fields.

亚撒黑追赶押尼珥，直追赶他不偏左右。
Asahel went running after Abner, not turning to the right or to the left.

押尼珥回头说，你是亚撒黑吗？回答说，是。
Then Abner, looking back, said, Is it you, Asahel? And he said, It is I.

押尼珥对他说，你或转向左转向右，拿住一个少年人，剥去他的战衣。亚撒黑却不肯转开不追赶他。
And Abner said, Then go to the right or to the left and put your hands on one of the fighting-men and take his arms. But Asahel would not be turned away from going after Abner.

押尼珥又对亚撒黑说，你转开不追赶我吧。我何必杀你呢？若杀你，有什么脸见你哥哥约押呢？
Then again Abner said to Asahel, Go to one side, do not keep on coming after me: why will you make me put an end to you? for then I will be shamed before your brother Joab.

亚撒黑仍不肯转开。故此，押尼珥就用枪？？刺入他的肚腹，甚至枪从背后透出，亚撒黑就在那里仆倒而死。众人赶到亚撒黑仆倒而死的地方，就都站住。
But still he did not go to one side: so Abner gave him a back blow in the stomach with his spear, so that the spear came out at his back; and he went down on the earth, wounded to death: and all those who came to the place where Asahel went down dead, came to a stop.

约押和亚比筛追赶押尼珥，日落的时候，到了通基遍旷野的路旁，基亚对面的亚玛山。
But Joab and Abishai went after Abner: and the sun went down when they came to the hill of Ammah, which is to the east of the road through the waste land of Geba.

便雅悯人聚集，跟随押尼珥站在一个山顶上。
And the men of Benjamin came together after Abner in one band, and took their places on the top of a hill.

押尼珥呼叫约押说，刀剑岂可永远杀人吗？你岂不知终久必有苦楚吗？你要等何时才叫百姓回去，不追赶弟兄呢？
Then crying out to Joab, Abner said, Are fighting and destruction to go on for ever? do you not see that the end will only be bitter? how long will it be before you send the people back and make them give up attacking their countrymen?

约押说，我指着永生的神起誓，你若不说戏耍的那句话，今日早晨百姓就回去，不追赶弟兄了。
And Joab said, By the living God, if you had not given the word, the people would have gone on attacking their countrymen till the morning.

于是约押吹角，众民就站住，不再追赶以色列人，也不再打仗了。
So Joab had a horn sounded, and all the people came to a stop, and gave up going after Israel and fighting them.

押尼珥和跟随他的人整夜经过亚拉巴，过约旦河，走过毕伦，到了玛哈念。
And all that night Abner and his men went through the Arabah; they went over Jordan and through all Bithron and came to Mahanaim.

约押追赶押尼珥回来，聚集众民，见大卫的仆人中缺少了十九个人和亚撒黑。
And Joab came back from fighting Abner: and when he had got all his men together, it was seen that nineteen of David's men, in addition to Asahel, were not with them.

但大卫的仆人杀了便雅悯人和跟随押尼珥的人，共三百六十名。
But David's men had put to death three hundred and sixty of the men of Benjamin and of Abner's men

众人将亚撒黑送到伯利恒，葬在他父亲的坟墓里。约押和跟随他的人走了一夜，天亮的时候到了希伯仑。
And they took Asahel's body and put it in the last resting-place of his father in Beth-lehem. And Joab and his men, travelling all night, came to Hebron at dawn.

扫罗家和大卫家争战许久。大卫家日见强盛。扫罗家日见衰弱。
Now there was a long war between Saul's people and David's people; and David became stronger and stronger, but those on Saul's side became more and more feeble.

大卫在希伯仑得了几个儿子，长子暗嫩是耶斯列人亚希暖所生的。
While David was in Hebron he became the father of sons: the oldest was Amnon, son of Ahinoam of Jezreel;

次子基利押（基利押历代上三章一节作但以利）是作过迦密人拿八的妻亚比该所生的。三子押沙龙是基述王达买的女儿玛迦所生的。
And the second, Chileab, whose mother was Abigail, the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom, son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur;

四子亚多尼雅是哈及所生的。五子示法提雅是亚比他所生的。
And the fourth, Adonijah, the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah, the son of Abital;

六子以特念是大卫的妻以格拉所生的。大卫这六个儿子都是在希伯仑生的。
And the sixth, Ithream, whose mother was David's wife Eglah. These were the sons of David, whose birth took place in Hebron.

扫罗家和大卫家争战的时候，押尼珥在扫罗家大有权势。
Now while there was war between Saul's people and David's people, Abner was making himself strong among the supporters of Saul.

扫罗有一妃嫔，名叫利斯巴，是爱亚的女儿。一日，伊施波设对押尼珥说，你为什么与我父的妃嫔同房呢？
Now Saul had among his wives a woman named Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ish-bosheth said to Abner, Why have you taken my father's wife?

押尼珥因伊施波设的话就甚发怒，说，我岂是犹大的狗头呢？我恩待你父扫罗的家和他的弟兄，朋友，不将你交在大卫手里，今日你竟为这妇人责备我吗？
And Abner was very angry at the words of Ish-bosheth, and he said, Am I a dog's head of Judah? I am this day doing all in my power for the cause of your father Saul and for his brothers and his friends, and have not given you up into the hands of David, and now you say I have done wrong with a woman.

我若不照着耶和华起誓应许大卫的话行，废去扫罗的位，建立大卫的位，使他治理以色列和犹大，从但直到别是巴，愿神重重地降罚与我。
May God's punishment be on Abner, if I do not for David as the Lord in his oath has said,


And if I do not take away the kingdom from the family of Saul and make David ruler over Israel and Judah from Dan as far as Beer-sheba!

伊施波设惧怕押尼珥，不敢回答一句。
And so great was Ish-bosheth's fear of Abner that he was not able to say a word in answer.

押尼珥打发人去见大卫，替他说，这国归谁呢？又说，你与我立约，我必帮助你，使以色列人都归服你。
And Abner sent men to David at Hebron, saying, Make an agreement with me, and I will give you my support in getting all Israel on your side.

大卫说，好。我与你立约。但有一件，你来见我面的时候，若不将扫罗的女儿米甲带来，必不得见我的面。
And he said, It is well; I will make an agreement with you, but on one condition, which is, that when you come before me, Saul's daughter Michal is to come with you; till she comes you will not see my face.

大卫就打发人去见扫罗的儿子伊施波设，说，你要将我的妻米甲归还我。她是我从前用一百非利士人的阳皮所聘定的。
And David sent men to Saul's son Ish-bosheth, saying, Give me back Michal, my wife, whom I made mine for the price of the private parts of a hundred Philistines.

伊施波设就打发人去，将米甲从拉亿的儿子，她丈夫帕铁那里接回来。
So Ish-bosheth sent and took her from her husband Paltiel, the son of Laish.

米甲的丈夫跟着她，一面走一面哭，直跟到巴户琳。押尼珥说，你回去吧。帕铁就回去了。
And her husband went with her as far as Bahurim, weeping while he went. Then Abner said to him, Go back. And he went back.

押尼珥对以色列长老说，从前你们愿意大卫作王治理你们，
Then Abner had a talk with the chief men of Israel, saying, In the past it was your desire to make David your king: so now, do it:

现在你们可以照心愿而行。因为耶和华曾论到大卫说，我必借我仆人大卫的手，救我民以色列脱离非利士人和众仇敌的手。
For the Lord has said of David, By the hand of my servant David I will make my people Israel safe from the Philistines, and from all who are against them.

押尼珥也用这话说给便雅悯人听，又到希伯仑，将以色列人和便雅悯全家一切所喜悦的事说给大卫听。
And Abner said the same things to Benjamin: and he went to David in Hebron to make clear to him what seemed good to Israel and to all the people of Benjamin.

押尼珥带着二十个人来到希伯仑见大卫，大卫就为押尼珥和他带来的人设摆筵席。
So Abner, with twenty men, came to Hebron, to David. And David made a feast for Abner and the men who were with him.

押尼珥对大卫说，我要起身去招聚以色列众人来见我主我王，与你立约，你就可以照着心愿作王。于是大卫送押尼珥去，押尼珥就平平安安地去了。
And Abner said to David, Now I will go, and make all Israel come to my lord the king, so that they may make an agreement with you, and your kingdom may be as wide as your heart's desire. Then David sent Abner away and he went in peace.

约押和大卫的仆人攻击敌军，带回许多的掠物。那时押尼珥不在希伯仑大卫那里，因大卫已经送他去，他也平平安安地去了。
Now the servants of David and Joab had been out attacking a band of armed men, and they came back with a great store of goods taken in the fight: but Abner was no longer in Hebron with David, for he had sent him away and he had gone in peace.

约押和跟随他的全军到了，就有人告诉约押说，尼珥的儿子押尼珥来见王，王送他去，他也平平安安地去了。
When Joab and his men came, news was given them that Abner, the son of Ner, had come to the king, who had let him go away again in peace.

约押去见王说，你这是作什么呢？押尼珥来见你，你为何送他去，他就踪影不见了呢？
Then Joab came to the king, and said, What have you done? when Abner came to you why did you send him away and let him go?

你当晓得，尼珥的儿子押尼珥来是要诓哄你，要知道你的出入和你一切所行的事。
Is it not clear to you that Abner, the son of Ner, came with deceit to get knowledge of your going out and your coming in and of all you are doing?

约押从大卫那里出来，就打发人去追赶押尼珥，在西拉井追上他，将他带回来，大卫却不知道。
And when Joab had come out from David, he sent men after Abner, and they overtook him at the water-spring of Sirah, and made him come back with them: but David had no knowledge of it.

押尼珥回到希伯仑，约押领他到城门的瓮洞，假作要与他说机密话，就在那里刺透他的肚腹，他便死了。这是报杀他兄弟亚撒黑的仇。
And when Abner was back in Hebron, Joab took him on one side by the doorway of the town to have a word with him quietly, and there he gave him a wound in the stomach, causing his death in payment for the death of his brother Asahel.

大卫听见了，就说，流尼珥的儿子押尼珥的血，这罪在耶和华面前必永不归我和我的国。
And when David had word of it he said, May I and my kingdom be clear for ever in the eyes of the Lord from the blood of Abner, the son of Ner:

愿流他血的罪归到约押头上和他父的全家。又愿约押家不断有患漏症的，长大麻疯的，架拐而行的，被刀杀死的，缺乏饮食的。
May it come on the head of Joab and all his father's family: among the men of Joab's family may there ever be some who are diseased or lepers, or who do the work of women, or are put to the sword, or are wasted from need of food!

约押和他兄弟亚比筛杀了押尼珥，是因押尼珥在基遍争战的时候杀了他们的兄弟亚撒黑。
So Joab and Abishai his brother put Abner to death, because he had put to death their brother Asahel in the fight at Gibeon.

大卫吩咐约押和跟随他的众人说，你们当撕裂衣服，腰束麻布，在押尼珥棺前哀哭。大卫王也跟在棺后。
And David said to Joab and all the people who were with him, Go in grief and put haircloth about you, in sorrow for Abner. And King David went after the dead body.

他们将押尼珥葬在希伯仑。王在押尼珥的墓旁放声而哭，众民也都哭了。
And they put Abner's body to rest in Hebron; and the king and all the people were weeping loudly by the resting-place of Abner's body.

王为押尼珥举哀，说，押尼珥何竟像愚顽人死呢？
And the king made a song of grief for Abner and said, Was the death of Abner to be like the death of a foolish man?

你手未曾捆绑，脚未曾锁住。你死，如人死在罪孽之辈手下一样。于是众民又为押尼珥哀哭。
Your hands were free, your feet were not chained: like the downfall of a man before evil men, so was your fall. And the weeping of the people over him went on again.

日头未落的时候，众民来劝大卫吃饭，但大卫起誓说，我若在日头未落以前吃饭，或吃别物，愿神重重地降罚与我。
And the people came to make David take food, while it was still day, but David with an oath said, May God's punishment be on me if I take a taste of bread or any other thing till the sun has gone down!

众民知道了就都喜悦。凡王所行的，众民无不喜悦。
And all the people took note of it and were pleased: like everything the king did, it was pleasing to the people.

那日，以色列众民才知道杀尼珥的儿子押尼珥并非出于王意。
So it was clear to Israel and to all the people on that day that the king was not responsible for the death of Abner, the son of Ner.

王对臣仆说，你们岂不知今日以色列人中死了一个作元帅的大丈夫吗？
And the king said to his servants, Do you not see that a chief and a great man has come to his end today in Israel?

我虽然受膏为王，今日还是软弱。这洗鲁雅的两个儿子比我刚强。愿耶和华照着恶人所行的恶报应他。
While I, though I am crowned king, have little strength, and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, are out of my control: may the Lord give to the evil-doer the reward of his evil-doing!

扫罗的儿子伊施波设听见押尼珥死在希伯仑，手就发软。以色列众人也都惊惶。
And when Saul's son Ish-bosheth had news that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.

扫罗的儿子伊施波设有两个军长，一名巴拿，一名利甲，是便雅悯支派，比录人临门的儿子。比录也属便雅悯。
And Saul's son had two men, captains of bands, one named Baanah and the other Rechab, sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the tribe of Benjamin; (for Beeroth was at one time taken to be part of Benjamin:

比录人早先逃到基他音，在那里寄居，直到今日。
But the people of Beeroth had gone in flight to Gittaim, where they have been living to this day.)

扫罗的儿子约拿单有一个儿子名叫米非波设，是瘸腿的。扫罗和约拿单死亡的消息从耶斯列传到的时候，他才五岁。他乳母抱着他逃跑。因为跑得太急，孩子掉在地上，腿就瘸了。
Now Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son whose feet were damaged. He was five years old when news of the death of Saul and Jonathan came from Jezreel, and the woman who took care of him took him up and went in flight: and while she was getting him away as quickly as she was able, he had a fall and his feet were damaged. His name was Mephibosheth.

一日，比录人临门的两个儿子利甲和巴拿出去，约在午热的时候到了伊施波设的家。伊施波设正睡午觉。
And Rechab and Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, went out and came to the house of Ish-bosheth in the heat of the day, when he was resting in the middle of the day. Now the woman who kept the door was cleaning grain, and sleep overcame her.

他们进了房子，假作要取麦子，就刺透伊施波设的肚腹，逃跑了。
And Rechab and his brother Baanah got in without being seen.

他们进房子的时候，伊施波设正在卧房里躺在床上，他们将他杀死，割了他的首级，拿着首级在亚拉巴走了一夜，
And when they came into the house, Ish-bosheth was stretched on his bed in his bedroom; and they made an attack on him and put him to death, and, cutting off his head, they took it with them and went by the road through the Arabah all night.

将伊施波设的首级拿到希伯仑见大卫王，说，王的仇敌扫罗曾寻索王的性命。看哪，这是他儿子伊施波设的首级。耶和华今日为我主我王在扫罗和他后裔的身上报了仇。
And they took the head of Ish-bosheth to David in Hebron, and said to the king, Here is the head of Ish-bosheth, the son of Saul your hater, who would have taken your life; the Lord has taken payment for the wrongs of my lord the king from Saul and his seed today.

大卫对比录人临门的儿子利甲和他兄弟巴拿说，我指着救我性命脱离一切苦难，永生的耶和华起誓，
And David made answer to Rechab and his brother Baanah, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, By the living Lord, who has kept me safe from all my trouble,

从前有人报告我说，扫罗死了，他自以为报好消息。我就拿住他，将他杀在洗革拉，这就作了他报消息的赏赐。
When one came to me with the news of Saul's death, in the belief that it would be good news, I took him and put him to death in Ziklag, which was the reward I gave him for his news:

何况恶人将义人杀在他的床上，我岂不向你们讨流他血的罪，从世上除灭你们呢？
How much more, when evil men have put an upright person to death, in his house, sleeping on his bed, will I take payment from you for his blood, and have you cut off from the earth?

于是大卫吩咐少年人将他们杀了，砍断他们的手脚，挂在希伯仑的池旁，却将伊施波设的首级葬在希伯仑押尼珥的坟墓里。
And David gave orders to his young men and they put them to death, cutting off their hands and their feet and hanging them up by the side of the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth and put it in its last resting-place with Abner's body in Hebron.

以色列众支派来到希伯仑见大卫，说，我们原是你的骨肉。
Then all the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron and said, Truly, we are your bone and your flesh.

从前扫罗作我们王的时候，率领以色列人出入的是你。耶和华也曾应许你说，你必牧养我的民以色列，作以色列的君。
In the past when Saul was king over us, it was you who went at the head of Israel when they went out or came in: and the Lord said to you, You are to be the keeper of my people Israel and their ruler.

于是以色列的长老都来到希伯仑见大卫王，大卫在希伯仑耶和华面前与他们立约，他们就膏大卫作以色列的王。
So all the responsible men of Israel came to the king at Hebron; and King David made an agreement with them in Hebron before the Lord: and they put the holy oil on David and made him king over Israel.

大卫登基的时候年三十岁，在位四十年。
David was thirty years old when he became king, and he was king for forty years,

在希伯仑作犹大王七年零六个月，在耶路撒冷作以色列和犹大王三十三年。
Ruling over Judah in Hebron for seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem, over all Israel and Judah, for thirty-three years.

大卫和跟随他的人到了耶路撒冷，要攻打住那地方的耶布斯人。耶布斯人对大卫说，你若不赶出瞎子，瘸子，必不能进这地方。心里想大卫决不能进去。
And the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the people of the land: and they said to David, You will not come in here, but the blind and the feeble-footed will keep you out; for they said, David will not be able to come in here.

然而大卫攻取锡安的保障，就是大卫的城。
But David took the strong place of Zion, which is the town of David.

当日，大卫说，谁攻打耶布斯人，当上水沟攻打我心里所恨恶的瘸子，瞎子。从此有俗语说，在那里有瞎子，瘸子，他不能进屋去。
And that day David said, Whoever makes an attack on the Jebusites, let him go up by the water-pipe, and put to death all the blind and feeble-footed who are hated by David. And this is why they say, The blind and feeble-footed may not come into the house.

大卫住在保障里，给保障起名叫大卫城。大卫又从米罗以里，周围筑墙。
So David took the strong tower for his living-place, naming it the town of David. And David took in hand the building of the town all round, starting from the Millo.

大卫日见强盛，因为耶和华万军之神与他同在。
And David became greater and greater; for the Lord, the God of armies, was with him.

推罗王希兰将香柏木运到大卫那里，又差遣使者和木匠，石匠给大卫建造宫殿。
And Hiram, king of Tyre, sent men to David, with cedar-trees and woodworkers and stoneworkers: and they made David a house.

大卫就知道耶和华坚立他作以色列王，又为自己的民以色列使他的国兴旺。
And David saw that the Lord had made his position safe as king over Israel, and that he had made his kingdom great because of his people Israel.

大卫离开希伯仑之后，在耶路撒冷又立后妃，又生儿女。
And David took more women and wives in Jerusalem, after he had come from Hebron: and he had more sons and daughters.

在耶路撒冷所生的儿子是沙母亚，朔罢，拿单，所罗门，
These are the names of those whose birth took place in Jerusalem: Shammua and Shobab and Nathan and Solomon

益辖，以利书亚，尼斐，雅非亚，
And Ibhar and Elishua and Nepheg and Japhia

以利沙玛，以利雅大，以利法列。
And Elishama and Eliada and Eliphelet.

非利士人听见人膏大卫作以色列王，非利士众人就上来寻索大卫。大卫听见，就下到保障。
And when the Philistines had news that David had been made king over Israel, they all went up in search of David; and David, hearing of it, went down to the strong place.

非利士人来了，布散在利乏音谷。
And when the Philistines came, they went in every direction in the valley of Rephaim.

大卫求问耶和华说，我可以上去攻打非利士人吗？你将他们交在我手里吗？耶和华说，你可以上去，我必将非利士人交在你手里。
And David, desiring directions from the Lord, said, Am I to go up against the Philistines? will you give them up into my hands? And the Lord said, Go up, for I will certainly give up the Philistines into your hands.

大卫来到巴力毗拉心，在那里击杀非利士人，说，耶和华在我面前冲破敌人，如同水冲去一般。因此称那地方为巴力毗拉心。
And David went to Baal-perazim, and overcame them there; and he said, The Lord has let the forces fighting against me be broken before me as a wall is broken by rushing waters. So that place was named Baal-perazim.

非利士人将偶像撇在那里，大卫和跟随他的人拿去了。
And the Philistines, when they went in flight, did not take their images with them, and David and his men took them away.

非利士人又上来，布散在利乏音谷。
And the Philistines came up again, and went in every direction in the valley of Rephaim.

大卫求问耶和华。耶和华说，不要一直地上去，要转到他们后头，从桑林对面攻打他们。
And when David went for directions to the Lord, he said, You are not to go up against them in front; but make a circle round them from the back and come on them opposite the spice-trees.

你听见桑树梢上有脚步的声音，就要急速前去，因为那时耶和华已经在你前头去攻打非利士人的军队。
Then at the sound of footsteps in the tops of the trees, go forward quickly, for the Lord has gone out before you to overcome the army of the Philistines.

大卫就遵着耶和华所吩咐的去行，攻打非利士人，从迦巴直到基色。
And David did as the Lord had said; and he overcame the Philistines, attacking them from Gibeon to near Gezer.

大卫又聚集以色列中所有挑选的人三万。
And David got together all the fighting-men of Israel to the number of thirty thousand;

大卫起身，率领跟随他的众人前往，要从巴拉犹大将神的约柜运来。这约柜就是坐在二基路伯上万军之耶和华留名的约柜。
And David, and all the people who were with him, went to Baal of Judah to get the ark of God, over which the holy name is named, the name of the Lord of armies, whose place is between the winged ones.

他们将神的约柜从冈上亚比拿达的家里抬出来，放在新车上。亚比拿达的两个儿子乌撒和亚希约赶这新车。
And they put the ark of God on a new cart and took it out of the house of Abinadab which was on the hill: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, were the drivers of the cart.

他们将神的约柜从冈上亚比拿达家里抬出来的时候，亚希约在柜前行走。
And Uzzah went by the side of the ark, while Ahio went before it.

大卫和以色列的全家在耶和华面前，用松木制造的各样乐器和琴，瑟，鼓，钹，锣，作乐跳舞。
And David and all the men of Israel made melody before the Lord with all their power, with songs and with corded instruments and instruments of brass.

到了拿艮的禾场，因为牛失前蹄（或作惊跳），乌撒就伸手扶住神的约柜。
And when they came to Nacon's grain-floor, Uzzah put his hand on the ark of God to keep it safe in its place, for the oxen were out of control.

神耶和华向乌撒发怒，因这错误击杀他，他就死在神的约柜旁。
And the wrath of the Lord, burning against Uzzah, sent destruction on him because he had put his hand on the ark, and death came to him there by the ark of God.

大卫因耶和华击杀（原文作闯杀）乌撒，心里愁烦，就称那地方为毗列斯乌撒，直到今日。
And David was angry because of the Lord's outburst of wrath against Uzzah: and he gave that place the name Perez-uzzah, which is its name to this day.

那日，大卫惧怕耶和华，说，耶和华的约柜怎可运到我这里来。
And such was David's fear of the Lord that day, that he said, How may I let the ark of God come to me?

于是大卫不肯将耶和华的约柜运进大卫的城，却运到迦特人俄别以东的家中。
So David did not let the ark of the Lord come back to him to the town of David: but had it turned away and put into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.

耶和华的约柜在迦特人俄别以东家中三个月。耶和华赐福给俄别以东和他的全家。
And the ark of the Lord was in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite for three months: and the Lord sent a blessing on Obed-edom and all his family.

有人告诉大卫王说，耶和华因为约柜赐福给俄别以东的家和一切属他的。大卫就去，欢欢喜喜地将神的约柜从俄别以东家中抬到大卫的城里。
And they said to King David, The blessing of the Lord is on the family of Obed-edom and on all he has, because of the ark of God. And David went and took the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the town of David with joy.

抬耶和华约柜的人走了六步，大卫就献牛与肥羊为祭。
And when those who were lifting the ark of the Lord had gone six steps, he made an offering of an ox and a fat young beast.

大卫穿着细麻布的以弗得，在耶和华面前极力跳舞。
And David, clothed in a linen ephod, was dancing before the Lord with all his strength.

这样，大卫和以色列的全家欢呼吹角，将耶和华的约柜抬上来。
So David and all the men of Israel took up the ark of the Lord with cries of joy and sounding of horns.

耶和华的约柜进了大卫城的时候，扫罗的女儿米甲从窗户里观看，见大卫王在耶和华面前踊跃跳舞，心里就轻视他。
And when the ark of the Lord came into the town of David, Michal, Saul's daughter, looking out of the window, saw King David dancing and jumping before the Lord; and to her mind he seemed foolish.

众人将耶和华的约柜请进去，安放在所预备的地方，就是在大卫所搭的帐幕里。大卫在耶和华面前献燔祭和平安祭。
And they took in the ark of the Lord, and put it in its place inside the tent which David had put up for it: and David made burned offerings and peace-offerings to the Lord.

大卫献完了燔祭和平安祭，就奉万军之耶和华的名给民祝福，
And after David had made the burned offerings and the peace-offerings, he gave the people a blessing in the name of the Lord of armies.

并且分给以色列众人，无论男女，每人一个饼，一块肉，一个葡萄饼。众人就各回各家去了。
And he gave to every man and woman among all the people, among all the masses of Israel, a cake of bread and a measure of wine and a cake of dry grapes. Then all the people went away, every man to his house.

大卫回家要给眷属祝福。扫罗的女儿米甲出来迎接他，说，以色列王今日在臣仆的婢女眼前露体，如同一个轻贱人无耻露体一样，有好大的荣耀阿。
Then David came back to give a blessing to his family. And Michal, Saul's daughter, came out to him and said, How full of glory was the king of Israel today, who let himself be seen uncovered by his servant-girls like a foolish person uncovering himself without shame!

大卫对米甲说，这是在耶和华面前。耶和华已拣选我，废了你父和你父的全家，立我作耶和华民以色列的君，所以我必在耶和华面前跳舞。
And David said to Michal, I was dancing before the Lord, who put me over your father and all his sons, to make me a ruler over the people of the Lord, over his people Israel: and I will go on playing before the Lord;

我也必更加卑微，自己看为轻贱。你所说的那些婢女，她们倒要尊敬我。
And I will do even worse than this, and make myself even lower in your eyes: but the servant-girls of whom you were talking will give me honour.

扫罗的女儿米甲，直到死日，没有生养儿女。
And Michal, Saul's daughter, had no child till the day of her death.

王住在自己宫中，耶和华使他安靖，不被四围的仇敌扰乱。
Now when the king was living in his house, and the Lord had given him rest from war on every side;

那时，王对先知拿单说，看哪，我住在香柏木的宫中，神的约柜反在幔子里。
The king said to Nathan the prophet, See now, I am living in a house of cedar, but the ark of God is housed inside the curtains of a tent.

拿单对王说，你可以照你的心意而行，因为耶和华与你同在。
And Nathan said to the king, Go and do whatever is in your heart; for the Lord is with you.

当夜，耶和华的话临到拿单说，
Now that night the word of the Lord came to Nathan, saying,

你去告诉我仆人大卫，说耶和华如此说，你岂可建造殿宇给我居住呢？
Go and say to my servant David, The Lord says, Are you to be the builder of a house, a living-place for me?

自从我领以色列人出埃及直到今日，我未曾住过殿宇，常在会幕和帐幕中行走。
For from the day when I took the children of Israel up out of Egypt till this day, I have had no house, but have gone from place to place in a tent.

凡我同以色列人所走的地方，我何曾向以色列一支派的士师，就是我吩咐牧养我民以色列的说，你们为何不给我建造香柏木的殿宇呢？
In all the places where I went with all the children of Israel, did I ever say to any of the judges of Israel, to whom I gave the care of my people Israel, Why have you not made me a house of cedar?

现在，你要告诉我仆人大卫，说万军之耶和华如此说，我从羊圈中将你召来，叫你不再跟从羊群，立你作我民以色列的君。
Then say these words to my servant David, The Lord of armies says, I took you from the fields, from keeping the sheep, so that you might be a ruler over my people, over my people Israel:

你无论往哪里去，我常与你同在，剪除你的一切仇敌。我必使你得大名，好像世上大大有名的人一样。
And I have been with you wherever you went, cutting off before you all those who were against you; and I will make your name great, like the name of the greatest ones of the earth.

我必为我民以色列选定一个地方，栽培他们，使他们住自己的地方，不再迁移。凶恶之子也不像从前扰害他们，
And I will make a resting-place for my people Israel, planting them there, so that they may be living in the place which is theirs, and never again be moved; and never again will they be troubled by evil men as they were at the first,

并不像我命士师治理我民以色列的时候一样。我必使你安靖，不被一切仇敌扰乱，并且我耶和华应许你，必为你建立家室。
From the time when I put judges over my people Israel; and I will give you peace from all who are against you. And the Lord says to you that he will make you the head of a line of kings.

你寿数满足，与你列祖同睡的时候，我必使你的后裔接续你的位。我也必坚定他的国。
And when the time comes for you to go to rest with your fathers, I will put in your place your seed after you, the offspring of your body, and I will make his kingdom strong.

他必为我的名建造殿宇。我必坚定他的国位，直到永远。
He will be the builder of a house for my name, and I will make the seat of his authority certain for ever.

我要作他的父，他要作我的子。他若犯了罪，我必用人的杖责打他，用人的鞭责罚他。
I will be to him a father and he will be to me a son: if he does wrong, I will give him punishment with the rod of men and with the blows of the children of men;

但我的慈爱仍不离开他，像离开在你面前所废弃的扫罗一样。
But my mercy will not be taken away from him, as I took it from him who was before you.

你的家和你的国必在我（原文作你）面前永远坚立。你的国位也必坚定，直到永远。
And your family and your kingdom will keep their place before me for ever: the seat of your authority will never be overturned.

拿单就按这一切话，照这默示，告诉大卫。
So Nathan gave David an account of all these words and this vision.

于是大卫王进去，坐在耶和华面前，说，主耶和华阿，我是谁。我的家算什么。你竟使我到这地步呢？
Then David the king went in and took his seat before the Lord, and said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my family, that you have been my guide till now?

主耶和华阿，这在你眼中还看为小，又应许你仆人的家至于久远。主耶和华阿，这岂是人所常遇的事吗？
And this was only a small thing to you, O Lord God; but your words have even been about the far-off future of your servant's family, O Lord God!

主耶和华阿，我还有何言可以对你说呢？因为你知道你的仆人。
What more may David say to you? for you have knowledge of your servant, O Lord God.

你行这大事使仆人知道，是因你所应许的话，也是照你的心意。
Because of your word and from your heart, you have done all this great work, and let your servant see it.

主耶和华阿，你本为大，照我们耳中听见，没有可比你的。除你以外再无神。
Truly you are great, O Lord God: there is no one like you and no other God but you, as is clear from everything which has come to our ears.

世上有何民能比你的民以色列呢？你从埃及救赎他们作自己的子民，又在你赎出来的民面前行大而可畏的事，驱逐列邦人和他们的神，显出你的大名。
And what other nation in the earth, like your people Israel, did a god go out to take for himself, to be his people, and to make a name for himself, and to do great and strange things for them, driving out a nation and its gods from before his people?

你曾坚立你的民以色列作你的子民，直到永远。你耶和华也作了他们的神。
But you took and made strong for yourself your people Israel, to be your people for ever; and you, Lord, became their God.

耶和华神阿，你所应许仆人和仆人家的话，求你坚定，直到永远。照你所说的而行。
And now, O Lord God, may the word which you have said about your servant and about his family, be made certain for ever, and may you do as you have said!

愿人永远尊你的名为大，说，万军之耶和华是治理以色列的神。这样，你仆人大卫的家必在你面前坚立。
And let your name be made great for ever, and let men say, The Lord of armies is God over Israel: and let the family of David your servant be made strong before you!

万军之耶和华以色列的神阿，因你启示你的仆人说，我必为你建立家室，所以仆人大胆向你如此祈祷。
For you, O Lord of armies, the God of Israel, have clearly said to your servant, I will make you the head of a family of kings: and so it has come into your servant's heart to make this prayer to you.

主耶和华阿，惟有你是神。你的话是真实的。你也应许将这福气赐给仆人。
And now, O Lord God, you are God and your words are true and you have said you will give your servant this good thing;

现在求你赐福与仆人的家，可以永存在你面前。主耶和华阿，这是你所应许的。愿你永远赐福与仆人的家。
So may it be your pleasure to give your blessing to the family of your servant, so that it may go on for ever before you: (for you, O Lord God, have said it,) and may your blessing be on your servant's family line for ever!

此后，大卫攻打非利士人，把他们治服，从他们手下夺取了京城的权柄（原文作母城的嚼环）。
And it came about after this that David made an attack on the Philistines and overcame them; and David took the authority of the mother-town from the hands of the Philistines.

又攻打摩押人，使他们躺卧在地上，用绳量一量，量二绳的杀了，量一绳的存留。摩押人就归服大卫，给他进贡。
And he overcame the Moabites, and he had them measured with a line when they were stretched out on the earth; marking out two lines for death and one full line for life. So the Moabites became servants to David and gave him offerings.

琐巴王利合的儿子哈大底谢往大河去，要夺回他的国权。大卫就攻打他，
And David overcame Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, when he went to make his power seen by the River.

擒拿了他的马兵一千七百，步兵二万，将拉战车的马砍断蹄筋，但留下一百辆车的马。
And David took from him one thousand, seven hundred horsemen and twenty thousand footmen: and David had the leg-muscles of the horses cut, only keeping enough of them for a hundred war-carriages.

大马色的亚兰人来帮助琐巴王哈大底谢，大卫就杀了亚兰人二万二千。
And when the Aramaeans of Damascus came to the help of Hadadezer, king of Zobah, David put to the sword twenty-two thousand of the Aramaeans.

于是大卫在大马色的亚兰地设立防营，亚兰人就归服他，给他进贡。大卫无论往哪里去，耶和华都使他得胜。
And David put armed forces in Aram of Damascus: and the Aramaeans became servants to David and gave him offerings. And the Lord made David overcome wherever he went.

他夺了哈大底谢臣仆所拿的金盾牌，带到耶路撒冷。
And David took their gold body-covers from the servants of Hadadezer and took them to Jerusalem.

大卫王又从属哈大底谢的比他和比罗他城中夺取了许多的铜。
And from Tebah and Berothai, towns of Hadadezer, King David took a great store of brass.

哈马王陀以听见大卫杀败哈大底谢的全军，
And when Tou, king of Hamath, had news that David had overcome all the army of Hadadezer,

就打发他儿子约兰去见大卫王，问他的安，为他祝福，因为他杀败了哈大底谢，原来陀以与哈大底谢常常争战。约兰带了金银铜的器皿来，
He sent his son Hadoram to David, with words of peace and blessing, because he had overcome Hadadezer in the fight, for Hadadezer had wars with Tou; and Hadoram took with him vessels of silver and gold and brass:

大卫王将这些器皿和他治服各国所得来的金银都分别为圣，献给耶和华，
These King David made holy to the Lord, together with the silver and gold which he had taken from the nations he had overcome--

就是从亚兰，摩押，亚扪，非利士，亚玛力人所得来的，以及从琐巴王利合的儿子哈大底谢所掠之物。
The nations of Edom and Moab, and the children of Ammon and the Philistines and the Amalekites and the goods he had taken from Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

大卫在盐谷击杀了亚兰（或作以东，见诗篇六十篇诗题）一万八千人回来，就得了大名。
And David got great honour for himself, when he came back, by the destruction of Edom in the valley of Salt, to the number of eighteen thousand men.

又在以东全地设立防营，以东人就都归服大卫。大卫无论往哪里去，耶和华都使他得胜。
And he put armed forces in Edom; all through Edom he had armed forces stationed, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And the Lord made David overcome wherever he went.

大卫作以色列众人的王，又向众民秉公行义。
And David was king over all Israel, judging and giving right decisions for all his people.

洗鲁雅的儿子约押作元帅。亚希律的儿子约沙法作史官。
And Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the army; and Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was keeper of the records;

亚希突的儿子撒督和亚比亚他的儿子亚希米勒作祭司长。西莱雅作书记。
And Zadok and Abiathar, the son of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, were priests; and Seraiah was the scribe;

耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅统辖基利提人和比利提人。大卫的众子都作领袖。
And Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were priests.

大卫问说，扫罗家还有剩下的人没有。我要因约拿单的缘故向他施恩。
And David said, Is there still anyone of Saul's family living, so that I may be a friend to him, because of Jonathan?

扫罗家有一个仆人，名叫洗巴，有人叫他来见大卫，王问他说，你是洗巴吗？回答说，仆人是。
Now there was of Saul's people a servant named Ziba, and they sent him to David; and the king said to him, Are you Ziba? And he said, I am.

王说，扫罗家还有人没有。我要照神的慈爱恩待他。洗巴对王说，还有约拿单的一个儿子，是瘸腿的。
And the king said, Is there anyone of Saul's family still living, to whom I may be a friend in God's name? And Ziba said, There is a son of Jonathan, whose feet are damaged.

王说，他在哪里。洗巴对王说，他在罗底巴，亚米利的儿子玛吉家里。
And the king said to him, Where is he? And Ziba said to the king, He is in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar.

于是大卫王打发人去，从罗底巴亚米利的儿子玛吉家里召了他来。
Then King David sent, and had him taken from Lo-debar, from the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel.

扫罗的孙子，约拿单的儿子米非波设来见大卫，伏地叩拜。大卫说，米非波设。米非波设说，仆人在此。
And Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, came to David, and falling down on his face, gave him honour. And David said, Mephibosheth. And answering he said, Your servant is here.

大卫说，你不要惧怕，我必因你父亲约拿单的缘故施恩与你，将你祖父扫罗的一切田地都归还你。你也可以常与我同席吃饭。
And David said to him, Have no fear: for truly I will be good to you, because of your father Jonathan, and I will give back to you all the land which was Saul's; and you will have a place at my table at all times.

米非波设又叩拜，说，仆人算什么，不过如死狗一般，竟蒙王这样眷顾。
And he went down on his face before the king, and said, What is your servant, for you to take note of a dead dog such as I am?

王召了扫罗的仆人洗巴来，对他说，我已将属扫罗和他的一切家产都赐给你主人的儿子了。
Then the king sent for Ziba, Saul's servant, and said to him, All the property of Saul and of his family I have given to your master's son.

你和你的众子，仆人要为你主人的儿子米非波设耕种田地，把所产的拿来供他食用。他却要常与我同席吃饭。洗巴有十五个儿子，二十个仆人。
And you and your sons and your servants are to take care of the land for him, and get in the fruit of it, so that your master's son may have food: but Mephibosheth, your master's son, will have a place at my table at all times. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.

洗巴对王说，凡我主我王吩咐仆人的，仆人都必遵行。王又说，米非波设必与我同席吃饭，如王的儿子一样。
Then Ziba said to the king, Every order which you have given to your servant will be done. As for Mephibosheth, he had a place at David's table, like one of the king's sons.

米非波设有一个小儿子，名叫米迦。凡住在洗巴家里的人都作了米非波设的仆人。
And Mephibosheth had a young son named Mica. And all the people living in the house of Ziba were servants to Mephibosheth.

于是米非波设住在耶路撒冷，常与王同席吃饭。他两腿都是瘸的。
So Mephibosheth went on living in Jerusalem; for he took all his meals at the king's table; and he had not the use of his feet.

此后，亚扪人的王死了，他儿子哈嫩接续他作王。
Now after this, death came to the king of the children of Ammon, and Hanun, his son, became king in his place.

大卫说，我要照哈嫩的父亲拿辖厚待我的恩典厚待哈嫩。于是大卫差遣臣仆，为他丧父安慰他。大卫的臣仆到了亚扪人的境内。
And David said, I will be a friend to Hanun, the son of Nahash, as his father was a friend to me. So David sent his servants, to give him words of comfort on account of his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

但亚扪人的首领对他们的主哈嫩说，大卫差人来安慰你，你想他是尊敬你父亲吗？他差臣仆来不是详察窥探，要倾覆这城吗？
But the chiefs of the children of Ammon said to Hanun their lord, Does it seem to you that David is honouring your father by sending comforters to you? has he not sent his servants to go through the town and make secret observation of it, and overcome it?

哈嫩便将大卫臣仆的胡须剃去一半，又割断他们下半截的衣服，使他们露出下体，打发他们回去。
So Hanun took David's servants, and after cutting off half the hair on their chins, and cutting off the skirts of their robes up to the middle, he sent them away.

有人告诉大卫，他就差人去迎接他们，因为他们甚觉羞耻，告诉他们说，可以住在耶利哥，等到胡须长起再回来。
When David had news of it, he sent men out with the purpose of meeting them on their way, for the men were greatly shamed: and the king said, Go to Jericho till your hair is long again, and then come back.

亚扪人知道大卫憎恶他们，就打发人去，招募伯利合的亚兰人和琐巴的亚兰人，步兵二万，与玛迦王的人一千，陀伯人一万二千。
And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves hated by David, they sent to the Aramaeans of Beth-rehob and Zobah, and got for payment twenty thousand footmen, and they got from the king of Maacah a thousand men, and from Tob twelve thousand.

大卫听见了，就差派约押统带勇猛的全军出去。
And hearing of this, David sent Joab and all the army and the best fighting-men.

亚扪人出来，在城门前摆阵。琐巴与利合的亚兰人，陀伯人，并玛迦人，另在郊野摆阵。
And the children of Ammon came out and put their forces in position at the way into the town: and the Aramaeans of Zobah and of Rehob, with the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.

约押看见敌人在他前后摆阵，就从以色列军中挑选精兵，使他们对着亚兰人摆阵。
Now when Joab saw that their forces were in position against him in front and at his back, he took the best of the men of Israel and put them in line against the Aramaeans;

其余的兵交与他兄弟亚比筛，对着亚扪人摆阵。
And the rest of the people he put in position against the children of Ammon, with Abishai, his brother, at their head.

约押对亚比筛说，亚兰人若强过我，你就来帮助我。亚扪人若强过你，我就去帮助你。
And he said, If the Aramaeans are stronger and get the better of me, then you are to come to my help; but if the children of Ammon get the better of you, I will come to your help.

我们都当刚强，为本国的民和神的城邑作大丈夫。愿耶和华凭他的意旨而行。
Take heart, and let us be strong for our people and for the towns of our God, and may the Lord do what seems good to him.

于是，约押和跟随他的人前进攻打亚兰人。亚兰人在约押面前逃跑。
Then Joab and the people with him went forward to the fight against the Aramaeans, and they went in flight before him.

亚扪人见亚兰人逃跑，他们也在亚比筛面前逃跑进城。约押就离开亚扪人那里，回耶路撒冷去了。
And when the children of Ammon saw the flight of the Aramaeans, they themselves went in flight from Abishai, and came into the town. So Joab went back from fighting the children of Ammon and came to Jerusalem.

亚兰人见自己被以色列人打败，就又聚集。
And when the Aramaeans saw that Israel had overcome them, they got themselves together.

哈大底谢差遣人，将大河那边的亚兰人调来。他们到了希兰，哈大底谢的将军朔法率领他们。
And Hadadezer sent for the Aramaeans who were on the other side of the River: and they came to Helam, with Shobach, the captain of Hadadezer's army, at their head.

有人告诉大卫，他就聚集以色列众人，过约旦河，来到希兰。亚兰人迎着大卫摆阵，与他打仗。
And word of this was given to David: and he got all Israel together and went over Jordan and came to Helam. And the Aramaeans put their forces in position against David, and made an attack on him.

亚兰人在以色列人面前逃跑。大卫杀了亚兰七百辆战车的人，四万马兵，又杀了亚兰的将军朔法。
And the Aramaeans went in flight before Israel; and David put to the sword the men of seven hundred Aramaean war-carriages and forty thousand footmen, and Shobach, the captain of the army, was wounded, and came to his death there.

属哈大底谢的诸王见自己被以色列人打败，就与以色列人和好，归服他们。于是亚兰人不敢再帮助亚扪人了。
And when all the kings who were servants of Hadadezer saw that they were overcome by Israel, they made peace with Israel and became their servants. So the Aramaeans, in fear, gave no more help to the children of Ammon.

过了一年，到列王出战的时候，大卫又差派约押，率领臣仆和以色列众人出战。他们就打败亚扪人，围攻拉巴。大卫仍住在耶路撒冷。
Now in the spring, at the time when kings go out to war, David sent Joab and his servants and all Israel with him; and they made waste the land of the children of Ammon, and took up their position before Rabbah, shutting it in. But David was still at Jerusalem.

一日，太阳平西，大卫从床上起来，在王宫的平顶上游行，看见一个妇人沐浴，容貌甚美，
Now one evening, David got up from his bed, and while he was walking on the roof of the king's house, he saw from there a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful.

大卫就差人打听那妇人是谁。有人说，她是以连的女儿，赫人乌利亚的妻拔示巴。
And David sent to get knowledge who the woman was. And one said, Is this not Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam and wife of Uriah the Hittite?

大卫差人去，将妇人接来。那时她的月经才得洁净。她来了，大卫与她同房，她就回家去了。
And David sent and took her; and she came to him, and he took her to his bed: (for she had been made clean;) then she went back to her house.

于是她怀了孕，打发人去告诉大卫说，我怀了孕。
And the woman became with child; and she sent word to David that she was with child.

大卫差人到约押那里，说，你打发赫人乌利亚到我这里来。约押就打发乌利亚去见大卫。
And David sent to Joab saying, Send Uriah the Hittite to me. And Joab sent Uriah to David.

乌利亚来了，大卫问约押好，也问兵好，又问争战的事怎样。
And when Uriah came to him, David put questions to him about how Joab and the people were, and how the war was going.

大卫对乌利亚说，你回家去，洗洗脚吧。乌利亚出了王宫，随后王送他一分食物。
And David said to Uriah, Go down to your house and let your feet be washed. And Uriah went away from the king's house, and an offering from the king was sent after him.

乌利亚却和他主人的仆人一同睡在宫门外，没有回家去。
But Uriah took his rest at the door of the king's house, with all the servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house.

有人告诉大卫说，乌利亚没有回家去。大卫就问乌利亚说，你从远路上来，为什么不回家去呢？
And when word was given to David that Uriah had not gone down to his house, David said to Uriah, Have you not come from a journey? why did you not go down to your house?

乌利亚对大卫说，约柜和以色列与犹大兵都住在棚里，我主约押和我主（或作王）的仆人都在田野安营，我岂可回家吃喝，与妻子同寝呢？我敢在王面前起誓（原文作我指着王和王的性命起誓），我决不行这事。
And Uriah said to David, Israel and Judah with the ark are living in tents, and my lord Joab and the other servants of my lord are sleeping in the open field; and am I to go to my house and take food and drink, and go to bed with my wife? By the living Lord, and by the life of your soul, I will not do such a thing.

大卫吩咐乌利亚说，你今日仍住在这里，明日我打发你去。于是乌利亚那日和次日住在耶路撒冷。
And David said to Uriah, Be here today, and after that I will let you go. So Uriah was in Jerusalem that day and the day after.

大卫召了乌利亚来，叫他在自己面前吃喝，使他喝醉。到了晚上，乌利亚出去与他主的仆人一同住宿，还没有回到家里去。
And when David sent for him, he took meat and drink with him, and David made him the worse for drink: and when evening came, he went to rest on his bed with the servants of his lord, but he did not go down to his house.

次日早晨，大卫写信与约押，交乌利亚随手带去。
Now in the morning, David gave Uriah a letter to take to Joab.

信内写着说，要派乌利亚前进，到阵势极险之处，你们便退后，使他被杀。
And in the letter he said, Take care to put Uriah in the very front of the line, where the fighting is most violent, and go back from him, so that he may be overcome and put to death.

约押围城的时候，知道敌人那里有勇士，便将乌利亚派在那里。
So while Joab was watching the town, he put Uriah in the place where it was clear to him the best fighters were.

城里的人出来和约押打仗。大卫的仆人中有几个被杀的，赫人乌利亚也死了。
And the men of the town went out and had a fight with Joab: and a number of David's men came to their death in the fight, and with them Uriah the Hittite.

于是，约押差人去将争战的一切事告诉大卫，
Then Joab sent David news of everything which had taken place in the war:

又嘱咐使者说，你把争战的一切事对王说完了，
And he gave orders to the man who took the news, saying, After you have given the king all the news about the war,

王若发怒，问你说，你们打仗为什么挨近城墙呢？岂不知敌人必从城上射箭吗？
If the king is angry and says, Why did you go so near the town for the fight? was it not certain that their archers would be on the wall?

从前打死耶路比设（就是耶路巴力，见士师记九章一节）儿子亚比米勒的是谁呢？岂不是一个妇人从城上抛下一块上磨石来，打在他身上，他就死在提备斯吗？你们为什么挨近城墙呢？你就说，王的仆人，赫人乌利亚也死了。
Who put Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, to death? did not a woman send a great stone down on him from the wall, putting him to death at Thebez? why did you go so near the wall? Then say to him, Your servant Uriah the Hittite is among the dead.

使者起身，来见大卫，照着约押所吩咐他的话奏告大卫。
So the man went, and came to David, and gave him all the news which Joab had sent him to give; then David was angry with Joab and said, Why did you go so near the town for the fight? was it not certain that their archers would be on the wall? who put Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, to death? did not a woman send a great stone down on him from the wall, putting him to death at Thebez? why did you go so near the wall?

使者对大卫说，敌人强过我们，出到郊野与我们打仗，我们追杀他们，直到城门口。
And the man said to David, Truly the men got the better of us, and came out against us into the open country, but we sent them back to the very doors of the town.

射箭的从城上射王的仆人，射死几个，赫人乌利亚也死了。
And the archers sent their arrows at your servants from the wall, and some of the king's servants are dead, and among them is your servant Uriah the Hittite.

王向使者说，你告诉约押说，不要因这事愁闷，刀剑或吞灭这人或吞灭那人，没有一定的。你只管竭力攻城，将城倾覆。可以用这话勉励约押。
Then David said to the man, Go and say to Joab, Do not let this be a grief to you; for one man may come to his death by the sword like another: put up an even stronger fight against the town, and take it: and do you put heart into him.

乌利亚的妻听见丈夫乌利亚死了，就为他哀哭。
And when the wife of Uriah had news that her husband was dead, she gave herself up to weeping for him.

哀哭的日子过了，大卫差人将她接到宫里，她就作了大卫的妻，给大卫生了一个儿子。但大卫所行的这事，耶和华甚不喜悦。
And when the days of weeping were past, David sent for her, and took her into his house, and she became his wife and gave him a son. But the Lord was not pleased with the thing David had done.

耶和华差遣拿单去见大卫。拿单到了大卫那里，对他说，在一座城里有两个人，一个是富户，一个是穷人。
And the Lord sent Nathan to David. And Nathan came to him and said, There were two men in the same town: one a man of great wealth, and the other a poor man.

富户有许多牛群羊群。
The man of wealth had great numbers of flocks and herds;

穷人除了所买来养活的一只小母羊羔之外，别无所有。羊羔在他家里和他儿女一同长大，吃他所吃的，喝他所喝的，睡在他怀中，在他看来如同女儿一样。
But the poor man had only one little she-lamb, which he had got and taken care of: from its birth it had been with him like one of his children; his meat was its food, and from his cup it took its drink, resting in his arms, and it was like a daughter to him.

有一客人来到这富户家里。富户舍不得从自己的牛群羊群中取一只预备给客人吃，却取了那穷人的羊羔，预备给客人吃。
Now a traveller came to the house of the man of wealth, but he would not take anything from his flock or his herd to make a meal for the traveller who had come to him, but he took the poor man's lamb and made it ready for the man who had come.

大卫就甚恼怒那人，对拿单说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，行这事的人该死。
And David was full of wrath against that man; and he said to Nathan, By the living Lord, death is the right punishment for the man who has done this:

他必偿还羊羔四倍。因为他行这事，没有怜恤的心。
And he will have to give back four times the value of the lamb, because he has done this and because he had no pity.

拿单对大卫说，你就是那人。耶和华以色列的神如此说，我膏你作以色列的王，救你脱离扫罗的手。
And Nathan said to David, You are that man. The Lord God of Israel says, I made you king over Israel, putting holy oil on you, and I kept you safe from the hands of Saul;

我将你主人的家业赐给你，将你主人的妻交在你怀里，又将以色列和犹大家赐给你。你若还以为不足，我早就加倍地赐给你。
I gave you your master's daughter and your master's wives for yourself, and I gave you the daughters of Israel and Judah; and if that had not been enough, I would have given you such and such things.

你为什么藐视耶和华的命令，行他眼中看为恶的事呢？你借亚扪人的刀杀害赫人乌利亚，又娶了他的妻为妻。
Why then have you had no respect for the word of the Lord, doing what is evil in his eyes? You have put Uriah the Hittite to death with the sword, and have taken his wife to be your wife; you have put him to death with the sword of the children of Ammon.

你既藐视我，娶了赫人乌利亚的妻为妻，所以刀剑必永不离开你的家。
So now the sword will never be turned away from your family; because you have had no respect for me, and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.

耶和华如此说，我必从你家中兴起祸患攻击你。我必在你眼前把你的妃嫔赐给别人，他在日光之下就与她们同寝。
The Lord says, From those of your family I will send evil against you, and before your very eyes I will take your wives and give them to your neighbour, and he will take your wives to his bed by the light of this sun.

你在暗中行这事，我却要在以色列众人面前，日光之下，报应你。
You did it secretly; but I will do this thing before all Israel and in the light of the sun.

大卫对拿单说，我得罪耶和华了。拿单说，耶和华已经除掉你的罪，你必不至于死。
And David said to Nathan, Great is my sin against the Lord. And Nathan said to David, The Lord has put away your sin; death will not come on you.

只是你行这事，叫耶和华的仇敌大得亵渎的机会，故此，你所得的孩子必定要死。
But still, because you have had no respect for the Lord, death will certainly overtake the child who has newly come to birth.

拿单就回家去了。耶和华击打乌利亚妻给大卫所生的孩子，使他得重病。
Then Nathan went back to his house. And the hand of the Lord was on David's son, the child of Uriah's wife, and it became very ill.

所以大卫为这孩子恳求神，而且禁食，进入内室，终夜躺在地上。
So David made prayer to God for the child; and he took no food day after day, and went in and, stretching himself out on the earth, was there all night.

他家中的老臣来到他旁边，要把他从地上扶起来，他却不肯起来，也不同他们吃饭。
And the chief men of his house got up and went to his side to make him get up from the earth, but he would not; and he would not take food with them.

到第七日，孩子死了。大卫的臣仆不敢告诉他孩子死了，因他们说，孩子还活着的时候，我们劝他，他尚且不肯听我们的话，若告诉他孩子死了，岂不更加忧伤吗？
And then on the seventh day the child's death took place. And David's servants were in fear of giving him the news of the child's death: for they said, Truly, while the child was still living he gave no attention when we said anything to him: what will he do to himself if we give him word that the child is dead?

大卫见臣仆彼此低声说话，就知道孩子死了，问臣仆说，孩子死了吗？他们说，死了。
But when David saw that his servants were talking together quietly, he was certain that the child was dead: and he said to his servants, Is the child dead? and they said, He is.

大卫就从地上起来，沐浴，抹膏，换了衣裳，进耶和华的殿敬拜。然后回宫，吩咐人摆饭，他便吃了。
Then David got up from the earth, and after washing and rubbing himself with oil and changing his clothing, he went into the house of the Lord and gave worship: then he went back to his house, and at his order they put food before him and he had a meal.

臣仆问他说，你所行的是什么意思。孩子活着的时候，你禁食哭泣。孩子死了，你倒起来吃饭。
Then his servants said to him, Why have you been acting in this way? you were weeping and going without food while the child was still living; but when the child was dead, you got up and had a meal.

大卫说，孩子还活着，我禁食哭泣。因为我想，或者耶和华怜恤我，使孩子不死也未可知。
And he said, While the child was still living I went without food and gave myself up to weeping: for I said, Who is able to say that the Lord will not have mercy on me and give the child life?

孩子死了，我何必禁食，我岂能使他返回呢？我必往他那里去，他却不能回我这里来。
But now that the child is dead there is no reason for me to go without food; am I able to make him come back to life? I will go to him, but he will never come back to me.

大卫安慰他的妻拔示巴，与她同寝，她就生了儿子，给他起名叫所罗门。耶和华也喜爱他，
And David gave comfort to his wife Bath-sheba, and he went in to her and had connection with her: and she had a son to whom she gave the name Solomon. And he was dear to the Lord.

就借先知拿单赐他一个名字，叫耶底底亚，因为耶和华爱他。
And he sent word by Nathan the prophet, who gave him the name Jedidiah, by the word of the Lord.

约押攻取亚扪人的京城拉巴。
Now Joab was fighting against Rabbah, in the land of the children of Ammon, and he took the water-town.

约押打发使者去见大卫，说，我攻打拉巴，取其水城。
And Joab sent men to David, saying, I have made war against Rabbah and have taken the water-town.

现在你要聚集其余的军兵来，安营围攻这城，恐怕我取了这城，人就以我的名叫这城。
So now, get the rest of the people together, and put them in position against the town and take it, for if I take it, it will be named after my name.

于是大卫聚集众军，往拉巴去攻城，就取了这城，
Then David got all the people together and went to Rabbah and made war on it and took it.

夺了亚扪人之王所戴的金冠冕（王或作玛勒堪。玛勒堪即米勒公，又名摩洛，亚扪族之神名），其上的金子重一他连得，又嵌着宝石。人将这冠冕戴在大卫头上。大卫从城里夺了许多财物，
And he took the crown of Milcom from his head; the weight of it was a talent of gold, and in it were stones of great price; and it was put on David's head. And he took a great store of goods from the town.

将城里的人拉出来，放在锯下，或铁耙下，或铁斧下，或叫他经过砖窑（或作强他们用锯，或用打粮食的铁器，或用铁斧作工，或使在砖窑里服役）。大卫待亚扪各城的居民都是如此。其后，大卫和众军都回耶路撒冷去了。
And he took the people out of the town and put them to work with wood-cutting instruments, and iron grain-crushers, and iron axes, and at brick-making: this he did to all the towns of the children of Ammon. Then David and all the people went back to Jerusalem.

大卫的儿子押沙龙有一个美貌的妹子，名叫他玛。大卫的儿子暗嫩爱她。
Now after this, it came about that Absalom, David's son, had a beautiful sister, whose name was Tamar; and David's son Amnon was in love with her.

暗嫩为他妹子他玛忧急成病。他玛还是处女，暗嫩以为难向她行事。
And he was so deeply in love that he became ill because of his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin, and so it seemed hard to Amnon to do anything to her.

暗嫩有一个朋友，名叫约拿达，是大卫长兄示米亚的儿子。这约拿达为人极其狡猾。
But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother: and Jonadab was a very wise man.

他问暗嫩说，王的儿子阿，为何一天比一天瘦弱呢？请你告诉我。暗嫩回答说，我爱我兄弟押沙龙的妹子他玛。
And he said to him, O son of the king, why are you getting thinner day by day? will you not say what your trouble is? And Amnon said to him, I am in love with Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

约拿达说，你不如躺在床上装病。你父亲来看你，就对他说，求父叫我妹子他玛来，在我眼前预备食物，递给我吃，使我看见，好从她手里接过来吃。
Then Jonadab said to him, Go to your bed, and let it seem that you are ill: and when your father comes to see you, say to him, Let my sister Tamar come and give me bread, and get the food ready before my eyes, so that I may see it and take it from her hand.

于是暗嫩躺卧装病。王来看他，他对王说，求父叫我妹子他玛来，在我眼前为我作两个饼，我好从她手里接过来吃。
So Amnon went to bed and made himself seem ill: and when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, Please let my sister Tamar come and make me one or two cakes before my eyes, so that I may take food from her hand.

大卫就打发人到宫里，对他玛说，你往你哥哥暗嫩的屋里去，为他预备食物。
Then David sent to the house for Tamar and said, Go now to your brother Amnon's house and get a meal for him.

他玛就到她哥哥暗嫩的屋里。暗嫩正躺卧。他玛抟面，在他眼前作饼，且烤熟了，
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was in bed. And she took paste and made cakes before his eyes, cooking them over the fire.

在他面前将饼从锅里倒出来，他却不肯吃，便说，众人离开我出去吧。众人就都离开他，出去了。
And she took the cooking-pot, and put the cakes before him, but he would not take them. And Amnon said, Let everyone go away from me. So they all went out.

暗嫩对他玛说，你把食物拿进卧房，我好从你手里接过来吃。他玛就把所作的饼拿进卧房，到她哥哥暗嫩那里，
Then Amnon said to Tamar, Take the food and come into my bedroom, so that I may take it from your hand. So Tamar took the cakes she had made and went with them into her brother Amnon's bedroom.

拿着饼上前给他吃，他便拉住他玛，说，我妹妹，你来与我同寝。
And when she took them to give them to him, he put his arms round her and said, Come to bed, my sister.

他玛说，我哥哥，不要玷辱我。以色列人中不当这样行，你不要作这丑事。
And answering him, she said, O my brother, do not put shame on me; it is not right for such a thing to be done in Israel: do not this evil thing.

你玷辱了我，我何以掩盖我的羞耻呢？你在以色列中也成了愚妄人。你可以求王，他必不禁止我归你。
What will become of me in my shame? and as for you, you will be looked down on with disgust by all Israel. Now then, go and make your request to the king, for he will not keep me from you.

但暗嫩不肯听她的话，因比她力大，就玷辱她，与她同寝。
But he would not give attention to what she said: but being stronger than she, he took her by force, and had connection with her.

随后，暗嫩极其恨她，那恨她的心比先前爱她的心更甚，对她说，你起来，去吧。
Then Amnon was full of hate for her, hating her with a hate greater than his earlier love for her. And he said to her, Get up and be gone.

他玛说，不要这样。你赶出我去的这罪比你才行的更重。但暗嫩不肯听她的话，
And she said to him, Not so, my brother, for this great wrong in sending me away is worse than what you did to me before. But he gave no attention to her.

就叫伺候自己的仆人来，说，将这个女子赶出去。她一出去，你就关门，上闩。
Then he gave a cry to the servant who was waiting on him and said, Put this woman out, and let the door be locked after her.

那时他玛穿着彩衣，因为没有出嫁的公主都是这样穿。暗嫩的仆人就把她赶出去，关门上闩。
Now she had on a long robe, such as in past times the king's virgin daughters were dressed in. Then the servant put her out, locking the door after her.

他玛把灰尘撒在头上，撕裂所穿的彩衣，以手抱头，一面行走，一面哭喊。
And Tamar, in her grief, put dust on her head; and she put her hand on her head and went away crying loudly.

她胞兄押沙龙问她说，莫非你哥哥暗嫩与你亲近了吗？我妹妹，暂且不要作声，他是你的哥哥，不要将这事放在心上。他玛就孤孤单单地住在她胞兄押沙龙家里。
And her brother Absalom said to her, Has your brother Amnon been with you? but now, let there be an end to your crying, my sister: he is your brother, do not take this thing to heart. So Tamar went on living uncomforted in her brother's house.

大卫王听见这事，就甚发怒。
But when King David had news of all these things he was very angry; but he did not make trouble for Amnon his son, for he was dear to David, being his oldest son.

押沙龙并不和他哥哥暗嫩说好说歹。因为暗嫩玷辱他妹妹他玛，所以押沙龙恨恶他。
But Absalom said nothing to his brother Amnon, good or bad: for he was full of hate for him, because he had taken his sister Tamar by force.

过了二年，在靠近以法莲的巴力夏琐有人为押沙龙剪羊毛。押沙龙请王的众子与他同去。
Now after two full years, Absalom had men cutting the wool of his sheep in Baal-hazor, which is near Ephraim: and he sent for all the king's sons to come to his feast.

押沙龙来见王，说，现在有人为仆人剪羊毛，请王和王的臣仆与仆人同去。
And Absalom came to the king and said, See now, your servant is cutting the wool of his sheep; will the king and his servants be pleased to come?

王对押沙龙说，我儿，我们不必都去，恐怕使你耗费太多。押沙龙再三请王，王仍是不肯去，只为他祝福。
And the king said to Absalom, No, my son, let us not all go, or the number will be over-great for you. And he made his request again, but he would not go, but he gave him his blessing.

押沙龙说，王若不去，求王许我哥哥暗嫩同去。王说，何必要他去呢？
Then Absalom said, If you will not go, then let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said to him, Is there any reason for him to go with you?

押沙龙再三求王，王就许暗嫩和王的众子与他同去。
But Absalom went on requesting him till he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him. And Absalom made a great feast like a feast for a king.

押沙龙吩咐仆人说，你们注意，看暗嫩饮酒畅快的时候，我对你们说杀暗嫩，你们便杀他，不要惧怕。这不是我吩咐你们的吗？你们只管壮胆奋勇。
Now Absalom had given orders to his servants, saying, Now take note when Amnon's heart is glad with wine; and when I say to you, Make an attack on Amnon, then put him to death without fear: have I not given you orders? be strong and without fear.

押沙龙的仆人就照押沙龙所吩咐的，向暗嫩行了。王的众子都起来，各人骑上骡子，逃跑了。
So Absalom's servants did to Amnon as Absalom had given them orders. Then all the king's sons got up, and every man got on his beast and went in flight.

他们还在路上，有风声传到大卫那里，说，押沙龙将王的众子都杀了，没有留下一个。
Now while they were on their way, news was given to David that Absalom had put to death all the sons of the king and that not one of them was still living.

王就起来，撕裂衣服，躺在地上。王的臣仆也都撕裂衣服，站在旁边。
Then the king got up in great grief, stretching himself out on the earth: and all his servants were by his side, with their clothing parted.

大卫的长兄，示米亚的儿子约拿达说，我主，不要以为王的众子少年人都杀了，只有暗嫩一个人死了。自从暗嫩玷辱押沙龙妹子他玛的那日，押沙龙就定意杀暗嫩了。
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother, said, Let not my lord have the idea that all the sons of the king have been put to death; for only Amnon is dead: this has been purposed by Absalom from the day when he took his sister Tamar by force.

现在，我主我王，不要把这事放在心上，以为王的众子都死了，只有暗嫩一个人死了。
So now, let not my lord the king take this thing to heart, with the idea that all the king's sons are dead: for only Amnon is dead.

押沙龙逃跑了。守望的少年人举目观看，见有许多人从山坡的路上来。
But Absalom went in flight. And the young man who kept the watch, lifting up his eyes, saw that a great band of people was coming down the slope by the way of the Horons; and the watchman came and gave word to the king, saying, I saw men coming down by the way of the Horons, from the hillside.

约拿达对王说，看哪，王的众子都来了，果然与你仆人所说的相合。
And Jonadab said to the king, See, the king's sons are coming; as your servant said, so it is.

话才说完，王的众子都到了，放声大哭，王和臣仆也都哭得甚恸。
And while he was talking, the king's sons came, with weeping and loud cries: and the king and all his servants were weeping bitterly.

押沙龙逃到基述王亚米忽的儿子达买那里去了。大卫天天为他儿子悲哀。
So Absalom went in flight and came to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, the king of Geshur, where he was for three years.

押沙龙逃到基述，在那里住了三年。
And the king was sorrowing for his son all the time.

暗嫩死了以后，大卫王得了安慰，心里切切想念押沙龙。
And the heart of David was wasted with desire for Absalom: for he was comforted for the death of Amnon.

洗鲁雅的儿子约押，知道王心里想念押沙龙，
Now it was clear to Joab, the son of Zeruiah, that the king's heart was turning to Absalom.

就打发人往提哥亚去，从那里叫了一个聪明的妇人来，对她说，请你假装居丧的，穿上孝衣，不要用膏抹身，要装作为死者许久悲哀的妇人。
And Joab sent to Tekoa and got from there a wise woman, and said to her, Now make yourself seem like one given up to grief, and put on the clothing of sorrow, not using any sweet oil for your body, but looking like one who for a long time has been weeping for the dead:

进去见王，对王如此如此说。于是约押将当说的话教导了妇人。
And come to the king and say these words to him. So Joab gave her words to say.

提哥亚妇人到王面前，伏地叩拜，说，王阿，求你拯救。
And the woman of Tekoa came to the king, and falling on her face, gave him honour and said, Give me help, O king.

王问她说，你有什么事呢？回答说，婢女实在是寡妇，我丈夫死了。
And the king said to her, What is your trouble? And her answer was, Truly I am a widow, and my husband is dead.

我有两个儿子，一日在田间争斗，没有人解劝，这个就打死那个。
And I had two sons, and the two of them had a fight in the field, and there was no one to come between them, and one with a blow put the other to death.

现在全家的人都起来攻击婢女，说，你将那打死兄弟的交出来，我们好治死他，偿他打死兄弟的命，灭绝那承受家业的。这样，他们要将我剩下的炭火灭尽，不与我丈夫留名留后在世上。
And now all the family is turned against me, your servant, saying, Give up him who was the cause of his brother's death, so that we may put him to death in payment for the life of his brother, whose life he took; and we will put an end to the one who will get the heritage: so they will put out my last burning coal, and my husband will have no name or offspring on the face of the earth.

王对妇人说，你回家去吧。我必为你下令。
And the king said to the woman, Go to your house and I will give orders about this.

提哥亚妇人又对王说，我主我王，愿这罪归我和我父家，与王和王的位无干。
And the woman of Tekoa said to the king, My lord, O king, may the sin be on me and on my family, and may the king and the seat of his kingdom be clear of sin!

王说，凡难为你的，你就带他到我这里来，他必不再搅扰你。
And the king said, If anyone says anything to you, make him come to me, and he will do you no more damage.

妇人说，愿王记念耶和华你的神，不许报血仇的人施行灭绝，恐怕他们灭绝我的儿子。王说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，你的儿子连一根头发也不至落在地上。
Then she said, Let the king keep in mind the Lord your God, so that he who gives punishment for blood may be kept back from further destruction and that no one may send death on my son. And he said, By the living Lord, not a hair of your son's head will come to the earth.

妇人说，求我主我王容婢女再说一句话。王说，你说吧。
Then the woman said, Will the king let his servant say one word more? And he said, Say on.

妇人说，王为何也起意要害神的民呢？王不使那逃亡的人回来，王的这话就是自证己错了。
And the woman said, Why have you had such a thought about the people of God? (for in saying these very words the king has put himself in the wrong because he has not taken back the one whom he sent far away.)

我们都是必死的，如同水泼在地上，不能收回。神并不夺取人的性命，乃设法使逃亡的人不至成为赶出回不来的。
For death comes to us all, and we are like water drained out on the earth, which it is not possible to take up again; and God will not take away the life of the man whose purpose is that he who has been sent away may not be completely cut off from him.

我来将这话告诉我主我王，是因百姓使我惧怕。婢女想，不如将这话告诉王，或者王成就婢女所求的。
And now it is my fear of the people which has made me come to say these words to my lord the king: and your servant said, I will put my cause before the king, and it may be that he will give effect to my request.

人要将我和我儿子从神的地业上一同除灭，王必应允救我脱离他的手。
For the king will give ear, and take his servant out of the power of the man whose purpose is the destruction of me and my son together from the heritage of God.

婢女又想，我主我王的话必安慰我。因为我主我王能辨别是非，如同神的使者一样。惟愿耶和华你的神与你同在。
Then your servant said, May the word of my lord the king give me peace! for my lord the king is as the angel of God in his hearing of good and bad: and may the Lord your God be with you!

王对妇人说，我要问你一句话，你一点不要瞒我。妇人说，愿我主我王说。
Then the king said to the woman, Now give me an answer to the question I am going to put to you; keep nothing back. And the woman said, Let my lord the king say on.

王说，你这些话莫非是约押的主意吗？妇人说，我敢在我主我王面前起誓，王的话正对，不偏左右，是王的仆人约押吩咐我的，这些话是他教导我的。
And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with you in all this? And the woman in answer said, By the life of your soul, my lord the king, it is not possible for anyone to go to the right hand or to the left from anything said by the king: your servant Joab gave me orders, and put all these words in my mouth:

王的仆人约押如此行，为要挽回这事。我主的智慧却如神使者的智慧，能知世上一切事。
This he did, hoping that the face of this business might be changed: and my lord is wise, with the wisdom of the angel of God, having knowledge of everything on earth.

王对约押说，我应允你这事。你可以去，把那少年人押沙龙带回来。
And the king said to Joab, See now, I will do this thing: go then and Come back with the young man Absalom.

约押就面伏于地叩拜，祝谢于王，又说，王既应允仆人所求的，仆人今日知道在我主我王眼前蒙恩了。
Then Joab, falling down on his face on the earth, gave the king honour and blessing; and Joab said, Today it is clear to your servant that I have grace in your eyes, my lord king, because the king has given effect to the request of his servant.

于是约押起身往基述去，将押沙龙带回耶路撒冷。
So Joab got up and went to Geshur and came back again to Jerusalem with Absalom.

王说，使他回自己家里去，不要见我的面。押沙龙就回自己家里去，没有见王的面。
And the king said, Let him go to his house, but let him not see my face. So Absalom went back to his house and did not see the face of the king.

以色列全地之中，无人像押沙龙那样俊美，得人的称赞，从脚底到头顶毫无瑕疵。
Now in all Israel there was no one so greatly to be praised for his beautiful form as Absalom: from his feet to the crown of his head he was completely beautiful.

他的头发甚重，每到年底剪发一次。所剪下来的，按王的平称一称，重二百舍客勒。
And when he had his hair cut, (which he did at the end of every year, because of the weight of his hair;) the weight of the hair was two hundred shekels by the king's weight.

押沙龙生了三个儿子，一个女儿。女儿名叫他玛，是个容貌俊美的女子。
And Absalom was the father of three sons and of one daughter named Tamar, who was very beautiful.

押沙龙住在耶路撒冷足有二年，没有见王的面。
For two full years Absalom was living in Jerusalem without ever seeing the face of the king.

押沙龙打发人去叫约押来，要托他去见王，约押却不肯来。第二次打发人去叫他，他仍不肯来。
Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king, but he would not come to him: and he sent again a second time, but he would not come.

所以押沙龙对仆人说，你们看，约押有一块田，与我的田相近，其中有大麦，你们去放火烧了。押沙龙的仆人就去放火烧了那田。
So he said to his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine, and he has barley in it; go and put it on fire. And Absalom's servants put the field on fire.

于是约押起来，到了押沙龙家里，问他说，你的仆人为何放火烧了我的田呢？
Then Joab came to Absalom in his house and said to him, Why have your servants put my field on fire?

押沙龙回答约押说，我打发人去请你来，好托你去见王，替我说，我为何从基述回来呢？不如仍在那里。现在要许我见王的面。我若有罪，任凭王杀我就是了。
And Absalom's answer was, See, I sent to you saying, Come here, so that I may send you to the king to say, Why have I come back from Geshur? it would be better for me to be there still: let me now see the king's face, and if there is any sin in me, let him put me to death.

于是约押去见王，将这话奏告王，王便叫押沙龙来。押沙龙来见王，在王面前俯伏于地，王就与押沙龙亲嘴。
So Joab went to the king and said these words to him: and when the king had sent for him, Absalom came, and went down on his face on the earth before the king: and the king gave him a kiss.

此后，押沙龙为自己预备车马，又派五十人在他前头奔走。
Now after this, Absalom got for himself a carriage and horses, and fifty runners to go before him.

押沙龙常常早晨起来，站在城门的道旁，凡有争讼要去求王判断的，押沙龙就叫他过来，问他说，你是哪一城的人。回答说，仆人是以色列某支派的人。
And Absalom got up early, morning after morning, and took his place at the side of the public meeting-place: and when any man had a cause which had to come to the king to be judged, then Absalom, crying out to him, said, What is your town? and he would say, Your servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.

押沙龙对他说，你的事有情有理，无奈王没有委人听你伸诉。
And Absalom would say to him, See, your cause is true and right; but no man has been named by the king to give you a hearing.

押沙龙又说，恨不得我作国中的士师。凡有争讼求审判的到我这里来，我必秉公判断。
And more than this, Absalom said, If only I was made judge in the land, so that every man who has any cause or question might come to me, and I would give a right decision for him!

若有人近前来要拜押沙龙，押沙龙就伸手拉住他，与他亲嘴。
And if any man came near to give him honour, he took him by the hand and gave him a kiss.

以色列人中，凡去见王求判断的，押沙龙都是如此待他们。这样，押沙龙暗中得了以色列人的心。
And this Absalom did to everyone in Israel who came to the king to have his cause judged: so Absalom, like a thief, took away the hearts of the men of Israel.

满了四十年（有作四年的），押沙龙对王说，求你准我往希伯仑去，还我向耶和华所许的愿。
Now at the end of four years, Absalom said to the king, Let me go to Hebron and give effect to the oath which I made to the Lord:

因为仆人住在亚兰的基述，曾许愿说，耶和华若使我再回耶路撒冷，我必事奉他。
For while I was living in Geshur in Aram, your servant made an oath, saying, If ever the Lord lets me come back to Jerusalem, I will give him worship in Hebron.

王说，你平平安安地去吧。押沙龙就起身，往希伯仑去了。
And the king said to him, Go in peace. So he got up and went to Hebron.

押沙龙打发探子走遍以色列各支派，说，你们一听见角声就说，押沙龙在希伯仑作王了。
But Absalom at the same time sent watchers through all the tribes of Israel to say, At the sound of the horn you are to say, Absalom is king in Hebron.

押沙龙在耶路撒冷请了二百人与他同去，都是诚诚实实去的，并不知道其中的真情。
And with Absalom, at his request, went two hundred men from Jerusalem, who were completely unconscious of his designs.

押沙龙献祭的时候，打发人去将大卫的谋士，基罗人亚希多弗从他本城请了来。于是叛逆的势派甚大。因为随从押沙龙的人民，日渐增多。
And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, one of David's helpers, from Giloh his town, while he was making the offerings. And the design against David became strong, for more and more people were joined to Absalom.

有人报告大卫说，以色列人的心都归向押沙龙了。
And one came to David and said, The hearts of the men of Israel have gone after Absalom.

大卫就对耶路撒冷跟随他的臣仆说，我们要起来逃走，不然都不能躲避押沙龙了。要速速地去，恐怕他忽然来到，加害于我们，用刀杀尽合城的人。
And David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, Come, let us go in flight, or not one of us will be safe from Absalom: let us go without loss of time, or he will overtake us quickly and send evil on us, and put the town to the sword.

王的臣仆对王说，我主我王所定的，仆人都愿遵行。
And the king's servants said to the king, See, your servants are ready to do whatever the king says is to be done.

于是王带着全家的人出去了，但留下十个妃嫔看守宫殿。
So the king went out, taking with him all the people of his house, but for ten of his women, who were to take care of the house.

王出去，众民都跟随他，到伯墨哈，就住下了。
And the king went out, and all his servants went after him, and made a stop at the Far House.

王的臣仆都在他面前过去。基利提人，比利提人，就是从迦特跟随王来的六百人，也都在他面前过去。
And all the people went on by his side; and all the Cherethites and all the Pelethites and all the men of Ittai of Gath, six hundred men who came after him from Gath, went on before the king.

王对迦特人以太说，你是外邦逃来的人，为什么与我们同去呢？你可以回去与新王同住，或者回你本地去吧。
Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, Why are you coming with us? go back and keep with the king: for you are a man of another country, you are far from the land of your birth.

你来的日子不多，我今日怎好叫你与我们一同飘流，没有一定的住处呢？你不如带你的弟兄回去吧。愿耶和华用慈爱诚实待你。
It was only yesterday you came to us; why then am I to make you go up and down with us? for I have to go where I may; go back then, and take your countrymen with you, and may the Lord's mercy and good faith be with you.

以太对王说，我指着永生的耶和华起誓，又敢在王面前起誓，无论生死，王在哪里，仆人也必在哪里。
And Ittai the Gittite in answer said, By the living Lord, and by the life of my lord the king, in whatever place my lord the king may be, for life or death, there will your servant be.

大卫对以太说，你前去过河吧。于是迦特人以太带着跟随他的人和所有的妇人孩子，就都过去了。
And David said to Ittai, Go forward, then. And Ittai the Gittite went on, with all his men and all the little ones he had with him.

本地的人都放声大哭。众民尽都过去，王也过了汲沦溪。众民往旷野去了。
And there was great weeping in all the country when all the people went through; and the king himself was waiting in the Kidron valley and all the people went by him in the direction of the olive-tree on the edge of the waste land.

撒督和抬神约柜的利未人也一同来了，将神的约柜放下。亚比亚他上来，等着众民从城里出来过去。
Then Zadok came, and Abiathar, and with them the ark of God's agreement: and they put down the ark of God, till all the people from the town had gone by.

王对撒督说，你将神的约柜抬回城去。我若在耶和华眼前蒙恩，他必使我回来，再见约柜和他的居所。
And the king said to Zadok, Take the ark of God back into the town: if I have grace in the eyes of the Lord, he will let me come back and see it and his House again:

倘若他说，我不喜悦你，看哪，我在这里，愿他凭自己的意旨待我。
But if he says, I have no delight in you: then, here I am; let him do to me what seems good to him.

王又对祭司撒督说，你不是先见吗？你可以安然回城。你儿子亚希玛斯和亚比亚他的儿子约拿单都可以与你同去。
The king said further to Zadok the priest, See, you and Abiathar are to go back to the town in peace, with your two sons, Ahimaaz, your son, and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar.

我在旷野的渡口那里等你们报信给我。
See, I will be waiting at the way across the river, in the waste land, till I get news from you.

于是撒督和亚比亚他将神的约柜抬回耶路撒冷，他们就住在那里。
So Zadok and Abiathar took the ark of God back to Jerusalem, and did not go away from there.

大卫蒙头赤脚上橄榄山，一面上，一面哭。跟随他的人也都蒙头哭着上去。
And David went up the slopes of the Mount of Olives weeping all the way, with his head covered and no shoes on his feet: and all the people who were with him, covering their heads, went up weeping.

有人告诉大卫说，亚希多弗也在叛党之中，随从押沙龙。大卫祷告说，耶和华阿，求你使亚希多弗的计谋变为愚拙。
And word came to David, saying, Ahithophel is among those who are joined to Absalom. And David said, O Lord, let the wisdom of Ahithophel be made foolish.

大卫到了山顶，敬拜神的地方，见亚基人户筛，衣服撕裂，头蒙灰尘来迎接他。
Now when David had come to the top of the slope, where they gave worship to God, Hushai the Archite came to him in great grief with dust on his head:

大卫对他说，你若与我同去，必累赘我。
David said to him, If you go on with me, you will be a trouble to me:

你若回城去，对押沙龙说，王阿，我愿作你的仆人。我向来作你父亲的仆人，现在我也照样作你的仆人。这样，你就可以为我破坏亚希多弗的计谋。
But if you go back to the town and say to Absalom, I will be your servant, O king; as in the past I have been your father's servant, so now I will be yours: then you will be able to keep Ahithophel's designs against me from being put into effect.

祭司撒督和亚比亚他岂不都在那里吗？你在王宫里听见什么，就要告诉祭司撒督和亚比亚他。
And have you not there Zadok and Abiathar the priests? so whatever comes to your ears from the king's house, give word of it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.

撒督的儿子亚希玛斯，亚比亚他的儿子约拿单，也都在那里。凡你们所听见的可以托这二人来报告我。
See, they have with them their two sons, Ahimaaz, Zadok's son, and Jonathan, the son of Abiathar; by them you may send word to me of everything which comes to your ears.

于是，大卫的朋友户筛进了城。押沙龙也进了耶路撒冷。
So Hushai, David's friend, went into the town, and Absalom came to Jerusalem.

大卫刚过山顶，见米非波设的仆人洗巴拉着备好了的两匹驴，驴上驮着二百面饼，一百葡萄饼，一百个夏天的果饼，一皮袋酒来迎接他。
And when David had gone a little way past the top of the slope, Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth, came to him, with two asses on which were two hundred cakes of bread and a hundred stems of dry grapes and a hundred summer fruits and a skin of wine.

王问洗巴说，你带这些来是什么意思呢？洗巴说，驴是给王的家眷骑的。面饼和夏天的果饼是给少年人吃的。酒是给在旷野疲乏人喝的。
And David said to Ziba, What is your reason for this? And Ziba said, The asses are for the use of the king's people, and the bread and the fruit are food for the young men; and the wine is for drink for those who are overcome by weariness in the waste land.

王问说，你主人的儿子在哪里呢？洗巴回答王说，他仍在耶路撒冷，因他说，以色列人今日必将我父的国归还我。
And the king said, And where is your master's son? And Ziba said, He is still at Jerusalem: for he said, Today Israel will give back to me the kingdom of my father.

王对洗巴说，凡属米非波设的都归你了。洗巴说，我叩拜我主我王，愿我在你眼前蒙恩。
Then the king said to Ziba, Truly everything which was Mephibosheth's is yours. And Ziba said, I give honour to my lord, may I have grace in your eyes, my lord, O king!

大卫王到了巴户琳，见有一个人出来，是扫罗族基拉的儿子，名叫示每。他一面走一面咒骂，
And when King David came to Bahurim, a man of Saul's family named Shimei, the son of Gera, came out from there, calling curses after him.

又拿石头砍大卫王和王的臣仆。众民和勇士都在王的左右。
And he sent stones at David and at all the king's servants and at all the people and at all the men of war by his side, on the right hand and on the left.

示每咒骂说，你这流人血的坏人哪，去吧去吧。
And Shimei said, with curses, Be gone, be gone, you man of blood, you good-for-nothing:

你流扫罗全家的血，接续他作王。耶和华把这罪归在你身上，将这国交给你儿子押沙龙。现在你自取其祸，因为你是流人血的人。
The Lord has sent punishment on you for all the blood of the family of Saul, whose kingdom you have taken; and the Lord has given the kingdom to Absalom, your son: now you yourself are taken in your evil, because you are a man of blood.

洗鲁雅的儿子亚比筛对王说，这死狗岂可咒骂我主我王呢？求你容我过去，割下他的头来。
Then Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, said to the king, Is this dead dog to go on cursing my lord the king? let me go over and take off his head.

王说，洗鲁雅的儿子，我与你们有何关涉呢？他咒骂是因耶和华吩咐他说，你要咒骂大卫。如此，谁敢说你为什么这样行呢？
And the king said, What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah? Let him go on cursing, for the Lord has said, Put a curse on David, and who then may say, Why have you done so?

大卫又对亚比筛和众臣仆说，我亲生的儿子尚且寻索我的性命，何况这便雅悯人呢？由他咒骂吧。因为这是耶和华吩咐他的。
And David said to Abishai and to all his servants, You see how my son, the offspring of my body, has made designs against my life: how much more then may this Benjamite do so? Let him be, and let him go on cursing; for the Lord has given him orders.

或者耶和华见我遭难，为我今日被这人咒骂，就施恩与我。
It may be that the Lord will take note of my wrongs, and give me back good in answer to his cursing of me today.

于是大卫和跟随他的人往前行走。示每在大卫对面山坡，一面行走一面咒骂，又拿石头砍他，拿土扬他。
So David and his men went on their way: and Shimei went by the hillside parallel with them, cursing and sending stones and dust at him.

王和跟随他的众人疲疲乏乏地到了一个地方，就在那里歇息歇息。
And the king and his people came tired to Jordan, and took their rest there.

押沙龙和以色列众人来到耶路撒冷。亚希多弗也与他同来。
And Absalom and the men of Israel came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel was with him.

大卫的朋友亚基人户筛去见押沙龙，对他说，愿王万岁。愿王万岁。
Then Hushai the Archite, David's friend, came to Absalom and said, Long life to the king, long life to the king!

押沙龙问户筛说，这是你恩待朋友吗？为什么不与你的朋友同去呢？
And Absalom said, Is this your love for your friend? why did you not go with your friend?

户筛对押沙龙说，不然，耶和华和这民，并以色列众人所拣选的，我必归顺他，与他同住。
And Hushai said to Absalom, Not so; I am for that man whom the Lord and this people and all the men of Israel have taken as king, and I will take my place with him.

再者，我当服事谁呢？岂不是前王的儿子吗？我怎样服事你父亲，也必照样服事你。
And more than this! where is my place as a servant? is it not before his son? as I have been your father's servant, so will I be yours.

押沙龙对亚希多弗说，你们出个主意，我们怎样行才好。
Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, Give your opinion now, what are we to do?

亚希多弗对押沙龙说，你父所留下看守宫殿的妃嫔，你可以与她们亲近。以色列众人听见你父亲憎恶你，凡归顺你人的手就更坚强。
And Ahithophel said to Absalom, Go in to your father's women who are here looking after his house; then all Israel will have the news that you are hated by your father, and the hands of your supporters will be strong.

于是人为押沙龙在宫殿的平顶上支搭帐棚。押沙龙在以色列众人眼前，与他父的妃嫔亲近。
So they put up the tent for Absalom on the top of the house, and Absalom went in to his father's women before the eyes of all Israel.

那时亚希多弗所出的主意好像人问神的话一样。他昔日给大卫，今日给押沙龙所出的主意，都是这样。
In those days the opinions of Ahithophel were valued as highly as if through him a man might get direction from God; so were they valued by David as much as by Absalom.

亚希多弗又对押沙龙说，求你准我挑选一万二千人，今夜我就起身追赶大卫，
Then Ahithophel said to Absalom, Let me take out twelve thousand men and this very night I will go after David:

趁他疲乏手软，我忽然追上他，使他惊惶。跟随他的民必都逃跑，我就单杀王一人，
And I will come up with him when he is tired and feeble, and make him full of fear: and all the people with him will go in flight; and I will make an attack on the king only:

使众民都归顺你。你所寻找的人既然死了，众民就如已经归顺你。这样，也都平安无事了。
And I will make all the people come back to you as a bride comes back to her husband: it is the life of only one man you are going after; so all the people will be at peace.

押沙龙和以色列的长老都以这话为美。
And the saying was pleasing to Absalom and to the responsible men of Israel.

押沙龙说，要召亚基人户筛来，我们也要听他怎样说。
Then Absalom said, Now send for Hushai the Archite, and let us give ear to what he has to say.

户筛到了押沙龙面前，押沙龙向他说，亚希多弗是如此如此说的，我们照着他的话行可以不可以。若不可，你就说吧。
And when Hushai came, Absalom said to him, This is what Ahithophel has said: are we to do as he says? if not, what is your suggestion?

户筛对押沙龙说，亚希多弗这次所定的谋不善。
And Hushai said to Absalom, Ahithophel's idea is not a good one at this time.

户筛又说，你知道，你父亲和跟随他的人都是勇士，现在他们心里恼怒，如同田野丢崽子的母熊一般，而且你父亲是个战士，必不和民一同住宿。
Hushai said further, You have knowledge of your father and his men, that they are men of war, and that their feelings are bitter, like those of a bear in the field whose young ones have been taken from her: and your father is a man of war, and will not take his night's rest with the people;

他现今或藏在坑中或在别处，若有人首先被杀，凡听见的必说，跟随押沙龙的民被杀了。
But he will certainly have taken cover now in some hole or secret place; and if some of our people, at the first attack, are overcome, then any hearing of it will say, There is destruction among the people who are on Absalom's side.

虽有人胆大如狮子，他的心也必消化。因为以色列人都知道你父亲是英雄，跟随他的人也都是勇士。
Then even the strongest, whose heart is like the heart of a lion, will become like water; for all Israel is conscious that your father is a man of war, and those who are with him are strong and without fear.

依我之计，不如将以色列众人从但直到别是巴，如同海边的沙那样多聚集到你这里来，你也亲自率领他们出战。
But my suggestion is that all Israel, from Dan as far as Beer-sheba, comes together to you, a great army like the sands of the sea in number; and that you yourself go out among them.

这样，我们在何处遇见他，就下到他那里，如同露水下在地上一般，连他带跟随他的人，一个也不留下。
Then we will come on him in some place, wherever he may be, falling on him as the dew comes on the earth: and of him and all the men who are with him not one will get away with his life.

他若进了哪一座城，以色列众人必带绳子去，将那城拉到河里，甚至连一块小石头都不剩下。
And if he has gone into some town, then let all Israel take strong cords to that town, and we will have it pulled into the valley, till not one small stone is to be seen there.

押沙龙和以色列众人说，亚基人户筛的计谋比亚希多弗的计谋更好。这是因耶和华定意破坏亚希多弗的良谋，为要降祸与押沙龙。
Then Absalom and all the men of Israel said, Hushai's suggestion is better than that of Ahithophel. For it was the purpose of the Lord to make the wise designs of Ahithophel without effect, so that the Lord might send evil on Absalom.

户筛对祭司撒督和亚比亚他说，亚希多弗为押沙龙和以色列的长老所定的计谋是如此如此，我所定的计谋是如此如此。
Then Hushai said to Zadok and Abiathar, the priests, This is the suggestion made by Ahithophel to Absalom and the responsible men of Israel, and this is what I said to them.

现在你们要急速打发人去，告诉大卫说，今夜不可住在旷野的渡口，务要过河，免得王和跟随他的人都被吞灭。
So now send the news quickly to David, and say, Do not take your night's rest by the way across the river to the waste land, but be certain to go over; or the king and all the people with him will come to destruction.

那时，约拿单和亚希玛斯在隐罗结那里等候，不敢进城，恐怕被人看见。有一个使女出来，将这话告诉他们，他们就去报信给大卫王。
Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were waiting by En-rogel; and a servant-girl went from time to time and gave them news and they went with the news to King David, for it was not wise for them to let themselves be seen coming into the town.

然而有一个童子看见他们，就去告诉押沙龙。他们急忙跑到巴户琳某人的家里。那人院中有一口井，他们就下到井里。
But a boy saw them, and gave word of it to Absalom: so the two of them went away quickly, and came to the house of a man in Bahurim who had a water-hole in his garden, and they went down into it.

那家的妇人用盖盖上井口，又在上头铺上碎麦，事就没有泄漏。
And a woman put a cover over the hole, and put crushed grain on top of it, and no one had any knowledge of it.

押沙龙的仆人来到那家，问妇人说，亚希玛斯和约拿单在哪里。妇人说，他们过了河了。仆人找他们，找不着，就回耶路撒冷去了。
And Absalom's servants came to the woman at the house and said, Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said to them, They have gone from here to the stream. And after searching for them, and seeing nothing of them, they went back to Jerusalem.

他们走后，二人从井里上来，去告诉大卫王说，亚希多弗如此如此定计害你，你们务要起来，快快过河。
Then after the servants had gone away, they came up out of the water-hole and went to give King David the news; and they said, Get up and go quickly over the water, for such and such are Ahithophel's designs against you.

于是大卫和跟随他的人都起来，过约旦河。到了天亮，无一人不过约旦河的。
So David and all the people who were with him went up over Jordan: when dawn came, every one of them had gone over Jordan.

亚希多弗见不依从他的计谋，就备上驴，归回本城。到了家，留下遗言，便吊死了，葬在他父亲的坟墓里。
Now when Ahithophel saw that his suggestion was not acted on, he got his ass ready, and went back to his house, to the town where he came from, and having put his house in order, he put himself to death by hanging; so he came to his end and was put in the resting-place of his father.

大卫到了玛哈念，押沙龙和跟随他的以色列人也都过了约旦河。
And David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom, with all the men of Israel, went over Jordan.

押沙龙立亚玛撒作元帅，代替约押。亚玛撒是以实玛利人（又作以色列人）以特拉的儿子。以特拉曾与拿辖的女儿亚比该亲近。这亚比该与约押的母亲洗鲁雅是姐妹。
And Absalom put Amasa at the head of the army in place of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man named Ithra the Ishmaelite, who had been the lover of Abigail, the daughter of Jesse, sister of Zeruiah, Joab's mother.

押沙龙和以色列人都安营在基列地。
And Israel and Absalom put up their tents in the land of Gilead.

大卫到了玛哈念，亚扪族的拉巴人拿辖的儿子朔比，罗底巴人亚米利的儿子玛吉，基列的罗基琳人巴西莱，
Now when David had come to Mahanaim, Shobi, the son of Nahash of Rabbah, the Ammonite, and Machir, the son of Ammiel of Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,

带着被，褥，盆，碗，瓦器，小麦，大麦，麦面，炒谷，豆子，红豆，炒豆，
Came with beds and basins and pots, and grain and meal, and all sorts of dry foods,

蜂蜜，奶油，绵羊，奶饼，供给大卫和跟随他的人吃。他们说，民在旷野，必饥渴困乏了。
And honey and butter and sheep and milk-cheeses, for David and his people: for they said, This people is in the waste land, needing food and drink and rest.

大卫数点跟随他的人，立千夫长，百夫长率领他们。
And David had the people who were with him numbered, and he put over them captains of thousands and captains of hundreds.

大卫打发军兵出战，分为三队，一队在约押手下，一队在洗鲁雅的儿子，约押兄弟亚比筛手下，一队在迦特人以太手下。大卫对军兵说，我必与你们一同出战。
And David sent the people out, a third of them under the orders of Joab, and a third under the orders of Abishai, son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third under Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, And I myself will certainly go out with you.

军兵却说，你不可出战。若是我们逃跑，敌人必不介意。我们阵亡一半，敌人也不介意。因为你一人强似我们万人，你不如在城里预备帮助我们。
But the people said, It is better for you not to go out: for if we are put to flight, they will not give a thought to us, and if death overtakes half of us, it will be nothing to them: but you are of more value than ten thousand of us: so it is better for you to be ready to come to our help from this town.

王向他们说，你们以为怎样好，我就怎样行。于是王站在城门旁，军兵或百或千地挨次出去了。
And the king said to them, I will do whatever seems best to you. So the king took his place by the door of the town, and all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.

王嘱咐约押，亚比筛，以太说，你们要为我的缘故宽待那少年人押沙龙。王为押沙龙嘱咐众将的话，兵都听见了。
And the king gave orders to Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Because of me, be gentle to the young man Absalom. And this order about Absalom was given in the hearing of all the people.

兵就出到田野迎着以色列人，在以法莲树林里交战。
So the people went out into the field against Israel, and the fight took place in the woods of Ephraim.

以色列人败在大卫的仆人面前。那日阵亡的甚多，共有二万人。
And the people of Israel were overcome there by the servants of David, and there was a great destruction that day, and twenty thousand men were put to the sword.

因为在那里四面打仗，死于树林的比死于刀剑的更多。
And the fighting went on over all the face of the country: and the woods were responsible for more deaths than the sword.

押沙龙偶然遇见大卫的仆人。押沙龙骑着骡子，从大橡树密枝底下经过，他的头发被树枝绕住，就悬挂起来，所骑的骡子便离他去了。
And Absalom came across some of David's men. And Absalom was seated on his mule, and the mule went under the thick branches of a great tree, and his head became fixed in the tree and he was lifted up between earth and heaven, and the beast under him went on.

有个人看见，就告诉约押说，我看见押沙龙挂在橡树上了。
And a certain man saw it and said to Joab, I saw Absalom hanging in a tree.

约押对报信的人说，你既看见他，为什么不将他打死落在地上呢？你若打死他，我就赏你十舍客勒银子，一条带子。
And Joab said to the man who had given him the news, If you saw this, why did you not put your sword through him, and I would have given you ten bits of silver and a band for your robe?

那人对约押说，我就是得你一千舍客勒银子，我也不敢伸手害王的儿子。因为我们听见王嘱咐你和亚比筛并以太说，你们要谨慎，不可害那少年人押沙龙。
And the man said to Joab, Even if you gave me a thousand bits of silver, I would not put out my hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king gave orders to you and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Take care that the young man Absalom is not touched.

我若妄为害了他的性命，就是你自己也必与我为敌。原来无论何事都瞒不过王。
And if I had falsely put him to death (and nothing may be kept secret from the king), you would have had nothing to do with me.

约押说，我不能与你留连。约押手拿三杆短枪，趁押沙龙在橡树上还活着，就刺透他的心。
Then Joab said, I would have made it safe for you. And he took three spears in his hand, and put them through Absalom's heart, while he was still living, in the branches of the tree.

给约押拿兵器的十个少年人围绕押沙龙，将他杀死。
And ten young men, servants of Joab, came round Absalom and put an end to him.

约押吹角，拦阻众人，他们就回来，不再追赶以色列人。
And Joab had the horn sounded, and the people came back from going after Israel, for Joab kept them back.

他们将押沙龙丢在林中一个大坑里，上头堆起一大堆石头。以色列众人都逃跑，各回各家去了。
And they took Absalom's body and put it into a great hole in the wood, and put a great mass of stones over it: and every man of Israel went in flight to his tent.

押沙龙活着的时候，在王谷立了一根石柱，因他说，我没有儿子为我留名。他就以自己的名称那石柱叫押沙龙柱，直到今日。
Now Absalom, before his death, had put up for himself a pillar in the king's valley, naming it after himself; for he said, I have no son to keep my name in memory: and to this day it is named Absalom's pillar.

撒督的儿子亚希玛斯说，容我跑去，将耶和华向仇敌给王报仇的信息报与王知。
Then Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, said, Let me go and give the king news of how the Lord has done right in his cause against those who took up arms against him.

约押对他说，你今日不可去报信，改日可以报信。因为今日王的儿子死了，所以你不可去报信。
And Joab said, You will take no news today; another day you may give him the news, but you will take no news today, because the king's son is dead.

约押对古示人说，你去将你所看见的告诉王。古示人在约押面前下拜，就跑去了。
Then Joab said to the Cushite, Go and give the king word of what you have seen. And the Cushite, making a sign of respect to Joab, went off running.

撒督的儿子亚希玛斯又对约押说，无论怎样，求你容我随着古示人跑去。约押说，我儿，你报这信息，既不得赏赐，何必要跑去呢？
Then Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok, said to Joab again, Whatever may come of it, let me go after the Cushite. And Joab said, Why have you a desire to go, my son, seeing that you will get no reward for your news?

他又说，无论怎样，我要跑去。约押说，你跑去吧。亚希玛斯就从平原往前跑，跑过古示人去了。
Whatever may come of it, he said, I will go. Then he said to him, Go. So Ahimaaz went running by the lowland road and overtook the Cushite.

大卫正坐在城瓮里。守望的人上城门楼的顶上，举目观看，见有一个人独自跑来。
Now David was seated between the two town doors; and the watchman went up to the roof of the doorways, on the wall, and, lifting up his eyes, saw a man running by himself.

守望的人就大声告诉王。王说，他若独自来，必是报口信的。那人跑得渐渐近了。
And the watchman gave news of it to the king. And the king said, If he is coming by himself, then he has news. And the man was travelling quickly, and came near.

守望的人又见一人跑来，就对守城门的人说，又有一人独自跑来。王说，这也必是报信的。
Then the watchman saw another man running: and crying out in the direction of the door he said, Here is another man running by himself. And the king said, He, like the other, comes with news.

守望的人说，我看前头人的跑法，好像撒督的儿子亚希玛斯的跑法一样。王说，他是个好人，必是报好信息。
And the watchman said, It seems to me that the running of the first is like the running of Ahimaaz, the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and his news will be good.

亚希玛斯向王呼叫说，平安了。就在王面前脸伏于地叩拜，说，耶和华你的神是应当称颂的，因他已将那举手攻击我主我王的人交给王了。
And Ahimaaz, crying out to the king, said, It is well. And falling down before the king, with his face to the earth, he said, May the Lord your God be praised, who has given up the men who took up arms against my lord the king!

王问说，少年人押沙龙平安不平安。亚希玛斯回答说，约押打发王的仆人，那时仆人听见众民大声喧哗，却不知道是什么事。
And the king said, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And Ahimaaz said in answer, When Joab sent me, your servant, I saw a great outcry going on, but I had no knowledge of what it was.

王说，你退去，站在旁边。他就退去，站在旁边。
And the king said, Get back and take your place here. So turning to one side, he took his place there.

古示人也来到，说，有信息报给我主我王。耶和华今日向一切兴起攻击你的人给你报仇了。
And then the Cushite came and said, I have news for my lord the king: today the Lord has done right in your cause against all those who took up arms against you.

王问古示人说，少年人押沙龙平安不平安。古示人回答说，愿我主我王的仇敌，和一切兴起要杀害你的人，都与那少年人一样。
And the king said to the Cushite, Is the young man Absalom safe? And the Cushite said in answer, May all the king's haters and those who do evil against the king, be as that young man is!

王就心里伤恸，上城门楼去哀哭，一面走一面说，我儿押沙龙阿。我儿，我儿押沙龙阿。我恨不得替你死，押沙龙阿，我儿。我儿。
Then the king was much moved, and went up into the room over the door, weeping, and saying, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! if only my life might have been given for yours, O Absalom, my son, my son!

有人告诉约押说，王为押沙龙哭泣悲哀。
And word was given to Joab that the king was weeping and sorrowing for Absalom.

众民听说王为他儿子忧愁，他们得胜的欢乐却变成悲哀。
And the salvation of that day was changed to sorrow for all the people: for it was said to the people, The king is in bitter grief for his son.

那日众民暗暗地进城，就如败阵逃跑，惭愧的民一般。
And the people made their way back to the town quietly and secretly, as those who are shamed go secretly when they go in flight from the war.

王蒙着脸，大声哭号说，我儿押沙龙阿。押沙龙，我儿，我儿阿。
But the king, covering his face, gave a great cry, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!

约押进去见王，说，你今日使你一切仆人脸面惭愧了。他们今日救了你的性命和你儿女妻妾的性命，
And Joab came into the house to the king and said, Today you have put to shame the faces of all your servants who even now have kept you and your sons and your daughters and your wives and all your women safe from death;

你却爱那恨你的人，恨那爱你的人。你今日明明地不以将帅，仆人为念。我今日看明，若押沙龙活着，我们都死亡，你就喜悦了。
For your haters, it seems, are dear to you, and your friends are hated. For you have made it clear that captains and servants are nothing to you: and now I see that if Absalom was living and we had all been dead today, it would have been right in your eyes.

现在你当出去，安慰你仆人的心。我指着耶和华起誓，你若不出去，今夜必无一人与你同在一处。这祸患就比你从幼年到如今所遭的更甚。
So get up now, and go out and say some kind words to your servants; for, by the Lord, I give you my oath, that if you do not go out, not one of them will keep with you tonight; and that will be worse for you than all the evil which has overtaken you from your earliest years.

于是王起来，坐在城门口。众民听说王坐在城门口，就都到王面前。以色列人已经逃跑，各回各家去了。
Then the king got up and took his seat near the town-door. And word was given to all the people that the king was in the public place: and all the people came before the king. Now all the men of Israel had gone back in flight to their tents.

以色列众支派的人纷纷议论说，王曾救我们脱离仇敌的手，又救我们脱离非利士人的手，现在他躲避押沙龙逃走了。
And through all the tribes of Israel the people were having arguments, saying, The king made us safe from the hands of those who were against us and made us free from the hands of the Philistines; and now he has gone in flight from the land, because of Absalom.

我们膏押沙龙治理我们，他已经阵亡。现在为什么不出一言请王回来呢？
And Absalom, whom we made a ruler over us, is dead in the fight. So now why do you say nothing about getting the king back? And word of what all Israel was saying came to the king.

大卫王差人去见祭司撒督和亚比亚他，说，你们当向犹大长老说，以色列众人已经有话请王回宫，你们为什么落在他们后头呢？
And King David sent word to Zadok and Abiathar, the priests, Say to the responsible men of Judah, Why are you the last to take steps to get the king back to his house?

你们是我的弟兄，是我的骨肉，为什么在人后头请王回来呢？
You are my brothers, my bone and my flesh; why are you the last to get the king back again?

也要对亚玛撒说，你不是我的骨肉吗？我若不立你替约押常作元帅，愿神重重地降罚与我。
And say to Amasa, Are you not my bone and my flesh? May God's punishment be on me, if I do not make you chief of the army before me at all times in place of Joab!

如此就挽回犹大众人的心，如同一人的心。他们便打发人去见王，说，请王和王的一切臣仆回来。
And the hearts of the men of Judah were moved like one man; so that they sent to the king, saying, Come back, with all your servants.

王就回来，到了约旦河。犹大人来到吉甲，要去迎接王，请他过约旦河。
So the king came back, and came as far as Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, meeting the king there, to take him back with them over Jordan.

巴户琳的便雅悯人，基拉的儿子示每急忙与犹大人一同下去迎接大卫王。
And Shimei, the son of Gera, the Benjamite from Bahurim, got up quickly and went down with the men of Judah for the purpose of meeting King David;

跟从示每的有一千便雅悯人，还有扫罗家的仆人洗巴和他十五个儿子，二十个仆人。他们都趟过约旦河迎接王。
And with him a thousand men of Benjamin, and Ziba, the servant of Saul, with his fifteen sons and twenty servants, came rushing to Jordan before the king,

有摆渡船过去，渡王的家眷，任王使用。王要过约旦河的时候，基拉的儿子示每就俯伏在王面前，
And kept going across the river to take the people of the king's house over, and to do whatever was desired by the king. And Shimei, the son of Gera, went down on his face in the dust before the king, when he was about to go over Jordan,

对王说，我主我王出耶路撒冷的时候，仆人行悖逆的事，现在求我主不要因此加罪与仆人，不要记念，也不要放在心上。
And said to him, Let me not be judged as a sinner in your eyes, O my lord, and do not keep in mind the wrong I did on the day when my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, or take it to heart.

仆人明知自己有罪，所以约瑟全家之中，今日我首先下来迎接我主我王。
For your servant is conscious of his sin: and so, as you see, I have come today, the first of all the sons of Joseph, for the purpose of meeting my lord the king.

洗鲁雅的儿子亚比筛说，示每既咒骂耶和华的受膏者，不应当治死他吗？
But Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, said, Is not death the right fate for Shimei, because he has been cursing the one marked by the holy oil?

大卫说，洗鲁雅的儿子，我与你们有何关涉，使你们今日与我反对呢？今日在以色列中岂可治死人呢？我岂不知今日我作以色列的王吗？
And David said, What have I to do with you, you sons of Zeruiah, that you put yourselves against me today? is it right for any man in Israel to be put to death today? for I am certain today that I am king in Israel.

于是王对示每说，你必不死。王就向他起誓。
So the king said to Shimei, You will not be put to death. And the king gave him his oath.

扫罗的孙子米非波设也下去迎接王。他自从王去的日子，直到王平平安安地回来，没有修脚，没有剃胡须，也没有洗衣服。
And Mephibosheth, the son of Saul's son, came down for the purpose of meeting the king; his feet had not been cared for or his hair cut or his clothing washed from the day when the king went away till the day when he came back in peace.

他来到耶路撒冷迎接王的时候，王问他说，米非波设，你为什么没有与我同去呢？
Now when he had come from Jerusalem to see the king, the king said to him, Why did you not come with me, Mephibosheth?

他回答说，我主我王，仆人是瘸腿的。那日我想要备驴骑上，与王同去，无奈我的仆人欺哄了我，
And he said in answer, Because of the deceit of my servant, my lord king: for I, your servant, said to him, You are to make ready an ass and on it I will go with the king, for your servant has not the use of his feet.

又在我主我王面前谗毁我。然而我主我王如同神的使者一般，你看怎样好，就怎样行吧。
He has given you a false account of me: but my lord the king is like the angel of God: do then whatever seems good to you.

因为我祖全家的人，在我主我王面前都算为死人，王却使仆人在王的席上同人吃饭，我现在向王还能辨理诉冤吗？
For all my father's family were only dead men before my lord the king: and still you put your servant among those whose place is at the king's table. What right then have I to say anything more to the king?

王对他说，你何必再提你的事呢？我说，你与洗巴均分地土。
And the king said, Say nothing more about these things. I say, Let there be a division of the land between Ziba and you.

米非波设对王说，我主我王既平平安安地回宫，就任凭洗巴都取了也可以。
And Mephibosheth said, Let him take it all, now that my lord the king has come back to his house in peace!

基列人巴西莱从罗基琳下来，要送王过约旦河，就与王一同过了约旦河。
And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim; and he went on as far as Jordan with the king to take him across Jordan.

巴西莱年纪老迈，已经八十岁了。王住在玛哈念的时候，他就拿食物来供给王。他原是大富户。
Now Barzillai was a very old man, as much as eighty years old: and he had given the king everything he had need of, while he was at Mahanaim, for he was a very great man.

王对巴西莱说，你与我同去，我要在耶路撒冷那里养你的老。
And the king said to Barzillai, Come over with me, and I will take care of you in Jerusalem.

巴西莱对王说，我在世的年日还能有多少，使我与王同上耶路撒冷呢？
And Barzillai said to the king, How much of my life is still before me, for me to go up to Jerusalem with the king?

仆人现在八十岁了，还能尝出饮食的滋味，辨别美恶吗？还能听男女歌唱的声音吗？仆人何必累赘我主我王呢？
I am now eighty years old: good and bad are the same to me; have meat and drink any taste for me now? am I able to take pleasure in the voices of men or women in song? why then am I to be a trouble to my lord the king?

仆人只要送王过约旦河，王何必赐我这样的恩典呢？
Your servant's desire was only to take the king over Jordan; why is the king to give me such a reward?

求你准我回去，好死在我本城，葬在我父母的墓旁。这里有王的仆人金罕，让他同我主我王过去，可以随意待他。
Let your servant now go back again, so that when death comes to me, it may be in my town and by the resting-place of my father and mother. But here is your servant Chimham: let him go with my lord the king, and do for him what seems good to you.

王说，金罕可以与我同去，我必照你的心愿待他。你向我求什么，我都必为你成就。
And the king said in answer, Let Chimham go over with me, and I will do for him whatever seems good to you: and whatever your desire is, I will do it for you.

于是众民过约旦河，王也过去。王与巴西莱亲嘴，为他祝福，巴西莱就回本地去了。
Then all the people went over Jordan, and the king went over: and the king gave Barzillai a kiss, with his blessing; and he went back to his place.

王过去，到了吉甲，金罕也跟他过去。犹大众民和以色列民的一半也都送王过去。
So the king went over to Gilgal, and Chimham went with him: and all the people of Judah, as well as half the people of Israel, took the king on his way.

以色列众人来见王，对他说，我们弟兄犹大人为什么暗暗送王和王的家眷，并跟随王的人过约旦河。
Then the men of Israel came to the king and said, Why have our countrymen of Judah taken you away in secret and come over Jordan with the king and all his family, because all his people are David's men?

犹大众人回答以色列人说，因为王与我们是亲属，你们为何因这事发怒呢？我们吃了王的什么呢？王赏赐了我们什么呢？
And all the men of Judah gave this answer to the men of Israel, Because the king is our near relation: why then are you angry about this? have we taken any of the king's food, or has he given us any offering?

以色列人回答犹大人说，按支派，我们与王有十分的情分。在大卫身上，我们也比你们更有情分。你们为何藐视我们，请王回来不先与我们商量呢？但犹大人的话比以色列人的话更硬。
And in answer to the men of Judah, the men of Israel said, We have ten parts in the king, and we are the first in order of birth: why did you make nothing of us? and were we not the first to make suggestions for getting the king back? And the words of the men of Judah were more violent than the words of the men of Israel.

在那里恰巧有一个匪徒，名叫示巴，是便雅悯人比基利的儿子。他吹角，说，我们与大卫无分，与耶西的儿子无涉。以色列人哪，你们各回各家去吧。
Now by chance there was present a good-for-nothing person named Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he, sounding the horn, said, We have no part in David, or any interest in the son of Jesse: let every man go to his tent, O Israel.

于是以色列人都离开大卫，跟随比基利的儿子示巴。但犹大人从约旦河直到耶路撒冷，都紧紧跟随他们的王。
So all the men of Israel, turning away from David, went after Sheba, the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah were true to their king, going with him from Jordan as far as Jerusalem.

大卫王来到耶路撒冷，进了宫殿，就把从前留下看守宫殿的十个妃嫔禁闭在冷宫，养活她们，不与她们亲近。她们如同寡妇被禁，直到死的日子。
And David came to his house at Jerusalem: and the king took the ten women to whom he had given the care of the house, and had them shut up, and gave them the necessaries of life, but did not go near them. So they were shut up till the day of their death, living as widows.

王对亚玛撒说，你要在三日之内将犹大人招聚了来，你也回到这里来。
Then the king said to Amasa, Get all the men of Judah together, and in three days be here yourself.

亚玛撒就去招聚犹大人，却耽延过了王所限的日期。
So Amasa went to get all the men of Judah together, but he took longer than the time David had given him.

大卫对亚比筛说，现在恐怕比基利的儿子示巴加害于我们比押沙龙更甚。你要带领你主的仆人追赶他，免得他得了坚固城，躲避我们。
And David said to Abishai, Sheba, the son of Bichri, will do us more damage than Absalom did; so take some of your lord's servants and go after him, before he makes himself safe in the walled towns, and gets away before our eyes.

约押的人和基利提人，比利提人，并所有的勇士，都跟着亚比筛，从耶路撒冷出去追赶比基利的儿子示巴。
So there went after Abishai, Joab and the Cherethites and the Pelethites and all the fighting-men; they went out of Jerusalem to overtake Sheba, the son of Bichri.

他们到了基遍的大磐石那里，亚玛撒来迎接他们。那时约押穿着战衣，腰束佩刀的带子，刀在鞘内。约押前行，刀从鞘内掉出来。
When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came face to face with them. Now Joab had on his war-dress, and round him a band from which his sword was hanging in its cover; and while he was walking, it came out, falling to the earth.

约押左手拾起刀来，对亚玛撒说，我兄弟，你好阿。就用右手抓住亚玛撒的胡子，要与他亲嘴。
And Joab said to Amasa, Is it well, my brother? And with his right hand he took him by the hair of his chin to give him a kiss.

亚玛撒没有防备约押手里所拿的刀。约押用刀刺入他的肚腹，他的肠子流在地上，没有再刺他，就死了。约押和他兄弟亚比筛往前追赶比基利的儿子示巴。
But Amasa did not see danger from the sword which was now in Joab's left hand, and Joab put it through his stomach so that his inside came out on to the earth, and he did not give him another blow. So Joab and his brother Abishai went on after Sheba, the son of Bichri.

有约押的一个少年人站在亚玛撒尸身旁边，对众人说，谁喜悦约押，谁归顺大卫，就当跟随约押去。
And one of Joab's young men, taking his place at Amasa's side, said, Whoever is for Joab and for David, let him go after Joab!

亚玛撒在道路上滚在自己的血里。那人见众民经过都站住，就把亚玛撒的尸身从路上挪到田间，用衣服遮盖。
And Amasa was stretched out in a pool of blood in the middle of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people were stopping, he took Amasa out of the highway and put him in a field, with a cloth over him, when he saw that everyone who went by came to a stop.

尸身从路上挪移之后，众民就都跟随约押去追赶比基利的儿子示巴。
When he had been taken off the road, all the people went on after Joab in search of Sheba, the son of Bichri.

他走遍以色列各支派，直到伯玛迦的亚比拉，并比利人的全地。那些地方的人也都聚集跟随他。
And Sheba went through all the tribes of Israel, to Abel of Beth-maacah; and all the Bichrites came together and went in after him.

约押和跟随的人到了伯玛迦的亚比拉，围困示巴，就对着城筑垒。跟随约押的众民用锤撞城，要使城塌陷。
And Joab and his men got him shut up in Abel of Beth-maacah, and put up an earthwork against the town: and all Joab's men did their best to get the wall broken down.

有一个聪明妇人从城上呼叫说，听阿，听阿，请约押近前来，我好与他说话。
Then a wise woman got up on the wall, and crying out from the town, said, Give ear, give ear; say now to Joab, Come near, so that I may have talk with you.

约押就近前来，妇人问他说，你是约押不是。他说，我是。妇人说，求你听婢女的话。约押说，我听。
And he came near, and the woman said, Are you Joab? And he said in answer, I am. Then she said, Give ear to your servant's words. And he said, I am giving ear.

妇人说，古时有话说，当先在亚比拉求问，然后事就定妥。
Then she said, In the old days, there was a saying, Let them put the question in Abel and in Dan, saying, Has what was ordered by men of good faith in Israel ever come to an end?

我们这城的人在以色列人中是和平，忠厚的。你为何要毁坏以色列中的大城，吞灭耶和华的产业呢？
Your purpose is the destruction of a mother-town in Israel: why would you put an end to the heritage of the Lord?

约押回答说，我决不吞灭毁坏，
And Joab, answering her, said, Far, far be it from me to be a cause of death or destruction;

乃因以法莲山地的一个人比基利的儿子示巴举手攻击大卫王，你们若将他一人交出来，我便离城而去。妇人对约押说，那人的首级必从城墙上丢给你。
Not so: but a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba, son of Bichri, by name, has taken up arms against the king, against David: give up this man only, and I will go away from the town. And the woman said to Joab, His head will be dropped over the wall to you.

妇人就凭她的智慧去劝众人。他们便割下比基利的儿子示巴的首级，丢给约押。约押吹角，众人就离城而散，各归各家去了。约押回耶路撒冷，到王那里。
Then the woman in her wisdom had talk with all the town. And they had Sheba's head cut off and sent out to Joab. And he had the horn sounded, and sent them all away from the town, every man to his tent. And Joab went back to Jerusalem to the king.

约押作以色列全军的元帅。耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅统辖基利提人和比利提人。
Now Joab was over all the army; and Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, was at the head of the Cherethites and the Pelethites;

亚多兰掌管服苦的人。亚希律的儿子约沙法作史官。
And Adoram was overseer of the forced work; and Jehoshaphat, the son of Ahilud, was the recorder;

示法作书记。撒督和亚比亚他作祭司长。
And Sheva was the scribe, and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

睚珥人以拉作大卫的宰相。
And in addition, Ira the Jairite was a priest to David.

大卫年间有饥荒，一连三年，大卫就求问耶和华。耶和华说，这饥荒是因扫罗和他流人血之家杀死基遍人。
In the days of David they were short of food for three years, year after year; and David went before the Lord for directions. And the Lord said, On Saul and on his family there is blood, because he put the Gibeonites to death.

原来这基遍人不是以色列人，乃是亚摩利人中所剩的。以色列人曾向他们起誓，不杀灭他们，扫罗却为以色列人和犹大人发热心，想要杀灭他们。大卫王召了他们来，
Then the king sent for the Gibeonites; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but were the last of the Amorites, to whom the children of Israel had given an oath; but Saul, in his passion for the children of Israel and Judah, had made an attempt on their lives:)

问他们说，我当为你们怎样行呢？可用什么赎这罪，使你们为耶和华的产业祝福呢？
So David said to the Gibeonites, What may I do for you? how am I to make up to you for your wrongs, so that you may give a blessing to the heritage of the Lord?

基遍人回答说，我们和扫罗与他家的事并不关乎金银，也不要因我们的缘故杀一个以色列人。大卫说，你们怎样说，我就为你们怎样行。
And the Gibeonites said to him, It is not a question of silver and gold between us and Saul or his family; and it is not in our power to put to death any man in Israel. And he said, Say, then, what am I to do for you?

他们对王说，那从前谋害我们，要灭我们，使我们不得再住以色列境内的人，
And they said to the king, As for the man by whom we were wasted, and who made designs against us to have us completely cut off from the land of Israel,

现在愿将他的子孙七人交给我们，我们好在耶和华面前，将他们悬挂在耶和华拣选扫罗的基比亚。王说，我必交给你们。
Let seven men of his family be given up to us and we will put an end to them by hanging them before the Lord in Gibeon, on the hill of the Lord. And the king said, I will give them.

王因为曾与扫罗的儿子约拿单指着耶和华起誓结盟，就爱惜扫罗的孙子，约拿单的儿子米非波设，不交出来。
But the king did not give up Mephibosheth, the son of Saul's son Jonathan, because of the Lord's oath made between David and Jonathan, the son of Saul.

却把爱雅的女儿利斯巴给扫罗所生的两个儿子亚摩尼，米非波设，和扫罗女儿米甲的姐姐给米何拉人巴西莱儿子亚得列所生的五个儿子
But the king took Armoni and Mephibosheth, the two sons of Saul to whom Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah, had given birth; and the five sons of Saul's daughter Merab, whose father was Adriel, the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:

交在基遍人的手里。基遍人就把他们，在耶和华面前，悬挂在山上，这七人就一同死亡。被杀的时候正是收割的日子，就是动手割大麦的时候。
And he gave them up to the Gibeonites, and they put them to death, hanging them on the mountain before the Lord; all seven came to their end together in the first days of the grain-cutting, at the start of the cutting of the barley.

爱雅的女儿利斯巴用麻布在磐石上搭棚，从动手收割的时候直到天降雨在尸身上的时候，日间不容空中的雀鸟落在尸身上，夜间不让田野的走兽前来糟践。
And Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah, took haircloth, placing it on the rock as a bed for herself, from the start of the grain-cutting till rain came down on them from heaven; and she did not let the birds of the air come near them by day, or the beasts of the field by night.

有人将扫罗的妃嫔爱雅女儿利斯巴所行的这事告诉大卫。
And news was given to David of what Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah, one of Saul's wives, had done.

大卫就去，从基列雅比人那里将扫罗和他儿子约拿单的骸骨搬了来。是因非利士人从前在基利波杀扫罗，将尸身悬挂在伯珊的街市上，基列雅比人把尸身偷了去。
And David went and took the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had taken them away secretly from the public place of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had put them, hanging up the bodies there on the day when they put Saul to death in Gilboa:

大卫将扫罗和他儿子约拿单的骸骨从那里搬了来，又收殓被悬挂七人的骸骨，
And he took the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan from that place; and they got together the bones of those who had been put to death by hanging.

将扫罗和他儿子约拿单的骸骨葬在便雅悯的洗拉，在扫罗父亲基士的坟墓里。众人行了王所吩咐的。此后神垂听国民所求的。
And they put them with the bones of Saul and his son Jonathan in the resting-place of Kish, his father, in Zela in the country of Benjamin; they did all the king had given them orders to do. And after that, God gave ear to their prayers for the land.

非利士人与以色列人打仗。大卫带领仆人下去，与非利士人接战，大卫就疲乏了。
And the Philistines went to war again with Israel; and David went down with his people, and while they were at Gob they had a fight with the Philistines:

伟人的一个儿子以实比诺要杀大卫。他的铜枪重三百舍客勒，又佩着新刀。
And there came against David one of the offspring of the Rephaim, whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in weight, and having a new sword, he made an attempt to put David to death.

但洗鲁雅的儿子亚比筛帮助大卫，攻打非利士人，将他杀死。当日，跟随大卫的人向大卫起誓说，以后你不可再与我们一同出战，恐怕熄灭以色列的灯。
But Abishai, the son of Zeruiah, came to his help, and, turning on the Philistine, gave him his death-blow. Then David's men took an oath, and said, Never again are you to go out with us to the fight, so that you may not put out the light of Israel.

后来，以色列人在歌伯与非利士人打仗，户沙人西比该杀了伟人的一个儿子撒弗。
Now after this there was war with the Philistines again at Gob, and Sibbecai the Hushathite put to death Saph, one of the offspring of the Rephaim.

又在歌伯与非利士人打仗，伯利恒人雅雷俄珥金的儿子伊勒哈难杀了迦特人歌利亚。这人的枪杆粗如织布的机轴。
And again there was war with the Philistines at Gob, and Elhanan, the son of Jair the Beth-lehemite, put to death Goliath the Gittite, the stem of whose spear was like a cloth-worker's rod.

又在迦特打仗，那里有一个身量高大的人，手脚都是六指，共有二十四个指头。他也是伟人的儿子。
And again there was war at Gath, where there was a very tall man, who had twenty-four fingers and toes, six fingers on his hands and six toes on his feet; he was one of the offspring of the Rephaim.

这人向以色列人骂阵，大卫的哥哥示米亚的儿子约拿单就杀了他。
And when he was purposing to put shame on Israel, Jonathan, the son of Shimei, David's brother, put him to death.

这四个人是迦特伟人的儿子，都死在大卫和他仆人的手下。
These four were of the offspring of the Rephaim in Gath; and they came to their end by the hands of David and his servants.

当耶和华救大卫脱离一切仇敌和扫罗之手的日子，他向耶和华念这诗，
And David made a song to the Lord in these words, on the day when the Lord made him free from the hands of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul:

说，耶和华是我的岩石，我的山寨，我的救主，
And he said, The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour, even mine;

我的神，我的磐石，我所投靠的。他是我的盾牌，是拯救我的角，是我的高台，是我的避难所。我的救主阿，你是救我脱离强暴的。
My God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my safe place; my saviour, who keeps me safe from the violent man.

我要求告当赞美的耶和华，这样，我必从仇敌手中被救出来。
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.

曾有死亡的波浪环绕我，匪类的急流使我惊惧，
For the waves of death came round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear;

阴间的绳索缠绕我，死亡的网罗临到我。
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.

我在急难中求告耶和华，向我的神呼求。他从殿中听了我的声音。我的呼求入了他的耳中。
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came to his ears.

那时因他发怒，地就摇撼战抖。天的根基也震动摇撼。
Then the earth was moved with a violent shock; the bases of heaven were moved and shaking, because he was angry.

从他鼻孔冒烟上腾。从他口中发火焚烧，连炭也着了。
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: coals were lighted by it.

他又使天下垂，亲自降临。有黑云在他脚下。
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.

他坐着基路伯飞行，在风的翅膀上显现。
And he went through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.

他以黑暗和聚集的水，天空的厚云为他四围的行宫。
And he made the dark his tent round him, a mass of waters, thick clouds of the skies.

因他面前的光辉炭都着了。
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and coals of fire.

耶和华从天上打雷。至高者发出声音。
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out.

他射出箭来，使仇敌四散，发出闪电，使他们扰乱。
And he sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.

耶和华的斥责一发，鼻孔的气一出，海底就出现，大地的根基也显露。
Then the deep beds of the sea were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of the Lord's wrath, because of the breath of his mouth.

他从高天伸手抓住我，把我从大水中拉上来。
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.

他救我脱离我的劲敌和那些恨我的人，因为他们比我强盛。
He made me free from my strong hater, from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.

我遭遇灾难的日子，他们来攻击我。但耶和华是我的倚靠。
They came on me in the day of my trouble: but the Lord was my support.

他又领我到宽阔之处。他救拔我，因他喜悦我。
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.

耶和华按着我的公义报答我，按着我手中的清洁赏赐我。
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.

因为我遵守了耶和华的道，未曾作恶离开我的神。
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.

他的一切典章常在我面前。他的律例，我也未曾离弃。
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.

我在他面前作了完全人。我也保守自己远离我的罪孽。
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.

所以耶和华按我的公义，按我在他眼前的清洁赏赐我。
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.

慈爱的人，你以慈爱待他。完全的人，你以完全待他。
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;

清洁的人，你以清洁待他。乖僻的人，你以弯曲待他。
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.

困苦的百姓，你必拯救。但你的眼目察看高傲的人，使他降卑。
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but your eyes are on men of pride, to make them low.

耶和华阿，你是我的灯。耶和华必照明我的黑暗。
For you are my light, O Lord; and the Lord will make the dark bright for me.

我借着你冲入敌军，借着我的神跳过墙垣。
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in: by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.

至于神，他的道是完全的。耶和华的话是炼净的。凡投靠他的，他便作他们的盾牌。
As for God, his way is all good: the word of the Lord is tested; he is a safe cover for all those who put their faith in him.

除了耶和华，谁是神呢？除了我们的神，谁是磐石呢？
For who is God but the Lord? and who is a Rock but our God?

神是我坚固的保障。他引导完全人行他的路。
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.

他使我的脚快如母鹿的蹄，又使我在高处安稳。
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.

他教导我的手能以争战，甚至我的膀臂能开铜弓。
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.

你把你的救恩给我作盾牌。你的温和使我为大。
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation, and your mercy has made me great.

你使我脚下的地步宽阔。我的脚未曾滑跌。
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet make no slip.

我追赶我的仇敌，灭绝了他们，未灭以先，我没有归回。
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.

我灭绝了他们，打伤了他们，使他们不能起来。他们都倒在我的脚下。
I have sent destruction on them and given them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.

因为你曾以力量束我的腰，使我能争战。你也使那起来攻击我的都服在我以下。
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who came out against me.

你又使我的仇敌在我面前转背逃跑，叫我能以剪除那恨我的人。
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.

他们仰望，却无人拯救。就是呼求耶和华，他也不应允。
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.

我捣碎他们，如同地上的灰尘，践踏他们，四散在地，如同街上的泥土。
Then they were crushed as small as the dust of the earth, stamped down under my feet like the waste of the streets.

你救我脱离我百姓的争竞，保护我作列国的元首。我素不认识的民必事奉我。
You have made me free from the fightings of my people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.

外邦人要投降我，一听见我的名声就必顺从我。
Men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority: from the time when my name comes to their ears, they will be ruled by me.

外邦人要衰残，战战兢兢地出他们的营寨。
They will be wasted away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.

耶和华是活神，愿我的磐石被人称颂。愿神那拯救我的磐石被人尊崇。
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured:

这位神就是那为我伸冤，使众民服在我以下的。
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.

你救我脱离仇敌，又把我举起，高过那些起来攻击我的。你救我脱离强暴的人。
He makes me free from my haters: I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.

耶和华阿，因此我要在外邦中称谢你，歌颂你的名。
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.

耶和华赐极大的救恩给他所立的王，施慈爱给他的受膏者，就是给大卫和他的后裔，直到永远。
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.

以下是大卫末了的话。耶西的儿子大卫得居高位，是雅各神所膏的，作以色列的美歌者，说，
Now these are the last words of David. David, the son of Jesse, says, the man who was lifted up on high, the man on whom the God of Jacob put the holy oil, the loved one of Israel's songs, says:

耶和华的灵借着我说，他的话在我口中。
The spirit of the Lord had voice through me, his word was on my tongue.

以色列的神，以色列的磐石晓谕我说，那以公义治理人民的，敬畏神执掌权柄，
The God of Israel said, the word of the Rock of Israel came to me: When an upright king is ruling over men, when he is ruling in the fear of God,

他必像日出的晨光，如无云的清晨，雨后的晴光，使地发生嫩草。
It is as the light of the morning, when the sun comes up, a morning without clouds; making young grass come to life from the earth.

我家在神面前并非如此。神却与我立永远的约。这约凡事坚稳，关乎我的一切救恩和我一切所想望的，他岂不为我成就吗？
For is not my house so with God? For he has made with me an eternal agreement, ordered in all things and certain: as for all my salvation and all my desire, will he not give it increase?

但匪类都必像荆棘被丢弃。人不敢用手拿它。
But the evil-doers, all of them, will be like thorns to be pushed away, because they may not be gripped in the hand:

拿它的人必带铁器和枪杆，终久它必被火焚烧。
But anyone touching them has to be armed with iron and the rod of a spear; and they will be burned with fire, every one of them.

大卫勇士的名字记在下面，他革扪人约设巴设，又称伊斯尼人亚底挪，他是军长的统领，一时击杀了八百人。
These are the names of David's men of war: Ishbaal the Hachmonite, chief of the three; his axe was lifted up against eight hundred put to death at one time.

其次是亚合人朵多的儿子以利亚撒。从前非利士人聚集要打仗，以色列人迎着上去，有跟随大卫的三个勇士向非利士人骂阵，其中有以利亚撒。
After him was Eleazar, the son of Dodai the Ahohite, one of the three great fighters, who was with David in Pas-dammim when the Philistines came together there for the fight; and when the men of Israel had gone in flight,

他起来击杀非利士人，直到手臂疲乏，手粘住刀把。那日耶和华使以色列人大获全胜。众民在以利亚撒后头专夺财物。
He was with David and went on fighting the Philistines till his hand became tired and stiff from gripping his sword: and that day the Lord gave a great salvation, and the people came back after him only to take the goods of the Philistines.

其次是哈拉人亚基的儿子沙玛。一日，非利士人聚集成群，在一块长满红豆的田里，众民就在非利士人面前逃跑。
After him was Shammah, the son of Ela the Hararite. And the Philistines came together in Lehi, where there was a bit of land full of seed; and the people went in flight from the Philistines.

沙玛却站在那田间击杀非利士人，救护了那田。耶和华使以色列人大获全胜。
But he kept his place in the middle of the bit of land, and kept back their attack and overcame the Philistines: and the Lord gave a great salvation.

收割的时候，有三十个勇士中的三个人下到亚杜兰洞见大卫。非利士的军兵在利乏音谷安营。
And three of the thirty went down at the start of the grain-cutting, and they came to David at the strong place of Adullam; and the band of Philistines had taken up their position in the valley of Rephaim.

那时大卫在山寨，非利士人的防营在伯利恒。
And at that time David had taken cover in the strong place, and an armed force of the Philistines was in Beth-lehem.

大卫渴想，说，甚愿有人将伯利恒城门旁，井里的水打来给我喝。
And David, moved by a strong desire, said, If only someone would give me a drink of water from the water-hole of Beth-lehem, by the doorway into the town!

这三个勇士就闯过非利士人的营盘，从伯利恒城门旁的井里打水，拿来奉给大卫。他却不肯喝，将水奠在耶和华面前，
And the three men, forcing their way through the Philistine army, got water from the water-hole of Beth-lehem, by the doorway into the town, and took it back to David: but he would not take it, but, draining it out, made an offering of it to the Lord.

说，耶和华阿，这三个人冒死去打水。这水好像他们的血一般，我断不敢喝。如此，大卫不肯喝。这是三个勇士所作的事。
And he said, Far be it from me, O Lord, to do this; how may I take as my drink the life-blood of men who have put their lives in danger? So he would not take it. These things did the three great men of war.

洗鲁雅的儿子，约押的兄弟亚比筛是这三个勇士的首领。他举枪杀了三百人，就在三个勇士里得了名。
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the thirty. He put to death three hundred with his spear, and he got for himself a name among the thirty.

他在这三个勇士里是最尊贵的，所以作他们的首领，只是不及前三个勇士。
Was he not the noblest of the thirty? so he was made their captain: but he was not equal to the first three.

有甲薛勇士耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅行过大能的事。他杀了摩押人亚利伊勒的两个儿子，又在下雪的时候下坑里去，杀了一个狮子，
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, a fighting man of Kabzeel, had done great acts; he put to death the two sons of Ariel of Moab: he went down into a hole and put a lion to death in time of snow:

又杀了一个强壮的埃及人。埃及人手里拿着枪，比拿雅只拿着棍子下去，从埃及人手里夺过枪来，用那枪将他杀死。
And he made an attack on an Egyptian, a tall man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a stick, and pulling the spear out of the hands of the Egyptian, put him to death with that same spear.

这是耶何耶大的儿子比拿雅所行的事，就在三个勇士里得了名。
These were the acts of Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, who had a great name among the thirty men of war.

他比那三十个勇士都尊贵，只是不及前三个勇士。大卫立他作护卫长。
He was honoured over the rest of the thirty, but he was not equal to the first three. And David put him over the fighting men who kept him safe.

三十个勇士里有约押的兄弟亚撒黑，伯利恒人朵多的儿子伊勒哈难，
Asahel, the brother of Joab, was one of the thirty; and Elhanan, the son of Dodai, of Beth-lehem,

哈律人沙玛，哈律人以利加，
Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,

帕勒提人希利斯，提哥亚人益吉的儿子以拉，
Helez the Paltite, Ira, the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,

亚拿突人亚比以谢，户沙人米本乃，
Abiezer the Anathothite, Sibbecai the Hushathite,

亚合人撒们，尼陀法人玛哈莱，
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,

尼陀法人巴拿的儿子希立，便雅悯族，基比亚人利拜的儿子以太，
Heldai, the son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai, the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin,

比拉顿人比拿雅，迦实溪人希太，
Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the valleys of Gaash,

伯亚拉巴人亚比亚本，巴鲁米人押斯玛弗，
Abiel the Arbathite, Azmaveth of Bahurim,

沙本人以利雅哈巴，雅善儿子中的约拿单，
Eliahba the Shaalbonite, Jashen the Gunite,

哈拉人沙玛，哈拉人沙拉的儿子亚希暗，
Jonathan, the son of Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam, the son of Sharar the Hararite,

玛迦人亚哈拜的儿子以利法列，基罗人亚希多弗的儿子以连，
Eliphelet, the son of Ahasbai the Maacathite, Eliam, the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,

迦密人希斯莱，亚巴人帕莱，
Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Archite,

琐巴人拿单的儿子以甲，迦得人巴尼，
Igal, the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,

亚扪人洗勒，比录人拿哈莱，是给洗鲁雅的儿子约押拿兵器的，
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, who had the care of the arms of Joab, son of Zeruiah,

以帖人以拉，以帖人迦立，
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,

赫人乌利亚，共有三十七人。
Uriah the Hittite: thirty-seven in number.

耶和华又向以色列人发怒，就激动大卫，使他吩咐人去数点以色列人和犹大人。
Again the wrath of the Lord was burning against Israel, and moving David against them, he said, Go, take the number of Israel and Judah.

大卫就吩咐跟随他的元帅约押说，你去走遍以色列众支派，从但直到别是巴，数点百姓，我好知道他们的数目。
And the king said to Joab and the captains of the army, who were with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan as far as Beer-sheba, and have all the people numbered, so that I may be certain of the number of the people.

约押对王说，无论百姓多少，愿耶和华你的神再加增百倍，使我主我王亲眼得见。我主我王何必喜悦行这事呢？
And Joab said to the king, Whatever the number of the people, may the Lord make it a hundred times as much, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it: but why does my lord the king take pleasure in doing this thing?

但王的命令胜过约押和众军长。约押和众军长就从王面前出去，数点以色列的百姓。
But the king's order was stronger than Joab and the captains of the army. And Joab and the captains of the army went out from the king, to take the number of the children of Israel.

他们过了约旦河，在迦得谷中，城的右边亚罗珥安营，与雅谢相对，
And they went over Jordan, and starting from Aroer, from the town which is in the middle of the valley, they went in the direction of the Gadites, and on to Jazer;

又到了基列和他停合示地，又到了但雅安，绕到西顿，
Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of the Hittites under Hermon; and they came to Dan, and from Dan they came round to Zidon,

来到推罗的保障，并希未人和迦南人的各城，又到犹大南方的别是巴。
And to the walled town of Tyre, and to all the towns of the Hivites and the Canaanites: and they went out to the South of Judah at Beer-sheba.

他们走遍全地，过了九个月零二十天，就回到耶路撒冷。
So after going through all the land in every direction, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

约押将百姓的总数奏告于王，以色列拿刀的勇士有八十万。犹大有五十万。
And Joab gave the king the number of all the people: there were in Israel eight hundred thousand fighting men able to take up arms; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand.

大卫数点百姓以后，就心中自责，祷告耶和华说，我行这事大有罪了。耶和华阿，求你除掉仆人的罪孽，因我所行的甚是愚昧。
And after the people had been numbered, David's heart was troubled. And David said to the Lord, Great has been my sin in doing this; but now, O Lord, be pleased to take away the sin of your servant, for I have done very foolishly

大卫早晨起来，耶和华的话临到先知迦得，就是大卫的先见，说，
And David got up in the morning; now the word of the Lord had come to the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,

你去告诉大卫，说耶和华如此说，我有三样灾，随你选择一样，我好降与你。
Go and say to David, The Lord says, Three things are offered to you: say which of them you will have, and I will do it to you.

于是迦得来见大卫，对他说，你愿意国中有七年的饥荒呢？是在你敌人面前逃跑，被追赶三个月呢？是在你国中有三日的瘟疫呢？现在你要揣摩思想，我好回覆那差我来的。
So Gad came to David, and gave him word of this and said to him, Are there to be three years when there is not enough food in your land? or will you go in flight from your haters for three months, while they go after you? or will you have three days of violent disease in your land? take thought and say what answer I am to give to him who sent me.

大卫对迦得说，我甚为难。我愿落在耶和华的手里，因为他有丰盛的怜悯。我不愿落在人的手里。
And David said to Gad, This is a hard decision for me to make: let us come into the hands of the Lord, for great are his mercies: let me not come into the hands of men.

于是，耶和华降瘟疫与以色列人，自早晨到所定的时候。从但直到别是巴，民间死了七万人。
So David made selection of the disease; and the time was the days of the grain-cutting, when the disease came among the people, causing the death of seventy thousand men from Dan as far as Beer-sheba.

天使向耶路撒冷伸手要灭城的时候，耶和华后悔，就不降这灾了，吩咐灭民的天使说，够了，住手吧。那时耶和华的使者在耶布斯人亚劳拿的禾场那里。
And when the hand of the angel was stretched out in the direction of Jerusalem, for its destruction, the Lord had regret for the evil, and said to the angel who was sending destruction on the people, It is enough; do no more. And the angel of the Lord was by the grain-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.

大卫看见灭民的天使，就祷告耶和华说，我犯了罪，行了恶。但这群羊作了什么呢？愿你的手攻击我和我的父家。
And when David saw the angel who was causing the destruction of the people, he said to the Lord, Truly, the sin is mine; I have done wrong: but these are only sheep; what have they done? let your hand be against me and against my family.

当日，迦得来见大卫，对他说，你上去，在耶布斯人亚劳拿的禾场上为耶和华筑一座坛。
And that day Gad came to David and said to him, Go up, and put up an altar to the Lord on the grain-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.

大卫就照着迦得奉耶和华名所说的话上去了。
So David went up, as Gad had said and as the Lord had given orders.

亚劳拿观看，见王和他臣仆前来，就迎接出去，脸伏于地，向王下拜，
And Araunah, looking out, saw the king and his servants coming to him: and Araunah went out, and went down on his face to the earth before the king.

说，我主我王为何来到仆人这里呢？大卫说，我要买你这禾场，为耶和华筑一座坛，使民间的瘟疫止住。
And Araunah said, Why has my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To give you a price for your grain-floor, so that I may put up an altar to the Lord, and the disease may be stopped among the people.

亚劳拿对大卫说，我主我王，你喜悦用什么，就拿去献祭。看哪，这里有牛可以作燔祭，有打粮的器具和套牛的轭可以当柴烧。
And Araunah said to David, Let my lord the king take whatever seems right to him, and make an offering of it: see, here are the oxen for the burned offering, and the grain-cleaning instruments and the ox-yokes for wood:

王阿，这一切，我亚劳拿都奉给你。又对王说，愿耶和华你的神悦纳你。
All this does the servant of my lord the king give to the king. And Araunah said, May the Lord your God be pleased with your offering!

王对亚劳拿说，不然。我必要按着价值向你买。我不肯用白得之物作燔祭献给耶和华我的神。大卫就用五十舍客勒银子买了那禾场与牛。
And the king said to Araunah, No, but I will give you a price for it; I will not give to the Lord my God burned offerings for which I have given nothing. So David got the grain-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

大卫在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛，献燔祭和平安祭。如此，耶和华垂听国民所求的，瘟疫在以色列人中就止住了。
And there David put up an altar to the Lord, making burned offerings and peace-offerings. So the Lord gave ear to his prayer for the land, and the disease came to an end in Israel.

�了。
So David went up, as Gad had said and as the Lord had given orders.

亚劳拿观看，见王和他臣仆前来，就迎接出去，脸伏于地，向王下拜，
And Araunah, looking out, saw the king and his servants coming to him: and Araunah went out, and went down on his face to the earth before the king.

说，我主我王为何来到仆人这里呢？大卫说，我要买你这禾场，为耶和华筑一座坛，使民间的瘟疫止住。
And Araunah said, Why has my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To give you a price for your grain-floor, so that I may put up an altar to the Lord, and the disease may be stopped among the people.

亚劳拿对大卫说，我主我王，你喜悦用什么，就拿去献祭。看哪，这里有牛可以作燔祭，有打粮的器具和套牛的轭可以当柴烧。
And Araunah said to David, Let my lord the king take whatever seems right to him, and make an offering of it: see, here are the oxen for the burned offering, and the grain-cleaning instruments and the ox-yokes for wood:

王阿，这一切，我亚劳拿都奉给你。又对王说，愿耶和华你的神悦纳你。
All this does the servant of my lord the king give to the king. And Araunah said, May the Lord your God be pleased with your offering!

王对亚劳拿说，不然。我必要按着价值向你买。我不肯用白得之物作燔祭献给耶和华我的神。大卫就用五十舍客勒银子买了那禾场与牛。
And the king said to Araunah, No, but I will give you a price for it; I will not give to the Lord my God burned offerings for which I have given nothing. So David got the grain-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

大卫在那里为耶和华筑了一座坛，献燔祭和平安祭。如此，耶和华垂听国民所求的，瘟疫在以色列人中就止住了。
And there David put up an altar to the Lord, making burned offerings and peace-offerings. So the Lord gave ear to his prayer for the land, and the disease came to an end in Israel.

