撒迦利亚 Zechariah

大利乌王第二年八月，耶和华的话临到易多的孙子，比利家的儿子，先知撒迦利亚，说，
In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

耶和华曾向你们列祖大大发怒。
The Lord has been very angry with your fathers:

所以你要对以色列人说，万军之耶和华如此说，你们要转向我，我就转向你们。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And you are to say to them, These are the words of the Lord of armies: Come back to me, says the Lord of armies, and I will come back to you.

不要效法你们列祖。从前的先知呼叫他们说，万军之耶和华如此说，你们要回头，离开你们的恶道恶行。他们却不听，也不顺从我。这是耶和华说的。
Be not like your fathers, to whom the voice of the earlier prophets came, saying, Be turned now from your evil ways and from your evil doings: but they did not give ear to me or take note, says the Lord.

你们的列祖在哪里呢？那些先知能永远存活吗？
Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they go on living for ever?

只是我的言语和律例，就是所吩咐我仆人众先知的，岂不临到你们列祖吗？他们就回头，说，万军之耶和华定意，按我们的行动作为，向我们怎样行，他已照样行了。
But my words and my orders, which I gave to my servants the prophets, have they not overtaken your fathers? and turning back they said, As it was the purpose of the Lord of armies to do to us, in reward for our ways and our doings, so has he done.

大利乌第二年十一月，就是细吧特月二十四日，耶和华的话临到易多的孙子，比利家的儿子先知撒迦利亚，说，
On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

我夜间观看，见一人骑着红马，站在洼地番石榴树中间。在他身后又有红马，黄马，和白马。
I saw in the night a man on a red horse, between the mountains in the valley, and at his back were horses, red, black, white, and of mixed colours.

我对与我说话的天使说，主阿，这是什么意思。他说，我要指示你这是什么意思。
Then I said, O my lord, what are these? And the angel who was talking to me said to me, I will make clear to you what they are.

那站在番石榴树中间的人说，这是奉耶和华差遣，在遍地走来走去的。
And the man who was between the mountains, answering me, said, These are those whom the Lord has sent to go up and down through the earth.

那些骑马的，对站在番石榴树中间耶和华的使者说，我们已在遍地走来走去，见全地都安息平静。
And the man who was between the mountains, answering, said to the angel of the Lord, We have gone up and down through the earth, and all the earth is quiet and at rest.

于是，耶和华的使者说，万军之耶和华阿，你恼恨耶路撒冷，和犹大的城邑，已经七十年，你不施怜悯要到几时呢？
Then the angel of the Lord, answering, said, O Lord of armies, how long will it be before you have mercy on Jerusalem and on the towns of Judah against which your wrath has been burning for seventy years?

耶和华就用美善的安慰话，回答那与我说话的天使。
And the Lord gave an answer in good and comforting words to the angel who was talking to me.

与我说话的天使对我说，你要宣告说，万军之耶和华如此说，我为耶路撒冷，为锡安，心里极其火热。
And the angel who was talking to me said to me, Let your voice be loud and say, These are the words of the Lord of armies: I am greatly moved about the fate of Jerusalem and of Zion.

我甚恼怒那安逸的列国。因我从前稍微恼怒我民，他们就加害过分。
And I am very angry with the nations who are living untroubled: for when I was only a little angry, they made the evil worse.

所以耶和华如此说，现今我回到耶路撒冷，仍施怜悯。我的殿必重建在其中，准绳必拉在耶路撒冷之上。这是万军之耶和华说的。
So this is what the Lord has said: I have come back to Jerusalem with mercies; my house is to be put up in her, says the Lord of armies, and a line is to be stretched out over Jerusalem.

你要再宣告说，万军之耶和华如此说，我的城邑必再丰盛发达。耶和华必再安慰锡安，拣选耶路撒冷。
And again let your voice be loud and say, This is what the Lord of armies has said: My towns will again be overflowing with good things, and again the Lord will give comfort to Zion and take Jerusalem for himself.

我举目观看，见有四角。
And lifting up my eyes I saw four horns.

我就问与我说话的天使说，这是什么意思。他回答说，这是打散犹大，以色列，和耶路撒冷的角。
And I said to the angel who was talking to me, What are these? And he said to me, These are the horns which have sent Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem in flight.

耶和华又指四个匠人给我看。
And the Lord gave me a vision of four metal-workers.

我说，他们来做什么呢？他说，这是打散犹大的角，使人不敢抬头。但这些匠人来威吓列国，打掉他们的角，就是举起打散犹大地的角。
Then I said, What have these come to do? And he said, These are the horns which sent Judah in flight, and kept him from lifting up his head: but these men have come to send fear on them and to put down the nations who are lifting up their horns against the land of Judah to send it in flight.

我又举目观看，见一人手拿准绳。
And lifting up my eyes, I saw a man with a measuring-line in his hand.

我说，你往哪里去？他对我说，要去量耶路撒冷，看有多宽多长。
And I said to him, Where are you going? And he said to me, To take the measure of Jerusalem, to see how wide and how long it is.

与我说话的天使去的时候，又有一位天使迎着他来，
And the angel who was talking to me went out, and another angel went out, and, meeting him,

对他说，你跑去告诉那少年人说，耶路撒冷必有人居住，好像无城墙的乡村，因为人民和牲畜甚多。
Said to him, Go quickly and say to this young man, Jerusalem will be an unwalled town, because of the great number of men and cattle in her.

耶和华说，我要作耶路撒冷四围的火城，并要作其中的荣耀。
For I, says the Lord, will be a wall of fire round about her, and I will be the glory inside her.

耶和华说，我从前分散你们在天的四方。（原文作犹如天的四风），现在你们要从北方之地逃回。这是耶和华说的。
Ho, ho! go in flight from the land of the north, says the Lord: for I have sent you far and wide to the four winds of heaven, says the Lord.

与巴比伦人同住的锡安民哪，应当逃脱。
Ho! Zion, go in flight from danger, you who are living with the daughter of Babylon.

万军之耶和华说，在显出荣耀之后，差遣我去惩罚那掳掠你们的列国。摸你们的，就是摸他眼中的瞳人。
For this is what the Lord of armies has said: In the way of glory he has sent me to the nations which have taken your goods: for anyone touching you is touching what is most dear to him.

看哪，我（或作他）要向他们抡手，他们就必作服事他们之人的掳物，你们便知道万军之耶和华差遣我了。
For at the shaking of my hand over them, their goods will be taken by those who were their servants: and you will see that the Lord of armies has sent me.

锡安城阿，应当欢乐歌唱，因为我来要住在你中间。这是耶和华说的。
Give songs of joy, O daughter of Zion: for I come, and I will make my resting-place among you, says the Lord.

那时，必有许多国归附耶和华，作他（原文作我）的子民。他（原文作我）要住在你中间，你就知道万军之耶和华差遣我到你那里去了。
And a number of nations will be joined to the Lord in that day, and will become my people; and I will be living among you, and you will see that the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

耶和华必收回犹大作他圣地的分，也必再拣选耶路撒冷。
And Judah will be the Lord's heritage in the holy land, and Jerusalem will again be his.

凡有血气的，都当在耶和华面前静默无声。因为他兴起，从圣所出来了。
Let all flesh be quiet and make no sound before the Lord: for he is awake and has come from his holy resting-place.

天使（原文作他）又指给我看，大祭司约书亚，站在耶和华的使者面前，撒但也站在约书亚的右边，与他作对。
And he let me see Joshua, the high priest, in his place before the angel of the Lord, and the Satan at his right hand ready to take up a cause against him.

耶和华向撒但说，撒但哪，耶和华责备你，就是拣选耶路撒冷的耶和华责备你。这不是从火中抽出来的一根柴吗？
And the Lord said to the Satan, May the Lord's word be sharp against you, O Satan, the word of the Lord who has taken Jerusalem for himself: is this not a burning branch pulled out of the fire?

约书亚穿着污秽的衣服，站在使者面前。
Now Joshua was clothed in unclean robes, and he was in his place before the angel.

使者吩咐站在面前的说，你们要脱去他污秽的衣服。又对约书亚说，我使你脱离罪孽，要给你穿上华美的衣服。
And he made answer and said to those who were there before him, Take the unclean robes off him, and let him be clothed in clean robes;

我说，要将洁净的冠冕戴在他头上。他们就把洁净的冠冕戴在他头上，给他穿上华美的衣服，耶和华的使者在旁边站立。
And let them put a clean head-dress on his head. So they put a clean head-dress on his head, clothing him with clean robes: and to him he said, See, I have taken your sin away from you.

耶和华的使者告诫约书亚说，
And the angel of the Lord made a statement to Joshua, and said,

万军之耶和华如此说，你若遵行我的道，谨守我的命令，你就可以管理我的家，看守我的院宇。我也要使你在这些站立的人中间来往。
These are the words of the Lord of armies: If you will go in my ways and keep what I have put in your care, then you will be judge over my Temple and have the care of my house, and I will give you the right to come in among those who are there.

大祭司约书亚阿，你和坐在你面前的同伴都当听。（他们是作预兆的）。我必使我仆人大卫的苗裔发出。
Give ear now, O Joshua, the high priest, you and your friends who are seated before you; for these are men who are a sign: for see, I will let my servant the Branch be seen.

看哪，我在约书亚面前所立的石头，在一块石头上有七眼。万军之耶和华说，我要亲自雕刻这石头，并要在一日之间，除掉这地的罪孽。
For see, the stone which I have put before Joshua; on one stone are seven eyes: see, the design cut on it will be my work, says the Lord of armies, and I will take away the sin of that land in one day.

当那日，你们各人要请邻舍坐在葡萄树和无花果树下。这是万军之耶和华说的。
In that day, says the Lord of armies, you will be one another's guests under the vine and under the fig-tree.

那与我说话的天使又来叫醒我，好像人睡觉被唤醒一样。
And the angel who was talking to me came again, awaking me as a man out of his sleep.

他问我说，你看见了什么。我说，我看见了一个纯金的灯台，顶上有灯盏，灯台上有七盏灯，每盏有七个管子。
And he said to me, What do you see? And I said, I see a light-support, made all of gold, with its cup on the top of it and seven lights on it; and there are seven pipes to every one of the lights which are on the top of it;

旁边有两棵橄榄树，一棵在灯盏的右边，一棵在灯盏的左边。
And two olive-trees by it, one on the right side of the cup and one on the left.

我问与我说话的天使说，主阿，这是什么意思。
And I made answer and said to the angel who was talking to me, What are these, my lord?

与我说话的天使回答我说，你不知道这是什么意思吗？我说，主阿，我不知道。
Then the angel who was talking to me, answering me, said, Have you no knowledge of what these are? And I said, No, my lord.

他对我说，这是耶和华指示所罗巴伯的。万军之耶和华说，不是倚靠势力，不是倚靠才能，乃是倚靠我的灵，方能成事。
This is the word of the Lord to Zerubbabel, saying, Not by force or by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of armies.

大山哪，你算什么呢？在所罗巴伯面前，你必成为平地。他必搬出一块石头，安在殿顶上。人且大声欢呼，说，愿恩惠恩惠归与这殿（殿或作石）。
Who are you, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel you will become level: and he will let all see the headstone, with cries of Grace, grace, to it.

耶和华的话又临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

所罗巴伯的手，立了这殿的根基。他的手也必完成这工。你就知道万军之耶和华差遣我到你们这里来了。
The hands of Zerubbabel have put the base of this house in place, and his hands will make it complete; and it will be clear to you that the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

谁藐视这日的事为小呢？这七眼乃是耶和华的眼睛，遍察全地，见所罗巴伯手拿线铊就欢喜。
For who has had a poor opinion of the day of small things? for they will be glad when they see the weighted measuring-line in the hand of Zerubbabel. Then he said in answer to me, These seven lights are the eyes of the Lord which go quickly up and down through all the earth.

我又问天使说，这灯台左右的两棵橄榄树，是什么意思。
And I made answer and said to him, What are these two olive-trees on the right side of the light-support and on the left?

我二次问他说，这两根橄榄枝，在两个流出金色油的金嘴旁边，是什么意思。
And answering a second time, I said to him, What are these two olive branches, through whose gold pipes the oil is drained out?

他对我说，你不知道这是什么意思吗？我说，主阿，我不知道。
And he said in answer to me, Have you no knowledge what these are? And I said, No, my lord.

他说，这是两个受膏者，站在普天下主的旁边。
And he said, These are the two sons of oil, whose place is by the Lord of all the earth.

我又举目观看，见有一飞行的书卷。
Then again lifting up my eyes I saw a roll in flight through the air.

他问我说，你看见什么。我回答说，我看见一飞行的书卷，长二十肘。宽十肘。
And he said to me, What do you see? And I said, A roll going through the air; it is twenty cubits long and ten cubits wide.

他对我说，这是发出行在遍地上的咒诅。凡偷窃的必按卷上这面的话除灭。凡起假誓的必按卷上那面的话除灭。
Then he said to me, This is the curse which goes out over the face of all the land: for long enough has every thief gone without punishment, and long enough has every taker of false oaths gone without punishment.

万军之耶和华说，我必使这书卷出去，进入偷窃人的家，和指我名起假誓人的家，必常在他家里，连房屋带木石都毁灭了。
And I will send it out, says the Lord of armies, and it will go into the house of the thief and into the house of him who takes a false oath by my name: and it will be in his house, causing its complete destruction, with its woodwork and its stones.

与我说话的天使出来，对我说，你要举目观看，见所出来的是什么？
And the angel who was talking to me went out and said to me, Let your eyes be lifted up now, and see the ephah which is going out.

我说，这是什么呢？他说，这出来的是量器。他又说，这是恶人，在遍地的形状。
And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah which is going out. And he said further, This is their evil-doing in all the land.

（我见有一片圆铅被举起来）这坐在量器中的是个妇人。
And I saw a round cover of lead lifted up; and a woman was seated in the middle of the ephah.

天使说，这是罪恶。他就把妇人扔在量器中，将那片圆铅扔在量器的口上。
And he said, This is Sin; and pushing her down into the ephah, he put the weight of lead on the mouth of it.

我又举目观看，见有两个妇人出来，在她们翅膀中有风，飞得甚快。翅膀如同鹳鸟的翅膀。她们将量器抬起来，悬在天地中间。
And lifting up my eyes I saw two women coming out, and the wind was in their wings; and they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they took the ephah, lifting it up between earth and heaven.

我问与我说话的天使说，她们要将量器抬到哪里去呢？
And I said to the angel who was talking to me, Where are they taking the ephah?

他对我说，要往示拿地去，为它盖造房屋。等房屋齐备，就把它安置在自己的地方。
And he said to me, To make a house for her in the land of Shinar: and they will make a place ready, and put her there in the place which is hers.

我又举目观看，见有四辆车从两山中间出来。那山是铜山。
And again lifting up my eyes I saw four war-carriages coming out from between the two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.

第一辆车套着红马，第二辆车套着黑马。
In the first war-carriage were red horses; and in the second, black horses;

第三辆车套着白马，第四辆车套着有斑点的壮马。
And in the third, white horses; and in the fourth, horses of mixed colour.

我就问与我说话的天使说，主阿，这是什么意思。
And I made answer and said to the angel who was talking to me, What are these, my lord?

天使回答我说，这是天的四风，是从普天下的主面前出来的。
And the angel, answering, said to me, These go out to the four winds of heaven from their place before the Lord of all the earth.

套着黑马的车往北方去，白马跟随在后。有斑点的马往南方去。
The carriage in which are the black horses goes in the direction of the north country; the white go to the west; and those of mixed colour go in the direction of the south country.

壮马出来，要在遍地走来走去。天使说，你们只管在遍地走来走去。它们就照样行了。
And the red ones go to the east; and they made request that they might go up and down through the earth: and he said, Go up and down through the earth. So they went up and down through the earth.

他又呼叫我说，看哪，往北方去的，已在北方安慰我的心。
Then crying out to me, he said, See, those who are going to the north country have given rest to the spirit of the Lord in the north country.

耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你要从被掳之人中取黑玳，多比雅，耶大雅的金银。这三人是从巴比伦来到西番雅的儿子约西亚的家里。当日你要进他的家，
Take the offerings of those who went away as prisoners, from Heldai, Tobijah, and Jedaiah, and from the family of Josiah, the son of Zephaniah, who have come from Babylon;

取这金银作冠冕，戴在约撒答的儿子，大祭司约书亚的头上。
And take silver and gold and make a crown and put it on the head of Zerubbabel;

对他说，万军之耶和华如此说，看哪，那名称为（大卫苗裔的，他要在本处长起来。并要建造耶和华的殿。
And say to him, These are the words of the Lord of armies: See, the man whose name is the Branch, under whom there will be fertile growth.

他要建造耶和华的殿，并担负尊荣，坐在位上掌王权。又必在位上作祭司，使两职之间筹定和平。
And he will be the builder of the Temple of the Lord; and the glory will be his, and he will take his place as ruler on the seat of power; and Joshua will be a priest at his right hand, and between them there will be a design of peace.

这冠冕要归希连（就是黑玳），多比雅，耶大雅，和西番雅的儿子贤（贤就是约西亚），放在耶和华的殿里为记念。
And the crown will be for grace to Heldai and Tobijah and Jedaiah and the son of Zephaniah, to keep their memory living in the house of the Lord.

远方的人也要来建造耶和华的殿。你们就知道万军之耶和华差遣我，到你们这里来。你们若留意听从耶和华你们神的话，这事必然成就。
And those who are far away will come and be builders in the Temple of the Lord, and it will be clear to you that the Lord of armies has sent me to you.

大利乌王第四年九月，就是基斯流月初四日，耶和华的话临到撒迦利亚。
And it came about in the fourth year of King Darius, that the word of the Lord came to Zechariah on the fourth day of the ninth month, the month Chislev.

那时伯特利人已经打发沙利色和利坚米勒，并跟从他们的人，去恳求耶和华的恩，
Now they of Beth-el had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech to make a request for grace from the Lord,

并问万军之耶和华殿中的祭司，和先知说，我历年以来，在五月间哭泣斋戒，现在还当这样行吗？
And to say to the priests of the house of the Lord of armies and to the prophets, Am I to go on weeping in the fifth month, separating myself as I have done in past years?

万军之耶和华的话就临到我说，
Then the word of the Lord of armies came to me, saying

你要宣告国内的众民，和祭司，说，你们这七十年在五月，七月禁食悲哀，岂是丝毫向我禁食吗？
Say to all the people of the land and to the priests, When you went without food and gave yourselves to grief in the fifth and the seventh months for these seventy years, did you ever do it because of me?

你们吃喝，不是为自己吃，为自己喝吗？
And when you are feasting and drinking, are you not doing it only for yourselves?

当耶路撒冷和四围的城邑有居民，正兴盛，南地高原有人居住的时候，耶和华借从前的先知所宣告的话，你们不当听吗？
Are not these the words which the Lord said to you by the earlier prophets, when Jerusalem was full of people and wealth, and the towns round about her and the South and the Lowland were peopled?

耶和华的话又临到撒迦利亚说，
And the word of the Lord came to Zechariah, saying,

万军之耶和华曾对你们的列祖如此说，要按至理判断，各人以慈爱怜悯弟兄。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Let your judging be upright and done in good faith, let every man have mercy and pity for his brother:

不可欺压寡妇，孤儿，寄居的，和贫穷人。谁都不可心里谋害弟兄。
Do not be hard on the widow, or the child without a father, on the man from a strange country, or on the poor; let there be no evil thought in your heart against your brother.

他们却不肯听从，扭转肩头，塞耳不听。
But they would not give attention, turning their backs and stopping their ears from hearing;

使心硬如金钢石，不听律法，和万军之耶和华用灵借从前的先知所说的话。故此，万军之耶和华大发烈怒。
And they made their hearts like the hardest stone, so that they might not give ear to the law and the words which the Lord of armies had said by the earlier prophets: and there came great wrath from the Lord of armies.

万军之耶和华说，我曾呼唤他们，他们不听。将来他们呼求我，我也不听。
And it came about that as they would not give ear to his voice, so I would not give ear to their voice, says the Lord of armies:

我必以旋风吹散他们到素不认识的万国中。这样，他们的地就荒凉，甚至无人来往经过。因为他们使美好之地荒凉了。
But with a storm-wind I sent them in flight among all the nations of whom they had no knowledge. So the land was waste after them, so that no man went through or came back: for they had made waste the desired land.

万军之耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord of armies came to me, saying,

万军之耶和华如此说，我为锡安心里极其火热。我为她火热，向她的仇敌发烈怒。
These are the words of the Lord of armies: I am angry about the fate of Zion, I am angry about her with great wrath.

耶和华如此说，我现在回到锡安，要住在耶路撒冷中。耶路撒冷必称为诚实的城，万军之耶和华的山必称为圣山。
This is what the Lord has said: I have come back to Zion, and will make my living-place in Jerusalem: and Jerusalem will be named The town of good faith; and the mountain of the Lord of armies The holy mountain.

万军之耶和华如此说，将来必有年老的男女，坐在耶路撒冷街上。因为年纪老迈就手拿拐杖。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: There will again be old men and old women seated in the open spaces of Jerusalem, every man with his stick in his hand because he is so old.

城中街上必满有男孩女孩玩耍。
And the open spaces of the town will be full of boys and girls playing in its open spaces.

万军之耶和华如此说，到那日，这事在余剩的民眼中看为希奇，在我眼中也看为希奇吗？这是万军之耶和华说的。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: If this is a wonder to the rest of this people, is it a wonder to me? says the Lord of armies.

万军之耶和华如此说，我要从东方从西方救回我的民。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: See, I will be the saviour of my people from the east country, and from the west country;

我要领他们来，使他们住在耶路撒冷中。他们要作我的子民，我要作他们的神，都凭诚实和公义。
And I will make them come and be living in Jerusalem and they will be to me a people and I will be to them a God, in good faith and in righteousness.

万军之耶和华如此说，当建造万军之耶和华的殿，立根基之日的先知所说的话，现在你们听见，应当手里强壮。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: Let your hands be strong, you who are now hearing these words from the mouths of the prophets, that is to say, in the days when the base of the house of the Lord of armies has been put in place for the building of the house, that is the Temple.

那日以先，人得不着雇价，牲畜也是如此。且因敌人的缘故，出入之人，不得平安。乃因我使众人互相攻击。
For before those days there was no payment for a man's work, or for the use of a beast, and there was no peace for him who went out or him who came in, because of the attacker: for I had every man turned against his neighbour.

但如今，我待这余剩的民必不像从前。这是万军之耶和华说的。
But now I will not be to the rest of this people as I was in the past, says the Lord of armies.

因为他们必平安撒种。葡萄树必结果子，地土必有出产，天也必降甘露。我要使这余剩的民，享受这一切的福。
For I will let the seed of peace be planted; the vine will give her fruit and the land will give her increase and the heavens will give their dew; and I will give to the rest of this people all these things for their heritage.

犹大家和以色列家阿，你们从前在列国中，怎样成为可咒诅的，照样，我要拯救你们，使人称你们为有福的（或作使你们叫人得福）。你们不要惧怕，手要强壮。
And it will come about that, as you were a curse among the nations, O children of Judah and children of Israel, so I will give you salvation and you will be a blessing: have no fear and let your hands be strong.

万军之耶和华如此说，你们列祖惹我发怒的时候，我怎样定意降祸，并不后悔。
For this is what the Lord of armies has said: As it was my purpose to do evil to you when your fathers made me angry, says the Lord of armies, and my purpose was not changed:

现在我照样定意施恩与耶路撒冷和犹大家，你们不要惧怕。
So in these days it is again my purpose to do good to Jerusalem and to the children of Judah: have no fear.

你们所当行的是这样，各人与邻舍说话诚实，在城门口按至理判断，使人和睦。
These are the things which you are to do: Let every man say what is true to his neighbour; and let your judging give peace in your towns.

谁都不可心里谋害邻舍，也不可喜爱起假誓。因为这些事都为我所恨恶。这是耶和华说的。
Let no one have any evil thought in his heart against his neighbour; and have no love for false oaths: for all these things are hated by me, says the Lord.

万军之耶和华的话临到我说，
And the word of the Lord of armies came to me, saying,

万军之耶和华如此说，四月五月禁食的日子，七月十月禁食的日子，必变为犹大家欢喜快乐的日子，和欢乐的节期。所以你们要喜爱诚实与和平。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: The times of going without food in the fourth month and in the fifth and the seventh and the tenth months, will be for the people of Judah times of joy and happy meetings; so be lovers of good faith and of peace.

万军之耶和华如此说，将来必有列国的人，和多城的居民来到。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: It will again come about that when peoples and those living in great towns come,

这城的居民必到那城，说，我们要快去恳求耶和华的恩，寻求万军之耶和华。我也要去。
And the people of one town go to another and say, Let us certainly go with a request for grace from the Lord, and to give worship to the Lord of armies, then I will go with you.

必有列邦的人，和强国的民，来到耶路撒冷，寻求万军之耶和华。恳求耶和华的恩。
And great peoples and strong nations will come to give worship to the Lord of armies in Jerusalem and to make requests for grace from the Lord.

万军之耶和华如此说，在那些日子，必有十个人从列国诸族中出来（族原文作方言），拉住一个犹大人的衣襟，说，我们要与你们同去，因为我们听见神与你们同在了。
This is what the Lord of armies has said: In those days, ten men from all the languages of the nations will put out their hands and take a grip of the skirt of him who is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for it has come to our ears that God is with you.

耶和华的默示应验在哈得拉地，大马色（世人和以色列各支派的眼目都仰望耶和华）。
A word of the Lord: The Lord has come to the land of Hadrach, and Damascus is his resting-place: for the towns of Aram are the Lord's,

和靠近的哈马，并推罗，西顿，因为这二城的人大有智慧。
As well as Hamath, which is by its limit, and Tyre and Zidon, because they are very wise.

推罗为自己修筑保障，积蓄银子如尘沙，堆起精金如街上的泥土。
And Tyre made for herself a strong place, and got together silver like dust and the best gold like the earth of the streets.

主必赶出她，打败她海上的权力。她必被火烧灭。
See, the Lord will take away her heritage, overturning her power in the sea; and she will be burned up with fire.

亚实基伦看见必惧怕。迦萨看见甚痛苦。以革伦因失了盼望蒙羞。迦萨必不再有君王。亚实基伦也不再有居民。
Ashkelon will see it with fear, and Gaza, bent with pain; and Ekron, for her hope will be shamed: and the king will be cut off from Gaza, and Ashkelon will be unpeopled.

私生子（或作外族人）必住在亚实突。我必除灭非利士人的骄傲。
And a mixed people will be living in Ashdod, and I will have the pride of the Philistines cut off.

我必除去他口中带血之肉，和牙齿内可憎之物。他必作为余剩的人归与我们的神，必在犹大像族长，以革伦人必如耶布斯人。
And I will take away his blood from his mouth, and his disgusting things from between his teeth; and some of his people will be kept for our God: and he will be as a family in Judah, and Ekron as one living in Jerusalem.

我必在我家的四围安营，使敌军不得任意往来。暴虐的人也不再经过，因为我亲眼看顾我的家。
And I will put my forces in position round my house, so that there may be no coming and going: and no cruel master will again go through them: for now I have seen his trouble.

锡安的民哪，应当大大喜乐。耶路撒冷的民哪，应当欢呼。看哪，你的王来到你这里。他是公义的，并且施行拯救，谦谦和和地骑着驴，就是骑着驴的驹子。
Be full of joy, O daughter of Zion; give a glad cry, O daughter of Jerusalem: see, your king comes to you: he is upright and has overcome; gentle and seated on an ass, on a young ass.

我必除灭以法莲的战车，和耶路撒冷的战马。争战的弓也必除灭。他必向列国讲和平。他的权柄必从这海管到那海，从大河管到地极。
And he will have the war-carriage cut off from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the bow of war will be cut off: and he will say words of peace to the nations: and his rule will be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.

锡安哪，我因与你立约的血，将你中间被掳而囚的人，从无水的坑中释放出来。
And as for you, because of the blood of your agreement, I have sent out your prisoners from the deep hole in which there is no water.

你们被囚而有指望的人，都要转回保障。我今日说明，我必加倍赐福给你们。
And they will come back to you, O daughter of Zion, as prisoners of hope: today I say to you that I will give you back twice as much;

我拿犹大作上弦的弓，我拿以法莲为张弓的箭。锡安哪，我要激发你的众子，攻击希腊（原文作雅完）的众子，使你如勇士的刀。
For I have made Judah a bow bent for my use, I have made Ephraim the arrows of the bow; I will make your sons, O Zion, take up arms against your sons, O Greece, and will make you like the sword of a man of war.

耶和华必显现在他们以上。他的箭必射出像闪电。主耶和华必吹角，乘南方的旋风而行。
And the Lord will be seen over them, and his arrow will go out like the thunder-flame: and the Lord God, sounding the war-horn, will go in the storm-winds of the South.

万军之耶和华必保护他们。他们必吞灭仇敌，践踏弹石。他们必喝血呐喊，犹如饮酒。他们必像盛满血的碗，又像坛的四角满了血。
The Lord of armies will be a cover for them; and they will overcome, crushing under foot the armed men; they will take their blood for drink like wine: they will be full like the sides of the altar.

当那日，耶和华他们的神必看他的民，如群羊拯救他们。因为他们必像冠冕上的宝石，高举在他的地以上（高举云云或作在他的地上发光辉）。
And the Lord their God will be their saviour in that day, giving them food like the flock of his people: for they will be like the jewels of a crown shining over his land.

他的恩慈何等大，他的荣美何其盛。五谷健壮少男，新酒培养处女。
For how good it is and how beautiful! grain will make the young men strong and new wine the virgins.

当春雨的时候，你们要向发闪电的耶和华求雨。他必为众人降下甘霖，使田园生长菜蔬。
Make your request to the Lord for rain in the time of the spring rains, even to the Lord who makes the thunder-flames; and he will give them showers of rain, to every man grass in the field.

因为，家神所言的是虚空，卜士所见的是虚假，做梦者所说的是假梦。他们白白地安慰人。所以众人如羊流离，因无牧人就受苦。
For the images have said what is not true, and the readers of signs have seen deceit; they have given accounts of false dreams, they give comfort to no purpose: so they go out of the way like sheep, they are troubled because they have no keeper.

我的怒气向牧人发作，我必惩罚公山羊。因我万军之耶和华眷顾自己的羊群，就是犹大家，必使他们如骏马在阵上。
My wrath is burning against the keepers of the flock, and I will send punishment on the he-goats: for the Lord of armies takes care of his flock, the people of Judah, and will make them like the horse of his pride in the fight.

房角石，钉子，争战的弓，和一切掌权的都从他而出。
From him will come the keystone, from him the nail, from him the bow of war, from him will come every ruler;

他们必如勇士，在阵上将仇敌践踏在街上的泥土中。他们必争战，因为耶和华与他们同在。骑马的也必羞愧。
Together they will be like men of war, crushing down their haters into the earth of the streets in the fight; they will make war because the Lord is with them: and the horsemen will be shamed.

我要坚固犹大家，拯救约瑟家，要领他们归回。我要怜恤他们，他们必像未曾弃绝的一样。都因我是耶和华他们的神，我必应允他们的祷告。
And I will make the children of Judah strong, and I will be the saviour of the children of Joseph, and I will make them come back again, for I have had mercy on them: they will be as if I had not given them up: for I am the Lord their God and I will give them an answer.

以法莲人必如勇士，他们心中畅快如同喝酒。他们的儿女必看见而快活。他们的心必因耶和华喜乐。
And Ephraim will be like a man of war, and their hearts will be glad as with wine; and their children will see it with joy; their hearts will be glad in the Lord.

我要发嘶声，聚集他们。因我已经救赎他们。他们的人数必加增，如从前加增一样。
With the sound of the pipe I will get them together; for I have given the price to make them free: and they will be increased as they were increased.

我虽然（或作必）播散他们在列国中，他们必在远方记念我。他们与儿女都必存活，且得归回。
Though I had them planted among the peoples, they will keep me in mind in far countries: and they will take care of their children and will come back.

我必再领他们出埃及地，招聚他们出亚述，领他们到基列和利巴嫩，这地尚且不够他们居住。
And I will make them come back out of the land of Egypt, and will get them together out of Assyria; and I will take them into the land of Gilead, and it will not be wide enough for them.

耶和华必经过苦海，击打海浪，使尼罗河的深处都枯干。亚述的骄傲必至卑微。埃及的权柄必然灭没。
And they will go through the sea of Egypt, and all the deep waters of the Nile will become dry: and the pride of Assyria will be made low, and the power of Egypt will be taken away.

我必使他们倚靠我，得以坚固。一举一动必奉我的名。这是耶和华说的。
And their strength will be in the Lord; and their pride will be in his name, says the Lord.

利巴嫩哪，开开你的门，任火烧灭你的香柏树。
Let your doors be open, O Lebanon, so that fire may be burning among your cedars.

松树阿，应当哀号，因为香柏树倾倒，佳美的树毁坏。巴珊的橡树阿，应当哀号，因为茂盛的树林已经倒了。
Give a cry of grief, O fir-tree, for the fall of the cedar, because the great ones have been made low: give cries of grief, O you oaks of Bashan, for the strong trees of the wood have come down.

听阿，有牧人哀号的声音，因他们荣华的草场毁坏了。有少壮狮子咆哮的声音，因约旦河旁的丛林荒废了。
The sound of the crying of the keepers of the flock! for their glory is made waste: the sound of the loud crying of the young lions! for the pride of Jordan is made waste.

耶和华我的神如此说，你撒迦利亚要牧养这将宰的群羊。
This is what the Lord my God has said: Take care of the flock of death;

买他们的宰了他们，以自己为无罪。卖他们的说，耶和华是应当称颂的，因我成为富足。牧养他们的并不怜恤他们。
Whose owners put them to death and have no sense of sin; and those who get a price for them say, May the Lord be praised for I have much wealth: and the keepers of the flock have no pity for them.

耶和华说，我不再怜恤这地的居民。必将这民交给各人的邻舍，和他们王的手中。他们必毁灭这地，我也不救这民脱离他们的手。
For I will have no more pity for the people of the land, says the Lord; but I will give up everyone into his neighbour's hand and into the hand of his king: and they will make the land waste, and I will not keep them safe from their hands.

于是，我牧养这将宰的群羊，就是群中最困苦的羊。我拿着两根杖。一根我称为荣美，一根我称为联索。这样，我牧养了群羊。
So I took care of the flock of death, for those who made profit out of the flock; and I took for myself two rods, naming one Beautiful, and the other Bands; and I took care of the flock.

一月之内，我除灭三个牧人。因为我的心厌烦他们，他们的心也憎嫌我。
And in one month I put an end to the three keepers of the flock; for my soul was tired of them, and their souls were disgusted with me.

我就说，我不牧养你们。要死的，由他死。要丧亡的，由他丧亡。余剩的，由他们彼此相食。
And I said, I will not take care of you: If death comes to any, let death be its fate; if any is cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest take one another's flesh for food.

我折断那称为荣美的杖，表明我废弃与万民所立的约。
And I took my rod Beautiful, cutting it in two, so that the Lord's agreement, which he had made with all the peoples, might be broken.

当日就废弃了。这样，那些仰望我的困苦羊，就知道所说的是耶和华的话。
And it was broken on that day: and the sheep-traders, who were watching me, were certain that it was the word of the Lord.

我对他们说，你们若以为美，就给我工价，不然，就罢了。于是他们给了三十块钱，作为我的工价。
And I said to them, If it seems good to you, give me my payment; and if not, do not give it. So they gave me my payment by weight, thirty shekels of silver.

耶和华吩咐我说，要把众人所估定美好的价值，丢给窑户。我便将这三十块钱，在耶和华的殿中丢给窑户了。
And the Lord said to me, Put it into the store-house, the price at which I was valued by them. And I took the thirty shekels of silver and put them into the store-house in the house of the Lord.

我又折断称为联索的那根杖，表明我废弃犹大与以色列弟兄的情谊。
Then I took my other rod, the one named Bands, cutting it in two, so that the relation of brothers between Judah and Israel might be broken.

耶和华又吩咐我说，你再取愚昧人所用的器具。
And the Lord said to me, Take again the instruments of a foolish keeper of sheep.

因我要在这地兴起一个牧人。他不看顾丧亡的，不寻找分散的，不医治受伤的，也不牧养强壮的。却要吃肥羊的肉，撕裂它的蹄子。
For see, I will put a sheep-keeper over the land, who will have no care for that which is cut off, and will not go in search of the wanderers, or make well what is broken, and he will not give food to that which is ill, but he will take for his food the flesh of the fat, and let their feet be broken.

无用的牧人丢弃羊群有祸了。刀必临到他的膀臂，和右眼上。他的膀臂必全然枯干，他的右眼也必昏暗失明。
A curse on the foolish keeper who goes away from the flock! the sword will be on his arm and on his right eye: his arm will become quite dry and his eye will be made completely dark.

耶和华论以色列的默示。铺张诸天，建立地基，造人里面之灵的耶和华说。
The word of the Lord about Israel. The Lord by whom the heavens are stretched out and the bases of the earth put in place, and the spirit of man formed inside him, has said:

我必使耶路撒冷被围困的时候，向四围列国的民成为令人昏醉的杯，这默示也论到犹大（或作犹大也是如此）。
See, I will make Jerusalem a cup of shaking fear to all the peoples round about, when Jerusalem is shut in.

那日，我必使耶路撒冷向聚集攻击他的万民，当作一块重石头。凡举起的必受重伤。
And it will come about in that day that I will make Jerusalem a stone of great weight for all the peoples; all those who take it up will be badly wounded; and all the nations of the earth will come together against it.

耶和华说，到那日，我必使一切马匹惊惶，使骑马的颠狂。我必看顾犹大家，使列国的一切马匹瞎眼。
In that day, says the Lord, I will put fear into every horse and make every horseman go off his head: and my eyes will be open on the people of Judah, and I will make every horse of the peoples blind.

犹大的族长，必心里说，耶路撒冷的居民，倚靠万军之耶和华他们的神，就作我们的能力。
And the families of Judah will say in their hearts, The people of Jerusalem have their strength in the Lord of armies, their God.

那日，我必使犹大的族长，如火盆在木柴中，又如火把在禾捆里。他们必左右烧灭四围列国的民。耶路撒冷人必仍住本处，就是耶路撒冷。
In that day I will make the families of Judah like a pot with fire in it among trees, and like a flaming stick among cut grain; they will send destruction on all the peoples round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem will be living again in the place which is hers, that is, in Jerusalem.

耶和华必先拯救犹大的帐棚，免得大卫家的荣耀，和耶路撒冷居民的荣耀，胜过犹大。
And the Lord will give salvation to the tents of Judah first, so that the glory of the family of David and the glory of the people of Jerusalem may not be greater than that of Judah.

那日，耶和华必保护耶路撒冷的居民。他们中间软弱的，必如大卫。大卫的家，必如神，如行在他们前面之耶和华的使者。
In that day the Lord will be a cover over the people of Jerusalem; and he who is feeble among them in that day will be as strong as David, and the family of David will be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.

那日，我必定意灭绝来攻击耶路撒冷各国的民。
And it will come about on that day that I will take in hand the destruction of all the nations who come against Jerusalem.

我必将那施恩叫人恳求的灵，浇灌大卫家，和耶路撒冷的居民。他们必仰望我，或作他本节同就是他们所扎的。必为我悲哀，如丧独生子，又为我愁苦，如丧长子。
And I will send down on the family of David and on the people of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of prayer; and their eyes will be turned to the one who was wounded by their hands: and they will be weeping for him as for an only son, and their grief for him will be bitter, like the grief of one sorrowing for his oldest son.

那日，耶路撒冷必有大大的悲哀，如米吉多平原之哈达临门的悲哀。
In that day there will be a great weeping in Jerusalem, like the weeping of Hadad-rimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

境内，一家一家地都必悲哀。大卫家，男的独在一处，女的独在一处。拿单家，男的独在一处，女的独在一处。
And the land will give itself to weeping, every family separately; the family of David by themselves, and their wives by themselves; the family of Nathan by themselves, and their wives by themselves;

利未家，男的独在一处，女的独在一处。示每家，男的独在一处，女的独在一处。
The family of Levi by themselves, and their wives by themselves; the family of Shimei by themselves, and their wives by themselves;

其余的各家，男的独在一处，女的独在一处。
And all the other families by themselves, and their wives by themselves.

那日，必给大卫家和耶路撒冷的居民，开一个泉源，洗除罪恶与污秽。
In that day there will be a fountain open to the family of David and to the people of Jerusalem, for sin and for that which is unclean.

万军之耶和华说，那日，我必从地上除灭偶像的名，不再被人记念。也必使这地不再有假先知与污秽的灵。
And it will come about on that day, says the Lord of armies, that I will have the names of the images cut off out of the land, and there will be no more memory of them: and I will send all the prophets and the unclean spirit away from the land.

若再有人说预言，生他的父母必对他说，你不得存活，因为你托耶和华的名说假预言。生他的父母在他说预言的时候，要将他刺透。
And if anyone goes on acting as a prophet, then his father and his mother who gave him life will say to him, You may not go on living, for you are saying what is false in the name of the Lord; and his father and his mother will put a sword through him when he does so.

那日，凡作先知说预言的，必因他所论的异象羞愧，不再穿毛衣哄骗人。
And it will come about in that day that the prophets will be shamed, every man on account of his vision, when he is talking as a prophet; and they will not put on a robe of hair for purposes of deceit:

他必说，我不是先知，我是耕地的。我从幼年作人的奴仆。
But he will say, I am no prophet, but a worker on the land; for I have been an owner of land from the time when I was young.

必有人问他说，你两臂中间是什么伤呢？他必回答说，这是我在亲友家中所受的伤。
And if anyone says to him, What are these wounds between your hands? then he will say, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

万军之耶和华说，刀剑哪，应当兴起，攻击我的牧人，和我的同伴。击打牧人，羊就分散，我必反手加在微小者的身上。
Awake! O sword, against the keeper of my flock, and against him who is with me, says the Lord of armies: put to death the keeper of the sheep, and the sheep will go in flight: and my hand will be turned against the little ones.

耶和华说，这全地的人，三分之二，必剪除而死，三分之一，仍必存留。
And it will come about that in all the land, says the Lord, two parts of it will be cut off and come to an end; but the third will be still living there.

我要使这三分之一经火，熬炼他们，如熬炼银子，试炼他们，如试炼金子。他们必求告我的名，我必应允他们。我要说，这是我的子民。他们也要说，耶和华是我们的神。
And I will make the third part go through the fire, cleaning them as silver is made clean, and testing them as gold is tested: and they will make their prayer to me and I will give them an answer: I will say, It is my people; and they will say, The Lord is my God.

耶和华的日子临近。你的财物，必被抢掠，在你中间分散。
See, a day of the Lord is coming when they will make division of your goods taken by force before your eyes.

因为我必聚集万国与耶路撒冷争战。城必被攻取，房屋被抢夺妇女被玷污，城中的民一半被掳去，剩下的民，仍在城中，不致剪除。
For I will get all the nations together to make war against Jerusalem; and the town will be overcome, and the goods taken from the houses, and the women taken by force: and half the town will go away as prisoners, and the rest of the people will not be cut off from the town.

那时耶和华必出去与那些国争战，好像从前争战一样。
Then the Lord will go out and make war against those nations, as he did in the day of the fight.

那日，他的脚必站在耶路撒冷前面朝东的橄榄山上。这山必从中间分裂，自东至西成为极大的谷。山的一半向北挪移，一半向南挪移。
And in that day his feet will be on the Mount of Olives, which is opposite Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives will be parted in the middle to the east and to the west, forming a very great valley; and half the mountain will be moved to the north and half of it to the south.

你们要从我山的谷中逃跑，因为山谷必延到亚萨。你们逃跑，必如犹大王乌西雅年间的人逃避大地震一样。耶和华我的神必降临，有一切圣者同来。
And the valley will be stopped ... and you will go in flight as you went in flight from the earth-shock in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah: and the Lord my God will come, and all his holy ones with him.

那日，必没有光。三光必退缩。
And in that day there will be no heat or cold or ice;

那日，必是耶和华所知道的。不是白昼，也不是黑夜，到了晚上才有光明。
And it will be unbroken day, such as the Lord has knowledge of, without change of day and night, and even at nightfall it will be light.

那日必有活水从耶路撒冷出来，一半往东海流，一半往西海流。冬夏都是如此。
And on that day living waters will go out from Jerusalem; half of them flowing to the sea on the east and half to the sea on the west: in summer and in winter it will be so.

耶和华必作全地的王，那日耶和华必为独一无二的。他的名也是独一无二的。
And the Lord will be King over all the earth: in that day there will be one Lord and his name one.

全地，从迦巴直到耶路撒冷南方的临门，要变为亚拉巴。耶路撒冷必仍居高位，就是从便雅悯门到第一门之处，又到角门，并从哈楠业楼，直到王的酒榨。
And all the land will become like the Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem; and she will be lifted up and be living in her place; from the doorway of Benjamin to the place of the first doorway, to the doorway of the angle, and from the tower of Hananel to the king's wine-crushing places, men will be living in her.

人必住在其中，不再有咒诅。耶路撒冷人必安然居住。
And there will be no more curse; but Jerusalem will be living without fear of danger.

耶和华用灾殃，攻击那与耶路撒冷争战的列国人，必是这样。他们两脚站立的时候，肉必消没，眼在眶中干瘪，舌在口中溃烂。
And this will be the disease which the Lord will send on all the peoples which have been warring against Jerusalem: their flesh will be wasted away while they are on their feet, their eyes will be wasted in their heads and their tongues in their mouths.

那日，耶和华必使他们大大扰乱。他们各人彼此揪住，举手攻击。
And it will be on that day that a great fear will be sent among them from the Lord; and everyone will take his neighbour's hand, and every man's hand will be lifted against his neighbour's.

犹大也必在耶路撒冷争战。那时四围各国的财物，就是许多金银衣服，必被收聚。
And even Judah will be fighting against Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the nations round about will be massed together, a great store of gold and silver and clothing.

那临到马匹，骡子，骆驼，驴，和营中一切牲畜的灾殃是与那灾殃一般。
And the horses and the transport beasts, the camels and the asses and all the beasts in those tents will be attacked by the same disease.

所有来攻击耶路撒冷列国中剩下的人，必年年上来敬拜大君王万军之耶和华，并守住棚节。
And it will come about that everyone who is still living, of all those nations who came against Jerusalem, will go up from year to year to give worship to the King, the Lord of armies, and to keep the feast of tents.

地上万族中，凡不上耶路撒冷敬拜大君王万军之耶和华的，必无雨降在他们的地上。
And it will be that if any one of all the families of the earth does not go up to Jerusalem to give worship to the King, the Lord of armies, on them there will be no rain.

埃及族若不上来，雨也不降在他们的地上。凡不上来守住棚节的列国人，耶和华也必用这灾攻击他们。
And if the family of Egypt does not go up or come there, they will be attacked by the disease which the Lord will send on the nations:

这就是埃及的刑罚，和那不上来守住棚节之列国的刑罚。
This will be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all the nations who do not go up to keep the feast of tents.

当那日，马的铃铛上必有‘归耶和华为圣’的这句话。耶和华殿内的锅，必如祭坛前的碗一样。
On that day all the bells of the horses will be holy to the Lord, and the pots in the Lord's house will be like the basins before the altar.

凡耶路撒冷和犹大的锅，都必归万军之耶和华为圣。凡献祭的都必来取这锅，煮肉在其中。当那日，在万军之耶和华的殿中，必不再有迦南人。
And every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the Lord of armies: and all those who make offerings will come and take them for boiling their offerings: in that day there will be no more traders in the house of the Lord of armies.

如祭坛前的碗一样。
On that day all the bells of the horses will be holy to the Lord, and the pots in the Lord's house will be like the basins before the altar.

凡耶路撒冷和犹大的锅，都必归万军之耶和华为圣。凡献祭的都必来取这锅，煮肉在其中。当那日，在万军之耶和华的殿中，必不再有迦南人。
And every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah will be holy to the Lord of armies: and all those who make offerings will come and take them for boiling their offerings: in that day there will be no more traders in the house of the Lord of armies.

