以色列人出埃及地后，第二年二月初一日，耶和华在西乃的旷野，会幕中晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses in the waste land of Sinai, in the Tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt,

你要按以色列全会众的家室，宗族，人名的数目，计算所有的男丁。
Take the full number of the children of Israel, by their families, and by their fathers' houses, every male by name;

凡以色列中，从二十岁以外，能出去打仗的，你和亚伦要照他们的军队数点。
All those of twenty years old and over, who are able to go to war in Israel, are to be numbered by you and Aaron.

每支派中，必有一人作本支派的族长，帮助你们。
And to give you help, take one man from every tribe, the head of his father's house.

他们的名字，属流便的，有示丢珥的儿子以利蓿。
These are the names of those who are to be your helpers: from Reuben, Elizur, the son of Shedeur;

属西缅的，有苏利沙代的儿子示路蔑。
From Simeon, Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai;

属犹大的，有亚米拿达的儿子拿顺。
From Judah, Nahshon, the son of Amminadab;

属以萨迦的，有苏押的儿子拿坦业。
From Issachar, Nethanel, the son of Zuar;

属西布伦的，有希伦的儿子以利押。
From Zebulun, Eliab, the son of Helon;

约瑟子孙，属以法莲的，有亚米忽的儿子以利沙玛。属玛拿西的，有比大蓿的儿子迦玛列。
Of the children of Joseph: from Ephraim, Elishama, the son of Ammihud; from Manasseh, Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur,

属便雅悯的，有基多尼的儿子亚比但。
From Benjamin, Abidan, the son of Gideoni;

属但的，有亚米沙代的儿子亚希以谢。
From Dan, Ahiezer, the son of Ammi-shaddai;

属亚设的，有俄兰的儿子帕结。
From Asher, Pagiel, the son of Ochran;

属迦得的，有丢珥的儿子以利雅萨。
From Gad, Eliasaph, the son of Reuel;

属拿弗他利的，有以南的儿子亚希拉。
From Naphtali, Ahira, the son of Enan.

这都是从会中选召的，各作本支派的首领，都是以色列军中的统领。
These are the men named out of all the people, chiefs of their fathers' houses, heads of the tribes of Israel.

于是，摩西，亚伦带着这些按名指定的人，
And Moses and Aaron took these men, marked out by name;

当二月初一日招聚全会众。会众就照他们的家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外的，都述说自己的家谱。
And they got together all the people on the first day of the second month; and everyone made clear his family and his father's house, by the number of the names, from twenty years old and over.

耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，他就怎样在西乃的旷野数点他们。
As the Lord had given orders to Moses, so they were numbered by him in the waste place of Sinai.

以色列的长子，流便子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的男丁，共有四万六千五百名。
The generations of the sons of Reuben, the oldest son of Israel, were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over, who was able to go to war;


Forty-six thousand, five hundred of the tribe of Reuben were numbered.

西缅子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的男丁，共有五万九千三百名。
The generations of the sons of Simeon were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over, who was able to go to war;


Fifty-nine thousand, three hundred of the tribe of Simeon were numbered.

迦得子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有四万五千六百五十名。
The generations of the sons of Gad were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Forty-five thousand, six hundred and fifty of the tribe of Gad were numbered.

犹大子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有七万四千六百名。
The generations of the sons of Judah were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Seventy-four thousand, six hundred of the tribe of Judah were numbered.

以萨迦子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有五万四千四百名。
The generations of the sons of Issachar were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Fifty-four thousand, four hundred of the tribe of Issachar were numbered.

西布伦子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有五万七千四百名。
The generations of the sons of Zebulun were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Fifty-seven thousand, four hundred of the tribe of Zebulun were numbered.

约瑟子孙，属以法莲子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有四万零五百名。
The generations of the sons of Joseph were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Forty thousand, five hundred of the tribe of Ephraim were numbered.

玛拿西子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有三万二千二百名。
The generations of the sons of Manasseh were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Thirty-two thousand, two hundred of the tribe of Manasseh were numbered.

便雅悯子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有三万五千四百名。
The generations of the sons of Benjamin were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Thirty-five thousand, four hundred of the tribe of Benjamin were numbered.

但子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有六万二千七百名。
The generations of the sons of Dan were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years and over who was able to go to war;


Sixty-two thousand, seven hundred of the tribe of Dan were numbered.

亚设子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有四万一千五百名。
The generations of the sons of Asher were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Forty-one thousand, five hundred of the tribe of Asher were numbered.

拿弗他利子孙的后代，照着家室，宗族，人名的数目，从二十岁以外，凡能出去打仗，被数的，共有五万三千四百名。
The generations of the sons of Naphtali were numbered by their families and their fathers' houses, every male of twenty years old and over who was able to go to war;


Fifty-three thousand, four hundred of the tribe of Naphtali were numbered.

这些就是被数点的，是摩西，亚伦，和以色列中十二个首领所数点的。这十二个人各作各宗族的代表。
These are they who were numbered by Moses and Aaron and by the twelve chiefs of Israel, one from every tribe.

这样凡以色列人中被数的，照着宗族从二十岁以外，能出去打仗，被数的，共有六十万零三千五百五十名。
So all those who were numbered of the children of Israel, by their families, all those of twenty years old and over who were able to go to war,


Were six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.

利未人却没有按着支派数在其中，
But the Levites, of the tribe of their fathers, were not numbered among them.

因为耶和华晓谕摩西说，
For the Lord said to Moses,

惟独利未支派你不可数点，也不可在以色列人中计算他们的总数。
Only the tribe of Levi is not to be numbered among the children of Israel,

只要派利未人管法柜的帐幕和其中的器具，并属乎帐幕的。他们要抬（抬或作搬运）帐幕和其中的器具，并要办理帐幕的事，在帐幕的四围安营。
But to them you are to give the care of the Tent of meeting with its vessels and everything in it: they are to take up the Tent, and be responsible for everything to do with it, and put up their tents round it.

帐幕将往前行的时候，利未人要拆卸。将支搭的时候，利未人要竖起。近前来的外人必被治死。
And when the Tent of meeting goes forward, the Levites are to take it down; and when it is to be put up, they are to do it: any strange person who comes near it is to be put to death.

以色列人支搭帐棚，要照他们的军队，各归本营，各归本纛。
The children of Israel are to put up their tents, every man in his tent-circle round his flag.

但利未人要在法柜帐幕的四围安营，免得忿怒临到以色列会众。利未人并要谨守法柜的帐幕。
But the tents of the Levites are to be round the Tent of meeting, so that wrath may not come on the children of Israel: the Tent of meeting is to be in the care of the Levites.

以色列人就这样行。凡耶和华所吩咐摩西的，他们就照样行了。
So the children of Israel did as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

以色列人要各归自己的纛下，在本族的旗号那里，对着会幕的四围安营。
The children of Israel are to put up their tents in the order of their families, by the flags of their fathers' houses, facing the Tent of meeting on every side.

在东边，向日出之地，照着军队安营的是犹大营的纛。有亚米拿达的儿子拿顺作犹大人的首领。
Those whose tents are on the east side, looking to the dawn, will be round the flag of the children of Judah, with Nahshon, the son of Amminadab, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有七万四千六百名。
The number of his army was seventy-four thousand, six hundred.

挨着他安营的是以萨迦支派。有苏押的儿子拿坦业作以萨迦人的首领。
And nearest to him will be the tribe of Issachar, with Nethanel, the son of Zuar, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有五万四千四百名。
The number of his army was fifty-four thousand, four hundred.

又有西布伦支派。希伦的儿子以利押作西布伦人的首领。
After him, the tribe of Zebulun, with Eliab, the son of Helon, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有五万七千四百名。
The number of his army was fifty-seven thousand, four hundred.

凡属犹大营，按着军队被数的，共有十八万六千四百名，要作第一队往前行。
The number of all the armies of Judah was a hundred and eighty-six thousand, four hundred. They go forward first.

在南边，按着军队是流便营的纛。有示丢珥的儿子以利蓿作流便人的首领。
On the south side is the flag of the children of Reuben, in the order of their armies, with Elizur, the son of Shedeur, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有四万六千五百名。
The number of his army was forty-six thousand, five hundred.

挨着他安营的是西缅支派。苏利沙代的儿子示路蔑作西缅人的首领。
And nearest to him, the tribe of Simeon, with Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有五万九千三百名。
The number of his army was fifty-nine thousand, three hundred.

又有迦得支派。丢珥的儿子以利雅萨作迦得人的首领。
Then the tribe of Gad, with Eliasaph, son of Reuel, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有四万五千六百五十名，
The number of his army was forty-five thousand, six hundred and fifty.

凡属流便营，按着军队被数的，共有十五万一千四百五十名，要作第二队往前行。
The number of all the armies of Reuben together came to a hundred and fifty-one thousand, four hundred and fifty. They go forward second.

随后，会幕要往前行，有利未营在诸营中间。他们怎样安营就怎样往前行，各按本位，各归本纛。
Then the Tent of meeting is to go forward, with the tents of the Levites, in the middle of the armies; in the same order as their tents are placed, they are to go forward, every man under his flag.

在西边，按着军队是以法莲营的纛。亚米忽的儿子以利沙玛作以法莲人的首领。
On the west side will be the flag of the children of Ephraim, with Elishama, the son of Ammihud, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有四万零五百名。
The number of his army was forty thousand, five hundred.

挨着他的是玛拿西支派。比大蓿的儿子迦玛列作玛拿西人的首领。
And by him the tribe of Manasseh with Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有三万二千二百名。
The number of his army was thirty-two thousand, two hundred.

又有便雅悯支派。基多尼的儿子亚比但作便雅悯人的首领。
Then the tribe of Benjamin, with Abidan, the son of Gideoni, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有三万五千四百名。
The number of his army was thirty-five thousand, four hundred.

凡属以法莲营，按着军队被数的，共有十万零八千一百名，要作第三队往前行。
The number of all the armies of Ephraim was a hundred and eight thousand, one hundred. They go forward third.

在北边，按着军队是但营的纛。亚米沙代的儿子亚希以谢作但人的首领。
On the north side will be the flag of the children of Dan, with Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有六万二千七百名。
The number of his army was sixty-two thousand, seven hundred.

挨着他安营的是亚设支派。俄兰的儿子帕结作亚设人的首领。
Nearest to him will be the tribe of Asher, with Pagiel, the son of Ochran, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有四万一千五百名。
The number of his army was forty-one thousand, five hundred;

又有拿弗他利支派。以南的儿子亚希拉作拿弗他利人的首领。
Then the tribe of Naphtali, with Ahira, the son of Enan, as their chief.

他军队被数的，共有五万三千四百名。
The number of his army was fifty-three thousand, four hundred.

凡但营被数的，共有十五万七千六百名，要归本纛作末队往前行。
The number of all the armies in the tents of Dan was a hundred and fifty-seven thousand, six hundred. They will go forward last, by their flags.

这些以色列人，照他们的宗族，按他们的军队，在诸营中被数的，共有六十万零三千五百五十名。
These are all who were numbered of the children of Israel, in the order of their fathers' families: all the armies in their tents together came to six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty.

惟独利未人没有数在以色列人中，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel, as the Lord said to Moses.

以色列人就这样行，各人照他们的家室，宗族归于本纛，安营起行，都是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
So the children of Israel did as the Lord said to Moses, so they put up their tents by their flags, and they went forward in the same order, by their families, and by their fathers' houses.

耶和华在西乃山晓谕摩西的日子，亚伦和摩西的后代如下，
Now these are the generations of Aaron and Moses, in the day when the word of the Lord came to Moses on Mount Sinai.

亚伦的儿子，长子名叫拿答，还有亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛。
These are the names of the sons of Aaron: Nadab the oldest, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

这是亚伦儿子的名字，都是受膏的祭司，是摩西叫他们承接圣职供祭司职分的。
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests, on whom the holy oil was put, who were marked out as priests.

拿答，亚比户在西乃的旷野向耶和华献凡火的时候就死在耶和华面前了。他们也没有儿子。以利亚撒，以他玛在他们的父亲亚伦面前供祭司的职分。
And Nadab and Abihu were put to death before the Lord when they made an offering of strange fire before the Lord, in the waste land of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar did the work of priests before Aaron their father.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你使利未支派近前来，站在祭司亚伦面前好服事他，
Make the tribe of Levi come near, and put them before Aaron the priest, to be his helpers,

替他和会众在会幕前守所吩咐的，办理帐幕的事。
In order that they may be responsible to him and to all Israel for the care of the Tent of meeting, and to do the work of the House;

又要看守会幕的器具，并守所吩咐以色列人的，办理帐幕的事。
And they will have the care of all the vessels of the Tent of meeting, and will do for the children of Israel all the necessary work of the House.

你要将利未人给亚伦和他的儿子，因为他们是从以色列人中选出来给他的。
Give the Levites to Aaron and his sons; so that they may be his without question from among the children of Israel.

你要嘱咐亚伦和他的儿子谨守自己祭司的职任。近前来的外人必被治死。
And give orders that Aaron and his sons are to keep their place as priests; any strange person who comes near is to be put to death.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

我从以色列人中拣选了利未人，代替以色列人一切头生的。利未人要归我。
See, I have taken the Levites out of the children of Israel to be mine in place of the first sons of the children of Israel;

因为凡头生的是我的。我在埃及地击杀一切头生的那日就把以色列中一切头生的，连人带牲畜都分别为圣归我。他们定要属我。我是耶和华。
For all the first sons are mine; on the day when I put to death all the first sons in the land of Egypt, I took for myself every first male birth of man and beast. They are mine; I am the Lord.

耶和华在西乃的旷野晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses in the waste land of Sinai,

你要照利未人的宗族，家室数点他们。凡一个月以外的男子都要数点。
Let all the children of Levi be numbered by their families and their fathers' houses; let every male of a month old and over be numbered.

于是摩西照耶和华所吩咐的数点他们。
So Moses did as the Lord said, numbering them as he had been ordered.

利未众子的名字是革顺，哥辖，米拉利。
These were the sons of Levi by name: Gershon and Kohath and Merari.

革顺的儿子，按着家室，是立尼，示每。
And these are the names of the sons of Gershon, by their families: Libni and Shimei.

哥辖的儿子，按着家室，是暗兰，以斯哈，希伯伦，乌薛。
And the sons of Kohath, by their families: Amram and Izhar and Hebron and Uzziel.

米拉利的儿子，按着家室，是抹利，母示。这些按着宗族是利未人的家室。
And the sons of Merari by their families: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites in the order of their fathers' houses.

属革顺的，有立尼族，示每族。这是革顺的二族。
From Gershon come the Libnites and the Shimeites; these are the families of the Gershonites.

其中被数，从一个月以外所有的男子共有七千五百名。
Those who were numbered of them, the males from one month old and over, were seven thousand, five hundred.

这革顺的二族要在帐幕后西边安营。
The tents of the Gershonites are to be placed at the back of the House, to the west.

拉伊勒的儿子以利雅萨作革顺人宗族的首领。
The chief of the Gershonites is Eliasaph, the son of Lael.

革顺的子孙在会幕中所要看守的，就是帐幕和罩棚，并罩棚的盖与会幕的门帘，
In the Tent of meeting, the Gershonites are to have the care of the House, and the Tent with its cover, and the veil for the door of the Tent of meeting,

院子的帷子和门帘（院子是围帐幕和坛的），并一切使用的绳子。
And the hangings for the open space round the House and the altar, and the curtain for its doorway, and all the cords needed for its use.

属哥辖的，有暗兰族，以斯哈族，希伯伦族，乌薛族。这是哥辖的诸族。
From Kohath come the Amramites and the Izharites and the Hebronites and the Uzzielites; these are the families of the Kohathites.

按所有男子的数目，从一个月以外看守圣所的，共有八千六百名。
Those who were numbered of them, the males from one month old and over, were eight thousand, six hundred, who were responsible for the care of the holy place.

哥辖儿子的诸族要在帐幕的南边安营。
The tents of the Kohathites are to be placed on the south side of the House.

乌薛的儿子以利撒反作哥辖宗族家室的首领。
Their chief is Elizaphan, the son of Uzziel.

他们所要看守的是约柜，桌子，灯台，两座坛与圣所内使用的器皿，并帘子和一切使用之物。
In their care are the ark, and the table, and the lights, and the altars, and all the vessels used in the holy place, and the veil, and all they are used for.

祭司亚伦的儿子以利亚撒作利未人众首领的领袖，要监察那些看守圣所的人。
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, will be head over all the Levites and overseer of those responsible for the care of the holy place.

属米拉利的，有抹利族，母示族。这是米拉利的二族。
From Merari come the Mahlites and the Mushites; these are the families of Merari.

他们被数的，按所有男子的数目，从一个月以外的，共有六千二百名。
Those who were numbered of them, the males of a month old and over, were six thousand, two hundred.

亚比亥的儿子苏列作米拉利二宗族的首领。他们要在帐幕的北边安营。
The chief of the families of Merari was Zuriel, the son of Abihail: their tents are to be placed on the north side of the House.

米拉利子孙的职分是看守帐幕的板，闩，柱子，带卯的座，和帐幕一切所使用的器具，
And in their care are to be all the boards of the Tent, with their rods and pillars and bases, and all the instruments, and all they are used for,

院子四围的柱子，带卯的座，橛子，和绳子。
And the pillars of the open space round it, with their bases and nails and cords.

在帐幕前东边，向日出之地安营的是摩西，亚伦，和亚伦的儿子。他们看守圣所，替以色列人守耶和华所吩咐的。近前来的外人，必被治死。
And those whose tents are to be placed on the east side of the House in front of the Tent of meeting, looking to the dawn, are Moses and Aaron and his sons, who will do the work of the holy place for the children of Israel; and any strange person who comes near will be put to death.

凡被数的利未人，就是摩西，亚伦照耶和华吩咐所数的，按着家室，从一个月以外的男子，共有二万二千名。
All the Levites numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord, all the males of one month old and over numbered in the order of their families, were twenty-two thousand.

耶和华对摩西说，你要从以色列人中数点一个月以外，凡头生的男子，把他们的名字记下。
And the Lord said to Moses, Let all the first male children be numbered, and take the number of their names.

我是耶和华。你要拣选利未人归我，代替以色列人所有头生的，也取利未人的牲畜代替以色列所有头生的牲畜。
And give to me the Levites (I am the Lord) in place of the first sons of the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites in place of the first births among the cattle of the children of Israel.

摩西就照耶和华所吩咐的把以色列人头生的都数点了。
So Moses had all the first sons among the children of Israel numbered, as the Lord said to him.

按人名的数目，从一个月以外，凡头生的男子，共有二万二千二百七十三名。
Every first son from a month old and over was numbered by name, and the number came to twenty-two thousand, two hundred and seventy-three.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你拣选利未人代替以色列人所有头生的，也取利未人的牲畜代替以色列人的牲畜。利未人要归我。我是耶和华。
Take the Levites in place of all the first sons of the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites in place of their cattle; the Levites are to be mine; I am the Lord.

以色列人中头生的男子比利未人多二百七十三个，必当将他们赎出来。
And the price you have to give for the two hundred and seventy-three first sons of the children of Israel which are in addition to the number of the Levites,

你要按人丁，照圣所的平，每人取赎银五舍客勒（一舍客勒是二十季拉），
Will be five shekels for every one, by the scale of the holy place (the shekel is twenty gerahs);

把那多余之人的赎银交给亚伦和他的儿子。
And this money, the price of those over the number of the Levites, is to be given to Aaron and his sons.

于是摩西从那被利未人所赎以外的人取了赎银。
So Moses took the money, the price of those whose place had not been taken by the Levites;

从以色列人头生的所取之银，按圣所的平，有一千三百六十五舍客勒。
From the first sons of Israel he took it, a thousand, three hundred and sixty-five shekels, by the scale of the holy place;

摩西照耶和华的话把这赎银给亚伦和他的儿子，正如耶和华所吩咐的。
And he gave the money to Aaron and his sons, as the Lord had said.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

你从利未人中，将哥辖子孙的总数，照他们的家室，宗族，
Let the sons of Kohath, from among the sons of Levi, be numbered by their families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，全都计算。
All those from thirty to fifty years old who are able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

哥辖子孙在会幕搬运至圣之物，所办的事乃是这样，
And this is to be the work of the sons of Kohath in connection with the most holy things.

起营的时候，亚伦和他儿子要进去摘下遮掩柜的幔子，用以蒙盖法柜，
When all the people go forward, Aaron is to go in with his sons, and take down the veil of the curtain, covering the ark of witness with it;

又用海狗皮盖在上头，再蒙上纯蓝色的毯子，把杠穿上。
And putting over it the leather cover and over that a blue cloth; and putting its rods in place.

又用蓝色毯子铺在陈设饼的桌子上，将盘子，调羹，奠酒的爵，和杯摆在上头。桌子上也必有常设的饼。
And on the table of the holy bread they are to put a blue cloth, and on it all the vessels, the spoons and the basins and the cups; and the holy bread with them;

在其上又要蒙朱红色的毯子，再蒙上海狗皮，把杠穿上。
And over them they are to put a red cloth, covering it with a leather cover, and putting its rods in their places.

要拿蓝色毯子，把灯台和灯台上所用的灯盏，剪子，蜡花盘，并一切盛油的器皿，全都遮盖。
And they are to take a blue cloth, covering with it the light-support with its lights and its instruments and its trays and all the oil vessels which are used for it:

又要把灯台和灯台的一切器具包在海狗皮里，放在抬架上。
All these they are to put in a leather cover, and put it on the frame.

在金坛上要铺蓝色毯子，蒙上海狗皮，把杠穿上。
On the gold altar they are to put a blue cloth, covering it with a leather cover; and they are to put its rods in their places.

又要把圣所用的一切器具包在蓝色毯子里，用海狗皮蒙上，放在抬架上。
All the vessels which are used in the holy place they are to put in a blue cloth, covering them with a leather cover, and put them on the frame.

要收去坛上的灰，把紫色毯子铺在坛上。
And they are to take away the burned waste from the altar, and put a purple cloth on it;

又要把所用的一切器具，就是火鼎，肉锸子，铲子，盘子，一切属坛的器具都摆在坛上，又蒙上海狗皮，把杠穿上。
Placing on the cloth all its vessels, the fire-baskets, the meat-hooks, the spades, and the basins; all the vessels of the altar; they are to put a leather cover over all these, and put its rods in their places.

将要起营的时候，亚伦和他儿子把圣所和圣所的一切器具遮盖完了，哥辖的子孙就要来抬，只是不可摸圣物，免得他们死亡。会幕里这些物件是哥辖子孙所当抬的
And after the holy place and all its vessels have been covered up by Aaron and his sons, when the tents of the people go forward, the sons of Kohath are to come and take it up; but the holy things may not be touched by them for fear of death.

祭司亚伦的儿子以利亚撒所要看守的是点灯的油与香料，并当献的素祭和膏油，也要看守全帐幕与其中所有的，并圣所和圣所的器具。
And Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, is to be responsible for the oil for the light, and the sweet perfumes for burning, and the regular meal offering, and the holy oil; the House and the holy place and everything in it will be in his care.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

你们不可将哥辖人的支派从利未人中剪除。
Do not let the family of the Kohathites be cut off from among the Levites;

他们挨近至圣物的时候，亚伦和他儿子要进去派他们各人所当办的，所当抬的。这样待他们，好使他们活着，不至死亡。
But do this to them, so that life and not death may be theirs when they come near the most holy things; let Aaron and his sons go in and give to every one his work and that which he is to take up;

只是他们连片时不可进去观看圣所，免得他们死亡。
But they themselves are not to go in to see the holy place, even for a minute, for fear of death.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要将革顺子孙的总数，照着宗族，家室，
Let the sons of Gershon be numbered by families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，全都数点。
All those from thirty to fifty years old who are able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

革顺人各族所办的事，所抬的物乃是这样，
This is to be the work of the Gershonites, the things they are to do and take up.

他们要抬帐幕的幔子和会幕，并会幕的盖与其上的海狗皮，和会幕的门帘，
They are to take up the curtains of the House, and the Tent of meeting with its cover and the leather cover over it, and the hangings for the door of the Tent of meeting;

院子的帷子和门帘（院子是围帐幕和坛的），绳子，并所用的器具，不论是作什么用的，他们都要经理。
And the hangings for the open space round the House and the altar, and the curtain for its doorway, with the cords and all the things used for them; whatever is necessary for these, they are to do.

革顺的子孙在一切抬物办事之上都要凭亚伦和他儿子的吩咐。他们所当抬的，要派他们看守。
From the mouth of Aaron and his sons the Gershonites will have word about all the things they are to do and take up; you are to give them their orders.

这是革顺子孙的各族在会幕里所办的事。他们所看守的，必在祭司亚伦儿子以他玛的手下。
This is the work of the family of the Gershonites in the Tent of meeting, and they will be under the direction of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

至于米拉利的子孙，你要照着家室，宗族把他们数点。
The sons of Merari are to be numbered by families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，你都要数点。
Every one from thirty to fifty years old who is able to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

他们办理会幕的事，就是抬帐幕的板，闩，柱子，和带卯的座，
And this is their part in the work of the Tent of meeting: the transport of the boards and the rods of the Tent, with the pillars and their bases;

院子四围的柱子和其上带卯的座，橛子，绳子，并一切使用的器具。他们所抬的器具，你们要按名指定。
And the pillars of the open space outside it, with their bases and their nails and cords and all the instruments used, and everything which has to be done there; all the instruments for which they are responsible are to be numbered by name.

这是米拉利子孙各族在会幕里所办的事，都在祭司亚伦儿子以他玛的手下。
This is the work which the sons of Merari are to do in connection with the Tent of meeting, under the direction of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

摩西，亚伦与会众的诸首领将哥辖的子孙，照着家室，宗族，
So Moses and Aaron and the chiefs of the people took in hand the numbering of the sons of the Kohathites, by families, in the order of their fathers' houses;

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，都数点了。
Numbering all those from thirty to fifty years old who were able to do the work in the Tent of meeting;

被数的共有二千七百五十名。
And the number of all these was two thousand, seven hundred and fifty.

这是哥辖各族中被数的，是在会幕里办事的，就是摩西，亚伦照耶和华借摩西所吩咐数点的。
This is the number of those of the Kohathites who did the work in the Tent of meeting, as they were numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

革顺子孙被数的，照着家室，宗族，
And those of the sons of Gershon who were numbered by families,

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，共有二千六百三十名。
All those from thirty to fifty years old who were able to do the work in the Tent of meeting,


Who were numbered by families in the order of their fathers' houses, were two thousand, six hundred and thirty.

这是革顺子孙各族中被数的，是在会幕里办事的，就是摩西，亚伦照耶和华借摩西所吩咐数点的。
This is the number of the sons of Gershon who did the work in the Tent of meeting, as they were numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

米拉利子孙中各族被数的，照着家室，宗族，
And those of the sons of Merari who were numbered by families, in the order of their fathers' houses,

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里办事的，共有三千二百名。
All those from thirty to fifty years old who did the work in the Tent of meeting,


Who were numbered by families, were three thousand, two hundred.

这是米拉利子孙各族中被数的，就是摩西，亚伦照耶和华借摩西所吩咐数点的。
This is the number of the sons of Merari, numbered by Moses and Aaron at the order of the Lord.

凡被数的利未人，就是摩西，亚伦并以色列众首领，照着家室，宗族所数点的，
And all the Levites who were numbered by Moses and Aaron and the chiefs of the people, by families, in the order of their fathers' houses,

从三十岁直到五十岁，凡前来任职，在会幕里作抬物之工的，共有八千五百八十名。
Those from thirty to fifty years old who were able to do the work of the Tent of meeting and of its transport,


Came to eight thousand, five hundred and eighty.

摩西按他们所办的事，所抬的物，凭耶和华的吩咐数点他们。他们这样被摩西数点，正如耶和华所吩咐他的。
At the order of the Lord they were numbered by Moses, every one in relation to his work and to his part in the transport; so they were numbered by Moses at the order of the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人，使一切长大麻疯的，患漏症的，并因死尸不洁净的，都出营外去。
Give orders to the children of Israel to put outside the tent-circle every leper, and anyone who has any sort of flow from his body, and anyone who is unclean from the touch of the dead;

无论男女都要使他们出到营外，免得污秽他们的营。这营是我所住的。
Male or female they are to be put outside the tent-circle, so that they may not make unclean my resting-place among them.

以色列人就这样行，使他们出到营外。耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，以色列人就怎样行了。
So the children of Israel did as the Lord had said to Moses, and put them outside the tent-circle.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，无论男女，若犯了人所常犯的罪，以至干犯耶和华，那人就有了罪。
Say to the children of Israel, If a man or a woman does any of the sins of men, going against the word of the Lord, and is in the wrong;

他要承认所犯的罪，将所亏负人的，如数赔还，另外加上五分之一，也归与所亏负的人。
Let them say openly what they have done; and make payment for the wrong done, with the addition of a fifth part, and give it to him to whom the wrong was done.

那人若没有亲属可受所赔还的，那所赔还的就要归与服事耶和华的祭司。至于那为他赎罪的公羊是在外。
But if the man has no relation to whom the payment may be made, then the payment for sin made to the Lord will be the priest's, in addition to the sheep offered to take away his sin.

以色列人一切的圣物中，所奉给祭司的举祭都要归与祭司。
And every offering lifted up of all the holy things which the children of Israel give to the priest, will be his.

各人所分别为圣的物，无论是什么，都要归给祭司。
And every man's holy things will be his: whatever a man gives to the priest will be his.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，人的妻若有邪行，得罪她丈夫，
Say to the children of Israel, If any man's wife does wrong, sinning against him

有人与她行淫，事情严密，瞒过她丈夫，而且她被玷污，没有作见证的人，当她行淫的时候也没有被捉住，
By taking as her lover another man, and keeps it secret so that her husband has no knowledge of it, and there is no witness against her, and she is not taken in the act;

她丈夫生了疑恨的心，疑恨她，她是被玷污，或是她丈夫生了疑恨的心，疑恨她，她并没有被玷污，
If the spirit of doubt comes into her husband's heart, and he has doubts of his wife, with good cause; or if he has doubts of her without cause:

这人就要将妻送到祭司那里，又为她带着大麦面伊法十分之一作供物，不可浇上油，也不可加上乳香。因为这是疑恨的素祭，是思念的素祭，使人思念罪孽。
Then let him take her to the priest, offering for her the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal, without oil or perfume; for it is a meal offering of a bitter spirit, a meal offering keeping wrongdoing in mind.

祭司要使那妇人近前来，站在耶和华面前。
And the priest will make her come near and put her before the Lord;

祭司要把圣水盛在瓦器里，又从帐幕的地上取点尘土，放在水中。
And the priest will take holy water in a pot and put in it dust from the floor of the House;

祭司要叫那妇人蓬头散发，站在耶和华面前，把思念的素祭，就是疑恨的素祭，放在她手中。祭司手里拿着致咒诅的苦水，
And he will make the woman come before the Lord with her hair loose, and will put the meal offering, the offering of a bitter spirit, in her hands; and the priest will take in his hand the bitter water causing the curse;

要叫妇人起誓，对她说，若没有人与你行淫，也未曾背着丈夫作污秽的事，你就免受这致咒诅苦水的灾。
And he will make her take an oath, and say to her, If no man has been your lover and you have not been with another in place of your husband, you are free from this bitter water causing the curse;

你若背着丈夫行了污秽的事，在你丈夫以外有人与你行淫，
But if you have been with another in place of your husband and have made yourself unclean with a lover:

（祭司叫妇人发咒起誓），愿耶和华叫你大腿消瘦，肚腹发胀，使你在你民中被人咒诅，成了誓语。
Then the priest will put the oath of the curse on the woman, and say to her, May the Lord make you a curse and an oath among your people, sending on you wasting of the legs and disease of the stomach;

并且这致咒诅的水入你的肠中，要叫你的肚腹发胀，大腿消瘦。妇人要回答说，阿们，阿们。
And this water of the curse will go into your body, causing disease of your stomach and wasting of your legs: and the woman will say, So be it.

祭司要写这咒诅的话，将所写的字抹在苦水里，
And the priest will put these curses in a book, washing out the writing with the bitter water;

又叫妇人喝这致咒诅的苦水。这水要进入她里面变苦了。
And he will give to the woman the bitter water for drink; and the bitter water causing the curse will go into her.

祭司要从妇人的手中取那疑恨的素祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇，拿到坛前。
And the priest will take from her hand the meal offering of doubt, waving it before the Lord, and will take it to the altar;

又要从素祭中取出一把，作为这事的纪念，烧在坛上，然后叫妇人喝这水。
And he will take some of it in his hand, burning it on the altar as a sign, and then he will give the woman the bitter water.

叫她喝了以后，她若被玷污，得罪了丈夫，这致咒诅的水必进入她里面变苦了，她的肚腹就要发胀，大腿就要消瘦，那妇人便要在他民中被人咒诅。
And it will be that if the woman has become unclean, sinning against her husband, when she has taken the bitter water it will go into her body, causing disease of the stomach and wasting of the legs, and she will be a curse among her people.

若妇人没有被玷污，却是清洁的，就要免受这灾，且要怀孕。
But if she is clean she will be free and will have offspring.

妻子背着丈夫行了污秽的事，
This is the law for testing a wife who goes with another in place of her husband and becomes unclean;

或是人生了疑恨的心，疑恨他的妻，就有这疑恨的条例。那时他要叫妇人站在耶和华面前，祭司要在她身上照这条例而行。
Or for a husband who, in a bitter spirit, has doubts in his heart about his wife; let him take her to the priest, who will put in force this law.

男人就为无罪，妇人必担当自己的罪孽。
Then the man will be free from all wrong, and the woman's sin will be on her.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，无论男女许了特别的愿，就是拿细耳人的愿（拿细耳就是归主的意思下同），要离俗归耶和华。
Say to the children of Israel, If a man or a woman takes an oath to keep himself separate and give himself to the Lord;

他就要远离清酒浓酒，也不可喝什么清酒浓酒作的醋。不可喝什么葡萄汁，也不可吃鲜葡萄和干葡萄。
He is to keep himself from wine and strong drink, and take no mixed wine or strong drink or any drink made from grapes, or any grapes, green or dry.

在一切离俗的日子，凡葡萄树上结的，自核至皮所作的物，都不可吃。
All the time he is separate he may take nothing made from the grape-vine, from its seeds to its skin.

在他一切许愿离俗的日子，不可用剃头刀剃头，要由发绺长长了。他要圣洁，直到离俗归耶和华的日子满了。
All the time he is under his oath let no blade come near his head; till the days while he is separate are ended he is holy and his hair may not be cut.

在他离俗归耶和华的一切日子，不可挨近死尸。
All the time he is separate he may not come near any dead body.

他的父母或是弟兄姐妹死了的时候，他不可因他们使自己不洁净，因为那离俗归神的凭据是在他头上。
He may not make himself unclean for his father or his mother, his sister or his brother, if death comes to them; because he is under an oath to keep himself separate for God.

在他一切离俗的日子是归耶和华为圣。
All the time he is separate he is holy to the Lord.

若在他旁边忽然有人死了，以致沾染了他离俗的头，他要在第七日，得洁净的时候，剃头。
If death comes suddenly to a man at his side, so that he becomes unclean, let his hair be cut off on the day when he is made clean, on the seventh day.

第八日，他要把两只斑鸠或两只雏鸽带到会幕门口，交给祭司。
And on the eighth day let him take to the priest, at the door of the Tent of meeting, two doves or two young pigeons;

祭司要献一只作赎罪祭，一只作燔祭，为他赎那因死尸而有的罪，并要当日使他的头成为圣洁。
And the priest will give one for a sin-offering and the other for a burned offering to take away the sin which came on him on account of the dead, and he will make his head holy that same day.

他要另选离俗归耶和华的日子，又要牵一只一岁的公羊羔来作赎愆祭。但先前的日子要归徒然，因为他在离俗之间被玷污了。
And he will give to the Lord his days of being separate, offering a he-lamb of the first year as an offering for error: but the earlier days will be a loss, because he became unclean.

拿细耳人满了离俗的日子乃有这条例，人要领他到会幕门口，
And this is the law for him who is separate, when the necessary days are ended: he is to come to the door of the Tent of meeting,

他要将供物奉给耶和华，就是一只没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔作燔祭，一只没有残疾，一岁的母羊羔作赎罪祭，和一只没有残疾的公绵羊作平安祭，
And make his offering to the Lord; one he-lamb of the first year, without a mark, for a burned offering, and one female lamb of the first year, without a mark, for a sin-offering, and one male sheep, without a mark, for peace-offerings,

并一筐子无酵调油的细面饼，与抹油的无酵薄饼，并同献的素祭和奠祭。
And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of the best meal mixed with oil, and thin unleavened cakes covered with oil, with their meal offering and drink offerings.

祭司要在耶和华面前献那人的赎罪祭和燔祭。
And the priest will take them before the Lord, and make his sin-offering and his burned offering;

也要把那只公羊和那筐无酵饼献给耶和华作平安祭，又要将同献的素祭和奠祭献上。
Giving the sheep of the peace-offerings, with the basket of unleavened bread; and at the same time, the priest will make his meal offering and his drink offering.

拿细耳人要在会幕门口剃离俗的头，把离俗头上的发放在平安祭下的火上。
Then let his long hair, the sign of his oath, be cut off at the door of the Tent of meeting, and let him put it on the fire on which the peace-offerings are burning.

他剃了以后，祭司就要取那已煮的公羊一条前腿，又从筐子里取一个无酵饼和一个无酵薄饼，都放在他手上。
And the priest will take the cooked leg of the sheep and one unleavened cake and one thin cake out of the basket, and put them on the hands of the separate one after his hair has been cut,

祭司要拿这些作为摇祭，在耶和华面前摇一摇。这与所摇的胸，所举的腿同为圣物，归给祭司。然后拿细耳人可以喝酒。
Waving them for a wave offering before the Lord; this is holy for the priest, together with the waved breast and the leg which is lifted up; after that, the man may take wine.

许愿的拿细耳人为离俗所献的供物，和他以外所能得的献给耶和华，就有这条例。他怎样许愿就当照离俗的条例行。
This is the law for him who takes an oath to keep himself separate, and for his offering to the Lord on that account, in addition to what he may be able to get; this is the law of his oath, which he will have to keep.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你告诉亚伦和他儿子说，你们要这样为以色列人祝福，说，
Say to Aaron and his sons, These are the words of blessing which are to be used by you in blessing the children of Israel; say to them,

愿耶和华赐福给你，保护你。
May the Lord send his blessing on you and keep you:

愿耶和华使他的脸光照你，赐恩给你。
May the light of the Lord's face be shining on you in grace:

愿耶和华向你仰脸，赐你平安。
May the Lord's approval be resting on you and may he give you peace.

他们要如此奉我的名为以色列人祝福。我也要赐福给他们。
So they will put my name on the children of Israel, and I will give them my blessing.

摩西立完了帐幕，就把帐幕用膏抹了，使它成圣，又把其中的器具和坛，并坛上的器具，都抹了，使它成圣。
And when Moses had put up the House completely, and had put oil on it and made it holy, with all the things in it, and had made the altar and all its vessels holy with oil;

当天，以色列的众首领，就是各族的族长，都来奉献。他们是各支派的首领，管理那些被数的人。
Then the chiefs of Israel, the heads of their fathers' houses, made offerings; these were the chiefs of the tribes, who were over those who were numbered.

他们把自己的供物送到耶和华面前，就是六辆篷子车和十二只公牛。每两个首领奉献一辆车，每首领奉献一只牛。他们把这些都奉到帐幕前。
And they came with their offerings before the Lord, six covered carts and twelve oxen; a cart for every two of the chiefs, and for every one an ox.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要收下这些，好作会幕的使用，都要照利未人所办的事交给他们。
Take the things from them, to be used for the work of the Tent of meeting; and give them to the Levites, to every man what is needed for his work.

于是摩西收了车和牛，交给利未人，
So Moses took the carts and the oxen and gave them to the Levites.

把两辆车，四只牛，照革顺子孙所办的事交给他们，
Two carts and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon for their work;

又把四辆车，八只牛，照米拉利子孙所办的事交给他们。他们都在祭司亚伦的儿子以他玛手下。
And four carts and eight oxen he gave to the sons of Merari for their work, under the direction of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.

但车与牛都没有交给哥辖子孙。因为他们办的是圣所的事，在肩头上抬圣物。
But to the sons of Kohath he gave nothing; because they had the care of the holy place, taking it about on their backs.

用膏抹坛的日子，首领都来行奉献坛的礼，众首领就在坛前献供物。
And the chiefs gave an offering for the altar on the day when the holy oil was put on it; they made their offering before the altar.

耶和华对摩西说，众首领为行奉献坛的礼，要每天一个首领来献供物。
And the Lord said to Moses, Let every chief on his day give his offering to make the altar holy.

头一日献供物的是犹大支派的亚米拿达的儿子拿顺。
And he who made his offering on the first day was Nahshon, the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
And his offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice for burning;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是亚米拿达儿子拿顺的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nahshon, the son of Amminadab.

第二日来献的是以萨迦子孙的首领，苏押的儿子拿坦业。
On the second day Nethanel, the son of Zuar, chief of Issachar, made his offering:

他献为供物的是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
He gave one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是苏押儿子拿坦业的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Nethanel, the son of Zuar.

第三日来献的是西布伦子孙的首领，希伦的儿子以利押。
On the third day Eliab, the son of Helon, chief of the children of Zebulun:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是希伦儿子以利押的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliab, the son of Helon.

第四日来献的是流便子孙的首领，示丢珥的儿子以利蓿。
On the fourth day Elizur, the son of Shedeur, chief of the children of Reuben:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是示丢珥的儿子以利蓿的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elizur, the son of Shedeur.

第五日来献的是西缅子孙的首领，苏利沙代的儿子示路蔑。
On the fifth day Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai, chief of the children of Simeon:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是苏利沙代儿子示路蔑的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai.

第六日来献的是迦得子孙的首领，丢珥的儿子以利雅萨。
On the sixth day Eliasaph, the son of Reuel, chief of the children of Gad:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是丢珥的儿子以利雅萨的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Eliasaph, the son of Reuel

第七日来献的是以法莲子孙的首领，亚米忽的儿子以利沙玛。
On the seventh day Elishama, the son of Ammihud, chief of the children of Ephraim:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是亚米忽儿子以利沙玛的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Elishama, the son of Ammihud.

第八日来献的是玛拿西子孙的首领，比大蓿的儿子迦玛列。
On the eighth day Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur, chief of the children of Manasseh:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是比大蓿儿子迦玛列的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur.

第九日来献的是便雅悯子孙的首领，基多尼的儿子亚比但。
On the ninth day Abidan, the son of Gideoni, chief of the children of Benjamin:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是基多尼儿子亚比但的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Abidan, the son of Gideoni.

第十日来献的是但子孙的首领，亚米沙代的儿子亚希以谢。
On the tenth day Ahiezer; the son of Ammishaddai, chief of the children of Dan:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是亚米沙代儿子亚希以谢的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai.

第十一日来献的是亚设子孙的首领，俄兰的儿子帕结。
On the eleventh day Pagiel, the son of Ochran, chief of the children of Asher:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate; a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是俄兰儿子帕结的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Pagiel, the son of Ochran.

第十二日来献的是拿弗他利子孙的首领，以南儿子亚希拉。
On the twelfth day Ahira, the son of Enan, chief of the children of Naphtali:

他的供物是，一个银盘子，重一百三十舍客勒，一个银碗，重七十舍客勒，都是按圣所的平，也都盛满了调油的细面作素祭。
His offering was one silver plate, a hundred and thirty shekels in weight, one silver basin of seventy shekels, by the scale of the holy place; the two of them full of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering;

一个金盂，重十舍客勒，盛满了香。
One gold spoon of ten shekels, full of spice;

一只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，一只一岁的公羊羔作燔祭。
One young ox, one male sheep, one he-lamb of the first year, for a burned offering;

一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
One male of the goats for a sin-offering;

两只公牛，五只公绵羊，五只公山羊，五只一岁的公羊羔作平安祭。这是以南儿子亚希拉的供物。
And for the peace-offerings, two oxen, five male sheep, five he-goats, five he-lambs of the first year: this was the offering of Ahira, the son of Enan.

用膏抹坛的日子，以色列的众首领为行献坛之礼所献的是，银盘子十二个，银碗十二个，金盂十二个。
These were the offerings given for the altar by the chiefs of Israel, when the holy oil was put on it: twelve silver plates, twelve silver basins, twelve gold spoons;

每盘子重一百三十舍客勒，每碗重七十舍客勒。一切器皿的银子，按圣所的平，共有二千四百舍客勒。
The weight of every silver plate was a hundred and thirty shekels, and of every basin seventy; the weight of all the silver of the vessels was two thousand and four hundred shekels, by the scale of the holy place;

十二个金盂盛满了香，按圣所的平，每盂重十舍客勒，所有的金子共一百二十舍客勒。
The weight of the twelve gold spoons of spice for burning was ten shekels for every one, by the scale of the holy place; all the gold of the spoons was a hundred and twenty shekels;

作燔祭的，共有公牛十二只，公羊十二只，一岁的公羊羔十二只，并同献的素祭作赎罪祭的公山羊十二只。
All the oxen, for the burned offering were twelve, the male sheep twelve, the he-lambs of the first year twelve, with their meal offering; and the males of the goats for sin-offering twelve;

作平安祭的，共有公牛二十四只，公绵羊六十只，公山羊六十只，一岁的公羊羔六十只。这就是用膏抹坛之后，为行奉献坛之礼所献的。
And all the oxen for the peace-offerings, twenty-four oxen, the male sheep sixty, and the he-goats sixty, the he-lambs of the first year sixty. This was given for the altar after the holy oil was put on it.

摩西进会幕要与耶和华说话的时候，听见法柜的施恩座以上，二基路伯中间有与他说话的声音，就是耶和华与他说话。
And when Moses went into the Tent of meeting to have talk with him, then the Voice came to his ears from over the cover which was on the ark of witness, from between the two winged ones. And he had talk with him.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你告诉亚伦说，点灯的时候，七盏灯都要向灯台前面发光。
Say to Aaron, When you put the lights in their places, the seven lights will give light in front of the support.

亚伦便这样行。他点灯台上的灯，使灯向前发光，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And Aaron did so; he put the lights in their places so that they gave light in front of the support, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

这灯台的作法是用金子锤出来的，连座带花都是锤出来的。摩西制造灯台，是照耶和华所指示的样式。
The support for the lights was of hammered gold work, from its base to its flowers it was of hammered work; from the design which the Lord had given to Moses, he made the support for the lights.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你从以色列人中选出利未人来，洁净他们。
Take the Levites out from among the children of Israel and make them clean.

洁净他们当这样行，用除罪水弹在他们身上，又叫他们用剃头刀刮全身，洗衣服，洁净自己。
And this is how you are to make them clean: let the holy water which takes away sin be put on them, and let the hair all over their bodies be cut off with a sharp blade, and let their clothing be washed and their bodies made clean.

然后叫他们取一只公牛犊，并同献的素祭，就是调油的细面。你要另取一只公牛犊作赎罪祭。
Then let them take a young ox and its meal offering, crushed grain mixed with oil, and take another ox for a sin-offering.

将利未人奉到会幕前，招聚以色列全会众。
And make the Levites come forward in front of the Tent of meeting, and let all the children of Israel come together:

将利未人奉到耶和华面前，以色列人要按手在他们头上。
And you are to take the Levites before the Lord: and the children of Israel are to put their hands on them:

亚伦也将他们奉到耶和华面前，为以色列人当作摇祭，使他们好办耶和华的事。
And Aaron is to give the Levites to the Lord as a wave offering from the children of Israel, so that they may do the Lord's work.

利未人要按手在那两只牛的头上。你要将一只作赎罪祭，一只作燔祭，献给耶和华，为利未人赎罪。
And the Levites are to put their hands on the heads of the oxen, and one of the oxen is to be offered for a sin-offering and the other for a burned offering to the Lord to take away the sin of the Levites.

你也要使利未人站在亚伦和他儿子面前，将他们当作摇祭奉给耶和华。
Then the Levites are to be put before Aaron and his sons, to be offered as a wave offering to the Lord.

这样，你从以色列人中将利未人分别出来，利未人便要归我。
So you are to make the Levites separate from the children of Israel, and the Levites will be mine.

此后利未人要进去办会幕的事，你要洁净他们，将他们当作摇祭奉上。
After that, the Levites will go in to do whatever has to be done in the Tent of meeting; you are to make them clean and give them as a wave offering.

因为他们是从以色列人中全然给我的，我拣选他们归我，是代替以色列人中一切头生的。
For they have been given to me from among the children of Israel; in place of every mother's first son, the first to come to birth in Israel, I have taken them for myself.

以色列人中一切头生的，连人带牲畜，都是我的。我在埃及地击杀一切头生的那天，将他们分别为圣归我。
For every mother's first son among the children of Israel is mine, the first male birth of man or beast: on the day when I sent death on all the first sons in the land of Egypt, I made them mine.

我拣选利未人代替以色列人中一切头生的。
And in place of the first sons among the children of Israel, I have taken the Levites.

我从以色列人中将利未人当作赏赐给亚伦和他的儿子，在会幕中办以色列人的事，又为以色列人赎罪，免得他们挨近圣所，有灾殃临到他们中间。
And I have given them to Aaron and to his sons, from among the children of Israel, to undertake for them all the work of the Tent of meeting, and to take away sin from the children of Israel so that no evil may come on them when they come near the holy place.

摩西，亚伦，并以色列全会众便向利未人如此行。凡耶和华指着利未人所吩咐摩西的，以色列人就向他们这样行。
All these things Moses and Aaron and the children of Israel did to the Levites; as the Lord gave orders to Moses about the Levites, so the children of Israel did.

于是利未人洁净自己，除了罪，洗了衣服。亚伦将他们当作摇祭奉到耶和华面前，又为他们赎罪，洁净他们。
And the Levites were made clean from sin, and their clothing was washed, and Aaron gave them for a wave offering before the Lord; and Aaron took away their sin and made them clean.

然后利未人进去，在亚伦和他儿子面前，在会幕中办事。耶和华指着利未人怎样吩咐摩西，以色列人就怎样向他们行了。
And then the Levites went in to do their work in the Tent of meeting before Aaron and his sons: all the orders which the Lord had given Moses about the Levites were put into effect.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

利未人是这样，从二十五岁以外，他们要前来任职，办会幕的事。
This is the rule for the Levites: those of twenty-five years old and over are to go in and do the work of the Tent of meeting;

到了五十岁要停工退任，不再办事，
But after they are fifty years old, they are to give up their work and do no more;

只要在会幕里，和他们的弟兄一同伺候，谨守所吩咐的，不再办事了。至于所吩咐利未人的，你要这样向他们行。
But be with their brothers in the Tent of meeting, taking care of it but doing no work. This is what you are to do in connection with the Levites and their work.

以色列人出埃及地以后，第二年正月，耶和华在西乃的旷野吩咐摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses, in the waste land of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt,

以色列人应当在所定的日期守逾越节，
Let the children of Israel keep the Passover at its regular time.

就是本月十四日黄昏的时候，你们要在所定的日期守这节，要按这节的律例典章而守。
In the fourteenth day of this month, at evening, you are to keep it at the regular time, and in the way ordered in the law.

于是摩西吩咐以色列人守逾越节。
And Moses gave orders to the children of Israel to keep the Passover.

他们就在西乃的旷野，正月十四日黄昏的时候，守逾越节。凡耶和华所吩咐摩西的，以色列人都照样行了。
So they kept the Passover in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the waste land of Sinai: as the Lord gave orders to Moses, so the children of Israel did.

有几个人因死尸而不洁净，不能在那日守逾越节。当日他们到摩西，亚伦面前，
And there were certain men who were unclean because of a dead body, so that they were not able to keep the Passover on that day; and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day:

说，我们虽因死尸而不洁净，为何被阻止，不得同以色列人在所定的日期献耶和华的供物呢？
And these men said to him, We have been made unclean by the dead body of a man; why may we not make the offering of the Lord at the regular time among the children of Israel?

摩西对他们说，你们暂且等候，我可以去听耶和华指着你们是怎样吩咐的。
And Moses said to them, Do nothing till the Lord gives me directions about you.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们和你们后代中，若有人因死尸而不洁净，或在远方行路，还要向耶和华守逾越节。
Say to the children of Israel, If any one of you or of your families is unclean because of a dead body, or is on a journey far away, still he is to keep the Passover to the Lord:

他们要在二月十四日黄昏的时候，守逾越节。要用无酵饼与苦菜，和逾越节的羊羔同吃。
In the second month, on the fourteenth day, in the evening, they are to keep it, taking it with unleavened bread and bitter-tasting plants;

一点不可留到早晨。羊羔的骨头一根也不可折断。他们要照逾越节的一切律例而守。
Nothing of it is to be kept till the morning, and no bone of it is to be broken: they are to keep it by the rules of the Passover.

那洁净而不行路的人若推辞不守逾越节，那人要从民中剪除。因为他在所定的日期不献耶和华的供物，应该担当他的罪。
But the man who, not being unclean or on a journey, does not keep the Passover, will be cut off from his people: because he did not make the offering of the Lord at the regular time, his sin will be on him.

若有外人寄居在你们中间，愿意向耶和华守逾越节，他要照逾越节的律例典章行，不管是寄居的是本地人，同归一例。
And if a man from another country is among you and has a desire to keep the Passover to the Lord, let him do as is ordered in the law of the Passover: there is to be the same rule for the man from another nation and for him who had his birth in the land.

立起帐幕的那日，有云彩遮盖帐幕，就是法柜的帐幕。从晚上到早晨，云彩在其上，形状如火。
And on the day when the House was put up, the cloud came down on it, on the Tent of witness; and in the evening there was a light like fire over the House till the morning.

常是这样，云彩遮盖帐幕，夜间形状如火。
And so it was at all times: it was covered by the cloud, and by a light as of fire by night.

云彩几时从帐幕收上去，以色列人就几时起行。云彩在哪里停住，以色列人就在那里安营。
And whenever the cloud was taken up from over the House, then the children of Israel went journeying on; and in the place where the cloud came to rest, there the children of Israel put up their tents.

以色列人遵耶和华的吩咐起行，也遵耶和华的吩咐安营。云彩在帐幕上停住几时，他们就住营几时。
At the order of the Lord the children of Israel went forward, and at the order of the Lord they put up their tents: as long as the cloud was resting on the House, they did not go away from that place.

云彩在帐幕上停留许多日子，以色列人就守耶和华所吩咐的不起行。
When the cloud was resting on the House for a long time the children of Israel, waiting for the order of the Lord, did not go on.

有时云彩在帐幕上几天，他们就照耶和华的吩咐住营，也照耶和华的吩咐起行。
Sometimes the cloud was resting on the House for two or three days; then, by the order of the Lord, they kept their tents in that place, and when the Lord gave the order they went on.

有时从晚上到早晨，有这云彩在帐幕上。早晨云彩收上去，他们就起行。有时昼夜云彩停在帐幕上，收上去的时候，他们就起行。
And sometimes the cloud was there only from evening to morning; and when the cloud was taken up in the morning they went on their journey again: or if it was resting there by day and by night, whenever the cloud was taken up they went forward.

云彩停留在帐幕上，无论是两天，是一月，是一年，以色列人就住营不起行。但云彩收上去，他们就起行。
Or if the cloud came to rest on the House for two days or a month or a year without moving, the children of Israel went on waiting there and did not go on; but whenever it was taken up they went forward on their journey.

他们遵耶和华的吩咐安营，也遵耶和华的吩咐起行。他们守耶和华所吩咐的，都是凭耶和华吩咐摩西的。
At the word of the Lord they put up their tents, and at the word of the Lord they went forward on their journey: they kept the orders of the Lord as he gave them by Moses.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要用银子作两枝号，都要锤出来的，用以招聚会众，并叫众营起行。
Make two silver horns of hammered work, to be used for getting the people together and to give the sign for the moving of the tents.

吹这号的时候，全会众要到你那里，聚集在会幕门口。
When they are sounded, all the people are to come together to you at the door of the Tent of meeting.

若单吹一枝，众首领，就是以色列军中的统领，要聚集到你那里。
If only one of them is sounded, then the chiefs, the heads of the thousands of Israel, are to come to you.

吹出大声的时候，东边安的营都要起行。
When a loud note is sounded, the tents placed on the east side are to go forward.

二次吹出大声的时候，南边安的营都要起行。他们将起行，必吹出大声。
At the sound of a second loud note, the tents on the south side are to go forward: the loud note will be the sign to go forward.

但招聚会众的时候，你们要吹号，却不要吹出大声。
But when all the people are to come together, the horn is to be sounded but not loudly.

亚伦子孙作祭司的要吹这号。这要作你们世世代代永远的定例。
The horns are to be sounded by the sons of Aaron, the priests; this is to be a law for you for ever, from generation to generation.

你们在自己的地，与欺压你们的敌人打仗，就要用号吹出大声，便在耶和华你们的神面前得蒙纪念，也蒙拯救脱离仇敌。
And if you go to war in your land against any who do you wrong, then let the loud note of the horn be sounded; and the Lord your God will keep you in mind and give you salvation from those who are against you.

在你们快乐的日子和节期，并月朔，献燔祭和平安祭，也要吹号，这都要在你们的神面前作为纪念。我是耶和华你们的神。
And on days of joy and on your regular feasts and on the first day of every month, let the horns be sounded over your burned offerings and your peace-offerings; and they will put the Lord in mind of you: I am the Lord your God.

第二年二月二十日，云彩从法柜的帐幕收上去。
Now in the second year, on the twentieth day of the second month, the cloud was taken up from over the Tent of witness.

以色列人就按站往前行，离开西乃的旷野，云彩停住在巴兰的旷野。
And the children of Israel went on their journey out of the waste land of Sinai; and the cloud came to rest in the waste land of Paran.

这是他们照耶和华借摩西所吩咐的，初次往前行。
They went forward for the first time on their journey as the Lord had given orders by the hand of Moses.

按着军队首先往前行的是犹大营的纛。统领军队的是亚米拿达的儿子拿顺。
First the flag of the children of Judah went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Nahshon, the son of Amminadab.

统领以萨迦支派军队的是苏押的儿子拿坦业。
And at the head of the army of the children of Issachar was Nethanel, the son of Zuar.

统领西布伦支派军队的是希伦的儿子以利押。
And at the head of the army of the children of Zebulun was Eliab, the son of Helon.

帐幕拆卸，革顺的子孙和米拉利的子孙就抬着帐幕先往前行。
Then the House was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who were responsible for moving the House, went forward.

按着军队往前行的是流便营的纛。统领军队的是示丢珥的儿子以利蓿。
Then the flag of the children of Reuben went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Elizur, the son of Shedeur.

统领西缅支派军队的是苏利沙代的儿子示路蔑。
And at the head of the army of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel, the son of Zurishaddai.

统领迦得支派军队的是丢珥的儿子以利雅萨。
At the head of the army of the children of Gad was Eliasaph, the son of Reuel.

哥辖人抬着圣物先往前行。他们未到以前，抬帐幕的已经把帐幕支好。
Then the Kohathites went forward with the holy place; the others put up the House ready for their coming.

按着军队往前行的是以法莲营的纛，统领军队的是亚米忽的儿子以利沙玛。
Then the flag of the children of Ephraim went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Elishama, the son of Ammihud.

统领玛拿西支派军队的是比大蓿的儿子迦玛列。
At the head of the army of the children of Manasseh was Gamaliel, the son of Pedahzur.

统领便雅悯支派军队的是基多尼的儿子亚比但。
At the head of the army of the children of Benjamin was Abidan, the son of Gideoni.

在诸营末后的是但营的纛，按着军队往前行。统领军队的是亚米沙代的儿子亚希以谢。
And the flag of the children of Dan, whose tents were moved last of all, went forward with their armies: and at the head of his army was Ahiezer, the son of Ammishaddai.

统领亚设支派军队的是俄兰的儿子帕结。
At the head of the army of the children of Asher was Pagiel, the son of Ochran.

统领拿弗他利支派军队的是以南的儿子亚希拉。
And at the head of the army of the children of Naphtali was Ahira, the son of Enan.

以色列人按着军队往前行，就是这样。
This was the order in which the children of Israel were journeying by armies; so they went forward.

摩西对他岳父（或作内兄）米甸人流珥的儿子何巴说，我们要行路，往耶和华所应许之地去。他曾说，我要将这地赐给你们。现在求你和我们同去，我们必厚待你，因为耶和华指着以色列人已经应许给好处。
Then Moses said to Hobab, the son of his father-in-law Reuel the Midianite, We are journeying to that place of which the Lord has said, I will give it to you: so come with us, and it will be for your profit: for the Lord has good things in store for Israel.

何巴回答说，我不去。我要回本地本族那里去。
But he said, I will not go with you, I will go back to the land of my birth and to my relations.

摩西说，求你不要离开我们。因为你知道我们要在旷野安营，你可以当作我们的眼目。
And he said, Do not go from us; for you will be eyes for us, guiding us to the right places in the waste land to put up our tents.

你若和我们同去，将来耶和华有什么好处待我们，我们也必以什么好处待你。
And if you come with us, we will give you a part in whatever good the Lord does for us.

以色列人离开耶和华的山，往前行了三天的路程。耶和华的约柜在前头行了三天的路程，为他们寻找安歇的地方。
So they went forward three days' journey from the mountain of the Lord; and the ark of the Lord's agreement went three days' journey before them, looking for a resting-place for them;

他们拔营往前行，日间有耶和华的云彩在他们以上。
And by day the cloud of the Lord went over them, when they went forward from the place where they had put up their tents.

约柜往前行的时候，摩西就说，耶和华阿，求你兴起。愿你的仇敌四散。愿恨你的人从你面前逃跑。
And when the ark went forward Moses said, Come up, O Lord, and let the armies of those who are against you be broken, and let your haters go in flight before you.

约柜停住的时候，他就说，耶和华阿，求你回到以色列的千万人中。
And when it came to rest, he said, Take rest, O Lord, and give a blessing to the families of Israel.

众百姓发怨言，他们的恶语达到耶和华的耳中。耶和华听见了就怒气发作，使火在他们中间焚烧，直烧到营的边界。
Now the people were saying evil against the Lord; and the Lord, hearing it, was angry and sent fire on them, burning the outer parts of the tent-circle.

百姓向摩西哀求，摩西祈求耶和华，火就熄了。
And the people made an outcry to Moses, and Moses made prayer to the Lord, and the fire was stopped.

那地方便叫作他备拉，因为耶和华的火烧在他们中间。
So that place was named Taberah, because of the fire of the Lord which had been burning among them.

他们中间的闲杂人大起贪欲的心。以色列人又哭号说，谁给我们肉吃呢？
And the mixed band of people who went with them were overcome by desire: and the children of Israel, weeping again, said, Who will give us flesh for our food?

我们记得，在埃及的时候不花钱就吃鱼，也记得有黄瓜，西瓜，韭菜，葱，蒜。
Sweet is the memory of the fish we had in Egypt for nothing, and the fruit and green plants of every sort, sharp and pleasing to the taste:

现在我们的心血枯竭了，除这吗哪以外，在我们眼前并没有别的东西。
But now our soul is wasted away; there is nothing at all: we have nothing but this manna before our eyes.

这吗哪仿佛芫荽子，又好像珍珠。
Now the manna was like a seed of grain, like small clear drops.

百姓周围行走，把吗哪收起来，或用磨推，或用臼捣，煮在锅中，又作成饼，滋味好像新油。
The people went about taking it up from the earth, crushing it between stones or hammering it to powder, and boiling it in pots, and they made cakes of it: its taste was like the taste of cakes cooked with oil.

夜间露水降在营中，吗哪也随着降下。
When the dew came down on the tents at night, the manna came down with it.

摩西听见百姓各在各家的帐棚门口哭号。耶和华的怒气便大发作，摩西就不喜悦。
And at the sound of the people weeping, every man at his tent-door, the wrath of the Lord was great, and Moses was very angry.

摩西对耶和华说，你为何苦待仆人，我为何不在你眼前蒙恩，竟把这管理百姓的重任加在我身上呢？
And Moses said to the Lord, Why have you done me this evil? and why have I not grace in your eyes, that you have put on me the care of all this people?

这百姓岂是我怀的胎，岂是我生下来的呢？你竟对我说，把他们抱在怀里，如养育之父抱吃奶的孩子，直抱到你起誓应许给他们祖宗的地去。
Am I the father of all this people? have I given them birth, that you say to me, Take them in your arms, like a child at the breast, to the land which you gave by an oath to their fathers?

我从哪里得肉给这百姓吃呢？他们都向我哭号说，你给我们肉吃吧。
Where am I to get flesh to give to all this people? For they are weeping to me and saying, Give us flesh for our food.

管理这百姓的责任太重了，我独自担当不起。
I am not able by myself to take the weight of all this people, for it is more than my strength.

你这样待我，我若在你眼前蒙恩，求你立时将我杀了，不叫我见自己的苦情。
If this is to be my fate, put me to death now in answer to my prayer, if I have grace in your eyes; and let me not see my shame.

耶和华对摩西说，你从以色列的长老中招聚七十个人，就是你所知道作百姓的长老和官长的，到我这里来，领他们到会幕前，使他们和你一同站立。
And the Lord said to Moses, Send for seventy of the responsible men of Israel, who are in your opinion men of weight and authority over the people; make them come to the Tent of meeting and be there with you.

我要在那里降临，与你说话，也要把降于你身上的灵分赐他们，他们就和你同当这管百姓的重任，免得你独自担当。
And I will come down and have talk with you there: and I will take some of the spirit which is on you and put it on them, and they will take part of the weight of the people off you, so that you do not have to take it by yourself.

又要对百姓说，你们应当自洁，预备明天吃肉，因为你们哭号说，谁给我们肉吃。我们在埃及很好。这声音达到了耶和华的耳中，所以他必给你们肉吃。
And say to the people, Make yourselves clean before tomorrow and you will have flesh for your food: for in the ears of the Lord you have been weeping and saying, Who will give us flesh for food? for we were well off in Egypt: and so the Lord will give you flesh, and it will be your food;

你们不止吃一天，两天，五天，十天，二十天，
Not for one day only, or even for five or ten or twenty days;

要吃一个整月，甚至肉从你们鼻孔里喷出来，使你们厌恶了，因为你们厌弃住在你们中间的耶和华，在他面前哭号说，我们为何出了埃及呢？
But every day for a month, till you are tired of it, turning from it in disgust: because you have gone against the Lord who is with you, and have been weeping before him saying, Why did we come out of Egypt?

摩西对耶和华说，这与我同住的百姓，步行的男人有六十万，你还说，我要把肉给他们，使他们可以吃一个整月。
Then Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand men on foot; and you have said, I will give them flesh to be their food for a month.

难道给他们宰了羊群牛群，或是把海中所有的鱼都聚了来，就够他们吃吗？
Are flocks and herds to be put to death for them? or are all the fish in the sea to be got together so that they may be full?

耶和华对摩西说，耶和华的膀臂岂是缩短了吗？现在要看我的话向你应验不应验。
And the Lord said to Moses, Has the Lord's hand become short? Now you will see if my word comes true for you or not.

摩西出去，将耶和华的话告诉百姓，又招聚百姓的长老中七十个人来，使他们站在会幕的四围。
And Moses went out and gave the people the words of the Lord: and he took seventy of the responsible men of the people, placing them round the Tent.

耶和华在云中降临，对摩西说话，把降与他身上的灵分赐那七十个长老。灵停在他们身上的时候，他们就受感说话，以后却没有再说。
Then the Lord came down in the cloud and had talk with him, and put on the seventy men some of the spirit which was on him: now when the spirit came to rest on them, they were like prophets, but only at that time.

但有两个人仍在营里，一个名叫伊利达，一个名叫米达。他们本是在那些被录的人中，却没有到会幕那里去。灵停在他们身上，他们就在营里说预言。
But two men were still in the tent-circle one of them named Eldad and the other Medad: and the spirit came to rest on them; they were among those who had been sent for, but they had not gone out to the Tent: and the prophet's power came on them in the tent-circle.

有个少年人跑来告诉摩西说，伊利达，米达在营里说预言。
And a young man went running to Moses and said, Eldad and Medad are acting as prophets in the tent-circle.

摩西的帮手，嫩的儿子约书亚，就是摩西所拣选的一个人，说，请我主摩西禁止他们。
Then Joshua, the son of Nun, who had been Moses' servant from the time when he was a child, said, My lord Moses, let them be stopped.

摩西对他说，你为我的缘故嫉妒人吗？惟愿耶和华的百姓都受感说话。愿耶和华把他的灵降在他们身上。
And Moses said to him, Are you moved by envy on my account? If only all the Lord's people were prophets, and the Lord might put his spirit on them!

于是，摩西和以色列的长老都回到营里去。
Then Moses, with the responsible men of Israel, went back to the tent-circle.

有风从耶和华那里刮起，把鹌鹑由海面刮来，飞散在营边和营的四围。这边约有一天的路程，那边约有一天的路程，离地面约有二肘。
Then the Lord sent a wind, driving little birds from the sea, so that they came down on the tents, and all round the tent-circle, about a day's journey on this side and on that, in masses about two cubits high over the face of the earth.

百姓起来，终日终夜，并次日一整天，捕取鹌鹑。至少的也取了十贺梅珥，为自己摆列在营的四围。
And all that day and all night and the day after, the people were taking up the birds; the smallest amount which anyone got was ten homers: and they put them out all round the tents.

肉在他们牙齿之间尚未嚼烂，耶和华的怒气就向他们发作，用最重的灾殃击杀了他们。
But while the meat was still between their teeth, before it was tasted, the wrath of the Lord was moved against the people and he sent a great outburst of disease on them.

那地方便叫作基博罗哈他瓦（就是贪欲之人的坟墓），因为他们在那里葬埋那起贪欲之心的人。
So that place was named Kibroth-hattaavah; because there they put in the earth the bodies of the people who had given way to their desires.

百姓从基博罗哈他瓦走到哈洗录，就住在哈洗录。
From Kibroth-hattaavah the people went on to Hazeroth; and there they put up their tents.

摩西娶了古实女子为妻。米利暗和亚伦因他所娶的古实女子就毁谤他，
Now Miriam and Aaron said evil against Moses, because of the Cushite woman to whom he was married, for he had taken a Cushite woman as his wife.

说，难道耶和华单与摩西说话，不也与我们说话吗？这话耶和华听见了。
And they said, Have the words of the Lord been given to Moses only? have they not come to us? And the Lord took note of it.

摩西为人极其谦和，胜过世上的众人。
Now the man Moses was more gentle than any other man on earth.

耶和华忽然对摩西，亚伦，米利暗说，你们三个人都出来，到会幕这里。他们三个人就出来了。
And suddenly the Lord said to Moses and Aaron and Miriam, Come out, you three, to the Tent of meeting. And the three of them went out.

耶和华在云柱中降临，站在会幕门口，召亚伦和米利暗，二人就出来了。
And the Lord came down in a pillar of cloud, taking his place at the door of the Tent, and made Aaron and Miriam come before him.

耶和华说，你们且听我的话，你们中间若有先知，我耶和华必在异象中向他显现，在梦中与他说话。
And he said, Now give ear to my words: if there is a prophet among you I will give him knowledge of myself in a vision and will let my words come to him in a dream.

我的仆人摩西不是这样。他是在我全家尽忠的。
My servant Moses is not so; he is true to me in all my house:

我要与他面对面说话，乃是明说，不用谜语，并且他必见我的形像。你们毁谤我的仆人摩西，为何不惧怕呢？
With him I will have talk mouth to mouth, openly and not in dark sayings; and with his eyes he will see the form of the Lord: why then had you no fear of saying evil against my servant Moses?

耶和华就向他们二人发怒而去。
And burning with wrath against them, the Lord went away.

云彩从会幕上挪开了，不料，米利暗长了大麻疯，有雪那样白。亚伦一看米利暗长了大麻疯，
And the cloud was moved from over the Tent; and straight away Miriam became a leper, as white as snow: and Aaron, looking at Miriam, saw that she was a leper.

就对摩西说，我主阿，求你不要因我们愚昧犯罪，便将这罪加在我们身上。
Then Aaron said to Moses, O my lord, let not our sin be on our heads, for we have done foolishly and are sinners.

求你不要使她像那出母腹，肉已半烂的死胎。
Let her not be as one dead, whose flesh is half wasted when he comes out from the body of his mother.

于是摩西哀求耶和华说，神阿，求你医治她。
And Moses, crying to the Lord, said, Let my prayer come before you, O God, and make her well.

耶和华对摩西说，她父亲若吐唾沫在她脸上，她岂不蒙羞七天吗？现在要把她在营外关锁七天，然后才可以领她进来。
And the Lord said to Moses, If her father had put a mark of shame on her, would she not be shamed for seven days? Let her be shut up outside the tent-circle for seven days, and after that she may come in again.

于是米利暗关锁在营外七天。百姓没有行路，直等到把米利暗领进来。
So Miriam was shut up outside the tent-circle for seven days: and the people did not go forward on their journey till Miriam had come in again.

以后百姓从哈洗录起行，在巴兰的旷野安营。
After that, the people went on from Hazeroth and put up their tents in the waste land of Paran.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你打发人去窥探我所赐给以色列人的迦南地，他们每支派中要打发一个人，都要作首领的。
Send men to get knowledge about the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the children of Israel; from every tribe of their fathers you are to send a man, every one a chief among them.

摩西就照耶和华的吩咐从巴兰的旷野打发他们去。他们都是以色列人的族长。
And Moses sent them from the waste land of Paran as the Lord gave orders, all of them men who were heads of the children of Israel.

他们的名字，属流便支派的有撒刻的的儿子沙母亚。
And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua, the son of Zaccur.

属西缅支派的有何利的儿子的沙法。
Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat, the son of Hori.

属犹大支派的有耶孚尼的儿子迦勒。
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb, the son of Jephunneh.

属以萨迦支派的有约色的儿子以迦。
Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal, the son of Joseph.

属以法莲支派的有嫩的儿子何希阿。
Of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea, the son of Nun.

属便雅悯支派的有拉孚的儿子帕提。
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti, the son of Raphu.

属西布伦支派的有梭底的儿子迦叠。
Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel, the son of Sodi.

约瑟的子孙，属玛拿西支派的有稣西的儿子迦底。
Of the tribe of Joseph, that is of the family of Manasseh, Gaddi, the son of Susi.

属但支派的有基玛利的儿子亚米利。
Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel, the son of Gemalli.

属亚设支派的有米迦勒的儿子西帖。
Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur, the son of Michael

属拿弗他利支派的有缚西的儿子拿比。
Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi, the son of Vophsi.

属迦得支派的有玛基的儿子臼利。
Of the tribe of Gad, Gevel, the son of Machi.

这就是摩西所打发，窥探那地之人的名字。摩西就称嫩的儿子何西阿为约书亚。
These are the names of the men whom Moses sent to get knowledge about the land. And Moses gave to Hoshea, the son of Nun, the name of Joshua.

摩西打发他们去窥探迦南地，说，你们从南地上山地去，
So Moses sent them to have a look at the land of Canaan, and said to them, Go up into the South and into the hill-country;

看那地如何，其中所住的民是强是弱，是多是少，
And see what the land is like; and if the people living in it are strong or feeble, small or great in number;

所住之地是好是歹，所住之处是营盘是坚城。
And what sort of land they are living in, if it is good or bad; and what their living-places are, tent-circles or walled towns;

又看那地土是肥美是瘠薄，其中有树木没有。你们要放开胆量，把那地的果子带些来。（那时正是葡萄初熟的时候。）
And if the land is fertile or poor, and if there is wood in it or not. And be of good heart, and come back with some of the produce of the land. Now it was the time when the first grapes were ready.

他们上去窥探那地，从寻的旷野到利合，直到哈马口。
So they went up and got a view of the land, from the waste land of Zin to Rehob, on the way to Hamath.

他们从南地上去，到了希伯仑。在那里有亚衲族人亚希幔，示筛，挞买。（原来希伯仑城被建造比埃及的锁安城早七年。）
They went up into the South and came to Hebron; and Ahiman and Sheshai and Talmai, the children of Anak, were living there. (Now the building of Hebron took place seven years before that of Zoan in Egypt.)

他们到了以实各谷，从那里砍了葡萄树的一枝，上头有一挂葡萄，两个人用杠抬着，又带了些石榴和无花果来。
And they came to the valley of Eshcol, and cutting down a vine-branch with its grapes, two of them took it on a rod between them; and they took some pomegranates and figs.

（因为以色列人从那里砍来的那挂葡萄，所以那地方叫作以实各谷。）
That place was named the valley of Eshcol because of the grapes which the children of Israel took from there.

过了四十天，他们窥探那地才回来，
At the end of forty days they came back from viewing the land.

到了巴兰旷野的加低斯，见摩西，亚伦，并以色列的全会众，回报摩西，亚伦，并全会众，又把那地的果子给他们看。
And they came back to Moses and Aaron and all the children of Israel, to Kadesh in the waste land of Paran; and gave an account to them and to all the people and let them see the produce of the land.

又告诉摩西说，我们到了你所打发我们去的那地，果然是流奶与蜜之地。这就是那地的果子。
And they said, We came to the land where you sent us, and truly it is flowing with milk and honey: and here is some of the produce of it.

然而住那地的民强壮，城邑也坚固宽大，并且我们在那里看见了亚衲族的人。
But the people living in the land are strong, and the towns are walled and very great; further, we saw the children of Anak there.

亚玛力人住在南地。赫人，耶布斯人，亚摩利人住在山地。迦南人住在海边并约旦河旁。
And the Amalekites are in the South; and the Hittites and the Jebusites and the Amorites are living in the hill-country; and the Canaanites by the sea and by the side of Jordan.

迦勒在摩西面前安抚百姓，说，我们立刻上去得那地吧。我们足能得胜。
Then Caleb made signs to the people to keep quiet, and said to Moses, Let us go up straight away and take this land; for we are well able to overcome it.

但那些和他同去的人说，我们不能上去攻击那民，因为他们比我们强壮。
But the men who had gone up with him said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we.

探子中有人论到所窥探之地，向以色列人报恶信，说，我们所窥探，经过之地是吞吃居民之地，我们在那里所看见的人民都身量高大。
And they gave the children of Israel a bad account of the land they had been to see, saying, This land through which we went is a land causing destruction to those living in it; and all the people we saw there are men of more than common size.

我们在那里看见亚衲族人，就是伟人。他们是伟人的后裔。据我们看，自己就如蚱蜢一样。据他们看，我们也是如此。
There we saw those great men, the sons of Anak, offspring of the Nephilim: and we seemed to ourselves no more than insects, and so we seemed to them.

当下，全会众大声喧嚷。那夜百姓都哭号。
Then all the people gave load cries of grief, and all that night they gave themselves up to weeping.

以色列众人向摩西，亚伦发怨言。全会众对他们说，巴不得我们早死在埃及地，或是死在这旷野。
And all the children of Israel, crying out against Moses and Aaron, said, If only we had come to our death in the land of Egypt, or even in this waste land!

耶和华为什么把我们领到那地，使我们倒在刀下呢？我们的妻子和孩子必被掳掠。我们回埃及去岂不好吗？
Why is the Lord taking us into this land to come to our death by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will get into strange hands: would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt?

众人彼此说，我们不如立一个首领回埃及去吧。
And they said to one another, Let us make a captain over us, and go back to Egypt.

摩西，亚伦就俯伏在以色列全会众面前。
Then Moses and Aaron went down on their faces before the meeting of the people.

窥探地的人中，嫩的儿子约书亚和耶孚尼的儿子迦勒撕裂衣服，
And Joshua, the son of Nun, and Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, two of those who had been to see the land, giving signs of grief,

对以色列全会众说，我们所窥探，经过之地是极美之地。
Said to all the children of Israel, This land which we went through to see is a very good land.

耶和华若喜悦我们，就必将我们领进那地，把地赐给我们。那地原是流奶与蜜之地。
And if the Lord has delight in us, he will take us into this land and give it to us, a land flowing with milk and honey.

但你们不可背叛耶和华，也不要怕那地的居民。因为他们是我们的食物，并且荫庇他们的已经离开他们。有耶和华与我们同在，不要怕他们。
Only, do not go against the Lord or go in fear of the people of the land, for they will be our food; their strength has been taken from them and the Lord is with us: have no fear of them.

但全会众说，拿石头打死他们二人。忽然，耶和华的荣光在会幕中向以色列众人显现。
But all the people said they were to be stoned. Then the glory of the Lord was seen in the Tent of meeting, before the eyes of all the children of Israel.

耶和华对摩西说，这百姓藐视我要到几时呢？我在他们中间行了这一切神迹，他们还不信我要到几时呢？
And the Lord said to Moses, How long will this people have no respect for me? how long will they be without faith, in the face of all the signs I have done among them?

我要用瘟疫击杀他们，使他们不得承受那地，叫你的后裔成为大国，比他们强胜。
I will send disease on them for their destruction, and take away their heritage, and I will make of you a nation greater and stronger than they.

摩西对耶和华说，埃及人必听见这事。因为你曾施展大能，将这百姓从他们中间领上来。
And Moses said to the Lord, Then it will come to the ears of the Egyptians; for by your power you took this people out from among them;

埃及人要将这事传给迦南地的居民。那民已经听见你耶和华是在这百姓中间。因为你面对面被人看见，有你的云彩停在他们以上。你日间在云柱中，夜间在火柱中，在他们前面行。
And they will give the news to the people of this land: they have had word that you, Lord, are present with this people, letting yourself be seen face to face, and that your cloud is resting over them, and that you go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and in a pillar of fire by night.

如今你若把这百姓杀了，如杀一人，那些听见你名声的列邦必议论说，
Now if you put to death all this people as one man, then the nations who have had word of your glory will say,

耶和华因为不能把这百姓领进他向他们起誓应许之地，所以在旷野把他们杀了。
Because the Lord was not able to take this people into the land which he made an oath to give them, he sent destruction on them in the waste land.

现在求主大显能力，照你所说过的话说，
So now, may my prayer come before you, and let the power of the Lord be great, as you said:

耶和华不轻易发怒，并有丰盛的慈爱，赦免罪孽和过犯。万不以有罪的为无罪，必追讨他的罪，自父及子，直到三，四代。
The Lord is slow to wrath and great in mercy, overlooking wrongdoing and evil, and will not let wrongdoers go free; sending punishment on children for the sins of their fathers, to the third and fourth generation.

求你照你的大慈爱赦免这百姓的罪孽，好象你从埃及到如今常赦免他们一样。
May the sin of this people have forgiveness, in the measure of your great mercy, as you have had mercy on them from Egypt up till now.

耶和华说，我照着你的话赦免了他们。
And the Lord said, I have had mercy, as you say:

然我指着我的永生起誓，遍地要被我的荣耀充满。
But truly, as I am living, and as all the earth will be full of the glory of the Lord;

这些人虽看见我的荣耀和我在埃及与旷野所行的神迹，仍然试探我这十次，不听从我的话，
Because all these men, having seen my glory and the signs which I have done in Egypt and in the waste land, still have put me to the test ten times, and have not given ear to my voice;

他们断不得看见我向他们的祖宗所起誓应许之地。凡藐视我的，一个也不得看见。
They will not see the land about which I made an oath to their fathers; not one of these by whom I have not been honoured will see it.

惟独我的仆人迦勒，因他另有一个心志，专一跟从我，我就把他领进他所去过的那地。他的后裔也必得那地为业。
But my servant Caleb, because he had a different spirit in him, and has been true to me with all his heart, him I will take into that land into which he went, and his seed will have it for their heritage.

亚玛力人和迦南人住在谷中，明天你们要转回，从红海的路往旷野去。
Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites are in the valley; tomorrow, turning round, go into the waste land by the way to the Red Sea.

耶和华对摩西，亚伦说，
Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

这恶会众向我发怨言，我忍耐他们要到几时呢？以色列人向我所发的怨言，我都听见了。
How long am I to put up with this evil people and their outcries against me? The words which they say against me have come to my ears.

你们告诉他们，耶和华说，我指着我的永生起誓，我必要照你们达到我耳中的话待你们。
Say to them, By my life, says the Lord, as certainly as your words have come to my ears, so certainly will I do this to you:

你们的尸首必倒在这旷野，并且你们中间凡被数点，从二十岁以外，向我发怨言的，
Your dead bodies will be stretched out in this waste land; and of all your number, all those of twenty years old and over who have been crying out against me,

必不得进我起誓应许叫你们住的那地。惟有耶孚尼的儿子迦勒和嫩的儿子约书亚才能进去。
Not one will come into the land which I gave my word you would have for your resting-place, but only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua, the son of Nun.

但你们的妇人孩子，就是你们所说，要被掳掠的，我必把他们领进去，他们就得知你们所厌弃的那地。
And your little ones, whom you said would come into strange hands, I will take in, and they will see the land which you would not have.

至于你们，你们的尸首必倒在这旷野。
But as for you, your dead bodies will be stretched in this waste land.

你们的儿女必在旷野飘流四十年，担当你们淫行的罪，直到你们的尸首在旷野消灭。
And your children will be wanderers in the waste land for forty years, undergoing punishment for your false ways, till your bodies become dust in the waste land.

按你们窥探那地的四十日，一年顶一日，你们要担当罪孽四十年，就知道我与你们疏远了，
And as you went through the land viewing it for forty days, so for forty years, a year for every day, you will undergo punishment for your wrongdoing, and you will see that I am against you.

我耶和华说过，我总要这样待这一切聚集敌我的恶会众。他们必在这旷野消灭，在这里死亡。
I the Lord have said it, and this I will certainly do to all this evil people who have come together against me: in this waste land destruction will come on them, and death will be their fate.

摩西所打发，窥探那地的人回来，报那地的恶信，叫全会众向摩西发怨言，
And the men whom Moses sent to see the land, and who, by the bad account they gave of the land, were the cause of the outcry the people made against Moses,

这些报恶信的人都遭瘟疫，死在耶和华面前。
Those same men who said evil of the land, came to their death by disease before the Lord.

其中惟有嫩的儿子约书亚和耶孚尼的儿子迦勒仍然存活。
But Joshua, the son of Nun, and Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, of those who went to see the land, were not touched by disease.

摩西将这些话告诉以色列众人，他们就甚悲哀。
And when Moses put these words before the children of Israel, the people were full of grief.

清早起来，上山顶去，说，我们在这里，我们有罪了。情愿上耶和华所应许的地方去。
And early in the morning they got up and went to the top of the mountain, saying, We are here and we will go up to the place which the Lord said he would give us: for we have done wrong.

摩西说，你们为何违背耶和华的命令呢？这事不能顺利了。
And Moses said, Why are you now acting against the Lord's order, seeing that no good will come of it?

不要上去。因为耶和华不在你们中间，恐怕你们被仇敌杀败了。
Go not up, for the Lord is not with you, and you will be overcome by those who are fighting against you.

亚玛力人和迦南人都在你们面前，你们必倒在刀下。因你们退回不跟从耶和华，所以他必不与你们同在。
For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you, and you will be put to death by their swords: because you have gone back from the way of the Lord, the Lord will not be with you.

他们却擅敢上山顶去，然而耶和华的约柜和摩西没有出营。
But they gave no attention to his words and went to the top of the mountain, though Moses and the ark of the Lord's agreement did not go out of the tent-circle.

于是亚玛力人和住在那山上的迦南人都下来击打他们，把他们杀退了，直到何珥玛。
Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites who were living in the hill-country, and overcame them completely, driving them back as far as Hormah.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们到了我所赐给你们居住的地，
Say to the children of Israel, When you have come into the land which I am giving to you for your resting-place,

若愿意从牛群羊群中取牛羊作火祭，献给耶和华，无论是燔祭是平安祭，为要还特许的愿，或是作甘心祭，或是逢你们节期献的，都要奉给耶和华为馨香之祭。
And are going to make an offering by fire to the Lord, a burned offering or an offering in connection with an oath, or an offering freely given, or at your regular feasts, an offering for a sweet smell to the Lord, from the herd or the flock:

那献供物的就要将细面伊法十分之一，并油一欣四分之一，调和作素祭，献给耶和华。
Then let him who is making his offering, give to the Lord a meal offering of a tenth part of a measure of the best meal mixed with a fourth part of a hin of oil:

无论是燔祭是平安祭，你要为每只绵羊羔，一同预备奠祭的酒一欣四分之一。
And for the drink offering, you are to give with the burned offering or other offering, the fourth part of a hin of wine for every lamb.

为公绵羊预备细面伊法十分之二，并油一欣三分之一，调和作素祭，
Or for a male sheep, give as a meal offering two tenth parts of a measure of the best meal mixed with a third part of a hin of oil:

又用酒一欣三分之一作奠祭，献给耶和华为馨香之祭。
And for the drink offering give a third part of a hin of wine, for a sweet smell to the Lord.

你预备公牛作燔祭，或是作平安祭，为要还特许的愿，或是作平安祭，献给耶和华，
And when you make ready a young ox for a burned or other offering, or for the effecting of an oath, or for peace-offerings to the Lord:

就要把细面伊法十分之三，并油半欣，调和作素祭，和公牛一同献上，
Then with the ox give a meal offering of three tenth parts of a measure of the best meal mixed with half a hin of oil.

又用酒半欣作奠祭，献给耶和华为馨香的火祭。
And for the drink offering: give half a hin of wine, for an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

献公牛，公绵羊，绵羊羔，山羊羔，每只都要这样办理。
This is to be done for every young ox and for every male sheep or he-lamb or young goat.

照你们所预备的数目，按着只数都要这样办理。
Whatever number you make ready, so you are to do for every one.

凡本地人将馨香的火祭献给耶和华，都要这样办理。
All those who are Israelites by birth are to do these things in this way, when giving an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord.

若有外人和你们同居，或有人世世代代住在你们中间，愿意将馨香的火祭献给耶和华，你们怎样办理，他也要照样办理。
And if a man from another country or any other person living among you, through all your generations, has the desire to give an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord, let him do as you do.

至于会众，你们和同居的外人都归一例，作为你们世世代代永远的定例，在耶和华面前，你们怎样，寄居的也要怎样。
There is to be one law for you and for the man of another country living with you, one law for ever from generation to generation; as you are, so is he to be before the Lord.

你们并与你们同居的外人当有一样的条例，一样的典章。
The law and the rule are to be the same for you and for those from other lands living with you.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人说，你们到了我所领你们进去的那地，
Say to the children of Israel, When you come into the land where I am guiding you,

吃那地的粮食，就要把举祭献给耶和华。
Then, when you take for your food the produce of the land, you are to give an offering lifted up before the Lord.

你们要用初熟的麦子磨面，作饼当举祭奉献。你们举上，好像举禾场的举祭一样，
Of the first of your rough meal you are to give a cake for a lifted offering, lifting it up before the Lord as the offering of the grain-floor is lifted up.

你们世世代代要用初熟的麦子磨面，当举祭献给耶和华。
From generation to generation you are to give to the Lord a lifted offering from the first of your rough meal.

你们有错误的时候，不守耶和华所晓谕摩西的这一切命令，
And if in error you go against any of these laws which the Lord has given to Moses,

就是耶和华借摩西一切所吩咐你们的，自那日以至你们的世世代代，
All the laws which the Lord has given you by the hand of Moses, from the day when the Lord gave them, and ever after from generation to generation;

若有误行，是会众所不知道的，后来全会众就要将一只公牛犊作燔祭，并照典章把素祭和奠祭一同献给耶和华为馨香之祭，又献一只公山羊作赎罪祭。
Then, if the wrong is done in error, without the knowledge of the meeting of the people, let all the meeting give a young ox as a burned offering, a sweet smell to the Lord, with its meal offering and its drink offering, as is ordered in the law, together with a he-goat for a sin-offering.

祭司要为以色列全会众赎罪，他们就必蒙赦免，因为这是错误。他们又因自己的错误，把供物，就是向耶和华献的火祭和赎罪祭，一并奉到耶和华面前。
So the priest will make the people free from sin, and they will have forgiveness; for it was an error, and they have given their offering made by fire to the Lord, and their sin-offering before the Lord, on account of their error:

以色列全会众和寄居在他们中间的外人就必蒙赦免，因为这罪是百姓误犯的。
And all the meeting of the children of Israel, as well as those from other lands living among them, will have forgiveness; for it was an error on the part of the people.

若有一个人误犯了罪，他就要献一岁的母山羊作赎罪祭。
And if one person does wrong, without being conscious of it, then let him give a she-goat of the first year for a sin-offering.

那误行的人犯罪的时候，祭司要在耶和华面前为他赎罪，他就必蒙赦免。
And the priest will take away the sin of the person who has done wrong, if the wrong was done unconsciously, and he will have forgiveness.

以色列中的本地人和寄居在他们中间的外人，若误行了什么事，必归一样的条例。
The law in connection with wrong done unconsciously is to be the same for him who is an Israelite by birth and for the man from another country who is living among them.

但那擅敢行事的，无论是本地人是寄居的，他亵渎了耶和华，必从民中剪除。
But the person who does wrong in the pride of his heart, if he is one of you or of another nation by birth, is acting without respect for the Lord, and will be cut off from his people.

因他藐视耶和华的言语，违背耶和华的命令，那人总要剪除。他的罪孽要归到他身上。
Because he had no respect for the word of the Lord, and did not keep his law, that man will be cut off without mercy and his sin will be on him.

以色列人在旷野的时候，遇见一个人在安息日捡柴。
Now while the children of Israel were in the waste land, they saw a man who was getting sticks on the Sabbath day.

遇见他捡柴的人，就把他带到摩西，亚伦并全会众那里，
And those who saw him getting sticks took him before Moses and Aaron and all the people.

将他收在监内。因为当怎样办他，还没有指明。
And they had him shut up, because they had no directions about what was to be done with him.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，总要把那人治死。全会众要在营外用石头把他打死。
Then the Lord said to Moses, Certainly the man is to be put to death: let him be stoned by all the people outside the tent-circle.

于是全会众将他带到营外，用石头打死他，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
So all the people took him outside the tent-circle and he was stoned to death there, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人，叫他们世世代代在衣服边上作？？子，又在底边的？？子上钉一根蓝细带子。
Say to the children of Israel that through all their generations they are to put on the edges of their robes an ornament of twisted threads, and in every ornament a blue cord;

你们佩带这？？子，好叫你们看见就记念遵行耶和华一切的命令，不随从自己的心意，眼目行邪淫，象你们素常一样。
So that, looking on these ornaments, you may keep in mind the orders of the Lord and do them; and not be guided by the desires of your hearts and eyes, through which you have been untrue to me:

使你们记念遵行我一切的命令，成为圣洁，归与你们的神。
And that you may keep in mind all my orders and do them and be holy to your God.

我是耶和华你们的神，曾把你们从埃及地领出来，要作你们的神。我是耶和华你们的神。
I am the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt, so that I might be your God: I am the Lord your God.

利未的曾孙，哥辖的孙子，以斯哈的儿子可拉，和流便子孙中以利押的儿子大坍，亚比兰，与比勒的儿子安，
Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Pallu, the son of Reuben, made themselves ready,

并以色列会中的二百五十个首领，就是有名望选入会中的人，在摩西面前一同起来，
And came before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty chiefs of the people, men of good name who had a place in the meeting of the people.

聚集攻击摩西，亚伦，说，你们擅自专权。全会众个个既是圣洁，耶和华也在他们中间，你们为什么自高，超过耶和华的会众呢？
They came together against Moses and against Aaron, and said to them, You take overmuch on yourselves, seeing that all the people are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; why then have you put yourselves in authority over the people of the Lord?

摩西听见这话就俯伏在地，
And Moses, hearing this, went down on his face;

对可拉和他一党的人说，到了早晨，耶和华必指示谁是属他的，谁是圣洁的，就叫谁亲近他。他所拣选的是谁，必叫谁亲近他。
And he said to Korah and his band, In the morning the Lord will make clear who are his, and who is holy, and who may come near him: the man of his selection will be caused to come near him.

可拉阿，你们要这样行，你和你的一党要拿香炉来。
So do this: let Korah and all his band take vessels for burning perfumes;

明日，在耶和华面前，把火盛在炉中，把香放在其上。耶和华拣选谁，谁就为圣洁。你们这利未的子孙擅自专权了。
And put spices on the fire in them before the Lord tomorrow; then the man marked out by the Lord will be holy: you take overmuch on yourselves, you sons of Levi.

摩西又对可拉说，利未的子孙哪，你们听我说。
And Moses said to Korah, Give ear now, you sons of Levi:

以色列的神从以色列会中将你们分别出来，使你们亲近他，办耶和华帐幕的事，并站在会众面前替他们当差。
Does it seem only a small thing to you that the God of Israel has made you separate from the rest of Israel, letting you come near himself to do the work of the House of the Lord, and to take your place before the people to do what has to be done for them;

耶和华又使你，和你一切弟兄利未的子孙，一同亲近他，这岂为小事，你们还要求祭司的职任吗？
Letting you, and all your brothers the sons of Levi, come near to him? and would you now be priests?

你和你一党的人聚集是要攻击耶和华。亚伦算什么，你们竟向他发怨言呢？
So you and all your band have come together against the Lord; and Aaron, who is he, that you are crying out against him?

摩西打发人去召以利押的儿子大坍，亚比兰。他们说，我们不上去。
Then Moses sent for Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: and they said, We will not come up:

你将我们从流奶与蜜之地领上来，要在旷野杀我们，这岂为小事，你还要自立为王辖管我们吗？
Is it not enough that you have taken us from a land flowing with milk and honey, to put us to death in the waste land, but now you are desiring to make yourself a chief over us?

并且你没有将我们领到流奶与蜜之地，也没有把田地和葡萄园给我们为业。难道你要剜这些人的眼睛吗？我们不上去。
And more than this, you have not taken us into a land flowing with milk and honey, or given us a heritage of fields and vine-gardens: will you put out the eyes of these men? We will not come up.

摩西就甚发怒，对耶和华说，求你不要享受他们的供物。我并没有夺过他们一匹驴，也没有害过他们一个人。
Then Moses was very angry, and said to the Lord, Give no attention to their offering: not one of their asses have I taken, or done wrong to any of them.

摩西对可拉说，明天，你和你一党的人，并亚伦，都要站在耶和华面前。
And Moses said to Korah, You and all your band are to come before the Lord tomorrow, you and they and Aaron:

各人要拿一个香炉，共二百五十个，把香放在上面，到耶和华面前。你和亚伦也各拿自己的香炉。
And let every man take a vessel for burning perfumes, and put sweet spices in them; let every man take his vessel before the Lord, two hundred and fifty vessels; you and Aaron and everyone with his vessel.

于是他们各人拿一个香炉，盛上火，加上香，同摩西，亚伦站在会幕门前。
So every man took his vessel and they put fire in them, with spices, and came to the door of the Tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron.

可拉招聚全会众到会幕门前，要攻击摩西，亚伦。耶和华的荣光就向全会众显现。
And Korah made all the people come together against them to the door of the Tent of meeting: and the glory of the Lord was seen by all the people.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

你们离开这会众，我好在转眼之间把他们灭绝。
Come out from among this people, so that I may send sudden destruction on them.

摩西，亚伦就俯伏在地，说，神，万人之灵的神阿，一人犯罪，你就要向全会众发怒吗？
Then falling down on their faces they said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, because of one man's sin will your wrath be moved against all the people?

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐会众说，你们离开可拉，大坍，亚比兰帐棚的四围。
Say to the people, Come away from the tent of Korah Dathan, and Abiram.

摩西起来，往大坍，亚比兰那里去。以色列的长老也随着他去。
So Moses got up and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the responsible men of Israel went with him.

他吩咐会众说，你们离开这恶人的帐棚吧，他们的物件，什么都不可摸，恐怕你们陷在他们的罪中，与他们一同消灭。
And he said to the people, Come away now from the tents of these evil men, without touching anything of theirs, or you may be taken in the punishment of their sins.

于是众人离开可拉，大坍，亚比兰帐棚的四围。大坍，亚比兰带着妻子，儿女，小孩子，都出来，站在自己的帐棚门口。
So on every side they went away from the tent of Korah Dathan, and Abiram: and Dathan and Abiram came out to the door of their tents, with their wives and their sons and their little ones.

摩西说，我行的这一切事本不是凭我自己心意行的，乃是耶和华打发我行的，必有证据使你们知道。
And Moses said, Now you will see that the Lord has sent me to do all these works, and I have not done them of myself.

这些人死若与世人无异，或是他们所遭的与世人相同，就不是耶和华打发我来的。
If these men have the common death of men, or if the natural fate of all men overtakes them, then the Lord has not sent me.

倘若耶和华创作一件新事，使地开口，把他们和一切属他们的都吞下去，叫他们活活地坠落阴间，你们就明白这些人是藐视耶和华了。
But if the Lord does something new, opening the earth to take them in, with everything which is theirs, and they go down living into the underworld, then it will be clear to you that the Lord has not been honoured by these men.

摩西刚说完了这一切话，他们脚下的地就开了口，
And while these words were on his lips, the earth under them was parted in two;

把他们和他们的家眷，并一切属可拉的人丁，财物，都吞下去。
And the earth, opening her mouth, took them in, with their families, and all the men who were joined to Korah, and their goods.

这样，他们和一切属他们的，都活活地坠落阴间。地口在他们上头照旧合闭，他们就从会中灭亡。
So they and all theirs went down living into the underworld, and the earth was shut over them, and they were cut off from among the meeting of the people.

在他们四围的以色列众人听他们呼号，就都逃跑，说，恐怕地也把我们吞下去。
And all Israel round about them went in flight at their cry, For fear, said they, that we go down into the heart of the earth.

又有火从耶和华那里出来，烧灭了那献香的二百五十个人。
Then fire came out from the Lord, burning up the two hundred and fifty men who were offering the perfume.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐祭司亚伦的儿子以利亚撒从火中捡起那些香炉来，把火撒在别处，因为那些香炉是圣的。
Say to Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, that he is to take out of the flames the vessels with the perfumes in them, turning the fire out of them, for they are holy;

把那些犯罪，自害己命之人的香炉，叫人锤成片子，用以包坛。那些香炉本是他们在耶和华面前献过的，所以是圣的，并且可以给以色列人作记号。
And let the vessels of those men, who with their lives have made payment for their sin, be hammered out into plates as a cover for the altar; for they have been offered before the Lord and are holy; so that they may be a sign to the children of Israel.

于是祭司以利亚撒将被烧之人所献的铜香炉拿来，人就锤出来，用以包坛，
So Eleazar the priest took the brass vessels which had been offered by those who were burned up, and they were hammered out to make a cover for the altar:

给以色列人作纪念，使亚伦后裔之外的人不得近前来在耶和华面前烧香，免得他遭可拉和他一党所遭的。这乃是照耶和华借着摩西所吩咐的。
To be a sign, kept in memory for ever by the children of Israel, that no man who is not of the seed of Aaron has the right of burning spices before the Lord, so that he may not be like Korah and his band: as the Lord said to him by the mouth of Moses.

第二天，以色列全会众都向摩西，亚伦发怨言说，你们杀了耶和华的百姓了。
But on the day after, all the children of Israel made an outcry against Moses and against Aaron, saying, You have put to death the Lord's people.

会众聚集攻击摩西，亚伦的时候，向会幕观看，不料，有云彩遮盖了，耶和华的荣光显现。
Now when the people had come together against Moses and Aaron, looking in the direction of the Tent of meeting, they saw the cloud covering it, and the glory of the Lord came before their eyes.

摩西，亚伦就来到会幕前。
Then Moses and Aaron came to the front of the Tent of meeting.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你们离开这会众，我好在转眼之间把他们灭绝。他们二人就俯伏于地。
Come out from among this people, so that I may send sudden destruction on them. And they went down on their faces.

摩西对亚伦说，拿你的香炉，把坛上的火盛在其中，又加上香，快快带到会众那里，为他们赎罪。因为有忿怒从耶和华那里出来，瘟疫已经发作了。
And Moses said to Aaron, Take your vessel and put in it fire from the altar, and sweet spices, and take it quickly into the meeting of the people, and make them free from sin: for wrath has gone out from the Lord, and the disease is starting.

亚伦照着摩西所说的拿来，跑到会中，不料，瘟疫在百姓中已经发作了。他就加上香，为百姓赎罪。
And at the words of Moses, Aaron took his vessel, and went running among the people; and even then the disease had made a start among them; and he put spices in his vessel to take away the sin of the people.

他站在活人死人中间，瘟疫就止住了。
And he took his place between the dead and the living: and the disease was stopped.

除了因可拉事情死的以外，遭瘟疫死的，共有一万四千七百人。
Now fourteen thousand, seven hundred deaths were caused by that disease, in addition to those who came to their end because of what Korah had done.

亚伦回到会幕门口，到摩西那里，瘟疫已经止住了。
Then Aaron went back to Moses to the door of the Tent of meeting: and the disease came to a stop.

耶和华对摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕以色列人，从他们手下取杖，每支派一根。从他们所有的首领，按着支派，共取十二根。你要将各人的名字写在各人的杖上，
Say to the children of Israel that they are to give you rods, one for every family, for every chief, the head of his father's house, making twelve rods; let every man's name be placed on his rod.

并要将亚伦的名字写在利未的杖上，因为各族长必有一根杖。
And let Aaron's name be placed on the rod of Levi: for there is to be one rod for the head of every family.

你要把这些杖存在会幕内法柜前，就是我与你们相会之处。
And let them be stored up in the Tent of meeting, in front of the ark of witness where I come to you.

后来我所拣选的那人，他的杖必发芽。这样，我必使以色列人向你们所发的怨言止息，不再达到我耳中。
And the rod of that man who is marked out by me for myself will have buds on it; so I will put a stop to the outcries which the children of Israel make to me against you.

于是摩西晓谕以色列人，他们的首领就把杖交给他，按着支派，每首领一根，共有十二根。亚伦的杖也在其中。
So Moses gave these orders to the children of Israel, and all their chiefs gave him rods, one for the head of every family, making twelve rods: and Aaron's rod was among them.

摩西就把杖存在法柜的帐幕内，在耶和华面前。
And Moses put the rods before the Lord in the Tent of witness.

第二天，摩西进法柜的帐幕去。谁知利未族亚伦的杖已经发了芽，生了花苞，开了花，结了熟杏。
Now on the day after, Moses went into the Tent of witness; and he saw that Aaron's rod, the rod of the house of Levi, had put out buds, and was covered with buds and flowers and fruit.

摩西就把所有的杖从耶和华面前拿出来，给以色列众人看。他们看见了，各首领就把自己的杖拿去。
Then Moses took out all the rods from before the Lord, and gave them back to the children of Israel: and they saw them, and every man took his rod.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，把亚伦的杖还放在法柜前，给这些背叛之子留作记号。这样，你就使他们向我发的怨言止息，免得他们死亡。
And the Lord said to Moses, Put Aaron's rod back in front of the ark of witness, to be kept for a sign against this false-hearted people, so that you may put a stop to their outcries against me, and death may not overtake them.

摩西就这样行。耶和华怎样吩咐他，他就怎样行了。
This Moses did: as the Lord gave orders, so he did.

以色列人对摩西说，我们死啦。我们灭亡啦。都灭亡啦。
And the children of Israel said to Moses, Truly, destruction has come on us; an evil fate has overtaken us all.

凡挨近耶和华帐幕的是必死的。我们都要死亡吗？
Death will overtake everyone who comes near, who comes near the House of the Lord: are we all to come to destruction?

耶和华对亚伦说，你和你的儿子，并你本族的人，要一同担当干犯圣所的罪孽。你和你的儿子也要一同担当干犯祭司职任的罪孽。
And the Lord said to Aaron, You and your sons and your father's family are to be responsible for all wrongdoing in relation to the holy place: and you and your sons are to be responsible for the errors which come about in your work as priests.

你要带你弟兄利未人，就是你祖宗支派的人前来，使他们与你联合，服事你，只是你和你的儿子，要一同在法柜的帐幕前供职。
Let your brothers, the family of Levi, come near with you, so that they may be joined with you and be your servants: but you and your sons with you are to go in before the ark of witness.

他们要守所吩咐你的，并守全帐幕，只是不可挨近圣所的器具和坛，免得他们和你们都死亡。
They are to do your orders and be responsible for the work of the Tent; but they may not come near the vessels of the holy place or the altar, so that death may not overtake them or you.

他们要与你联合，也要看守会幕，办理帐幕一切的事，只是外人不可挨近你们。
They are to be joined with you in the care of the Tent of meeting, doing whatever is needed for the Tent: and no one of any other family may come near you.

你们要看守圣所和坛，免得忿怒再临到以色列人。
You are to be responsible for the holy place and the altar, so that wrath may never again come on the children of Israel.

我已将你们的弟兄利未人从以色列人中拣选出来归耶和华，是给你们为赏赐的，为要办理会幕的事。
Now, see, I have taken your brothers the Levites from among the children of Israel: they are given to you and to the Lord, to do the work of the Tent of meeting.

你和你的儿子要为一切属坛和幔子内的事一同守祭司的职任。你们要这样供职。我将祭司的职任给你们当作赏赐事奉我。凡挨近的外人必被治死。
And you and your sons with you are to be responsible as priests for the altar and everything on it, and everything inside the veil; you are to do the work of priests; I have given you your position as priests; and any other man who comes near will be put to death.

耶和华晓谕亚伦说，我已将归我的举祭，就是以色列人一切分别为圣的物，交给你经管。因你受过膏，把这些都赐给你和你的子孙，当作永得的分。
And the Lord said to Aaron, See, I have given into your care my lifted offerings; even all the holy things of the children of Israel I have given to you and to your sons as your right for ever, because you have been marked with the holy oil.

以色列人归给我至圣的供物，就是一切的素祭，赎罪祭，赎愆祭，其中所有存留不经火的，都为至圣之物，要归给你和你的子孙。
This is to be yours of the most holy things, out of the fire offerings; every offering of theirs, every meal offering and sin-offering, and every offering which they make on account of error, is to be most holy for you and your sons.

你要拿这些当至圣物吃。凡男丁都可以吃。你当以此物为圣。
As most holy things they are to be your food: let every male have them for food; it is to be holy to you.

以色列人所献的举祭并摇祭都是你的。我已赐给你和你的儿女，当作永得的分。凡在你家中的洁净人都可以吃。
And this is yours: the lifted offering which they give and all the wave offerings of the children of Israel I have given to you and to your sons and to your daughters as your right for ever: everyone in your house who is clean may have them for food.

凡油中，新酒中，五谷中至好的，就是以色列人所献给耶和华初熟之物，我都赐给你。
All the best of the oil and the wine and the grain, the first-fruits of them which they give to the Lord, to you have I given them.

凡从他们地上所带来给耶和华初熟之物也都要归与你。你家中的洁净人都可以吃。
The earliest produce from their land which they take to the Lord is to be yours; everyone in your house who is clean may have it for his food.

以色列中一切永献的都必归与你。
Everything given by oath to the Lord in Israel is to be yours.

他们所有奉给耶和华的，连人带牲畜，凡头生的，都要归给你。只是人头生的，总要赎出来。不洁净牲畜头生的，也要赎出来。
The first birth of every living thing which is offered to the Lord, of man or beast, is to be yours; but for the first sons of man payment is to be made, and for the first young of unclean beasts.

其中在一月之外所当赎的，要照你所估定的价，按圣所的平，用银子五舍客勒赎出来（一舍客勒是二十季拉）。
Payment is to be made for these when they are a month old, at the value fixed by you, a price of five shekels by the scale of the holy place, that is, twenty gerahs to the shekel.

只是头生的牛，或是头生的绵羊和山羊，必不可赎，都是圣的，要把它的血洒在坛上，把它的脂油焚烧，当作馨香的火祭献给耶和华。
But no such payment may be made for the first birth of an ox or a sheep or a goat; these are holy: their blood is to be dropped on the altar, and their fat burned for an offering made by fire, a sweet smell to the Lord.

它的肉必归你，像被摇的胸，被举的右腿归你一样。
Their flesh is to be yours; like the breast of the wave offering and the right leg, it is to be yours.

凡以色列人所献给耶和华圣物中的举祭，我都赐给你和你的儿女，当作永得的分。这是给你和你的后裔，在耶和华面前作为永远的盐约（盐即不废坏的意思）。
All the lifted offerings of the holy things which the children of Israel give to the Lord, I have given to you and to your sons and to your daughters as a right for ever. This is an agreement made with salt before the Lord, to you and to your seed for ever.

耶和华对亚伦说，你在以色列人的境内不可有产业，在他们中间也不可有分。我就是你的分，是你的产业。
And the Lord said to Aaron, You will have no heritage in their land, or any part among them; I am your part and your heritage among the children of Israel.

凡以色列中出产的十分之一，我已赐给利未的子孙为业。因他们所办的是会幕的事，所以赐给他们为酬他们的劳。
And to the children of Levi I have given as their heritage all the tenths offered in Israel, as payment for the work they do, the work of the Tent of meeting.

从今以后，以色列人不可挨近会幕，免得他们担罪而死。
In future the children of Israel are not to come near the Tent of meeting, so that death may not come to them because of sin.

惟独利未人要办会幕的事，担当罪孽。这要作你们世世代代永远的定例。他们在以色列人中不可有产业。
But the Levites are to do the work of the Tent of meeting, and be responsible for errors in connection with it: this is a law for ever through all your generations; and among the children of Israel they will have no heritage.

因为以色列人中出产的十分之一，就是献给耶和华为举祭的，我已赐给利未人为业。所以我对他们说，在以色列人中不可有产业。
For the tenths which the children of Israel give as a lifted offering to the Lord I have given to the Levites as their heritage. and so I have said to them, Among the children of Israel they will have no heritage.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你晓谕利未人说，你们从以色列人中所取的十分之一，就是我给你们为业的，要再从那十分之一中取十分之一作为举祭献给耶和华，
Say to the Levites, When you take from the children of Israel the tenth which I have given to you from them as your heritage, a tenth part of that tenth is to be offered as an offering lifted up before the Lord.

这举祭要算为你们场上的谷，又如满酒榨的酒。
And this lifted offering is to be put to your credit as if it was grain from the grain-floor and wine from the vines.

这样，你们从以色列人中所得的十分之一也要作举祭献给耶和华，从这十分之一中，将所献给耶和华的举祭归给祭司亚伦。
So you are to make an offering lifted up to the Lord from all the tenths which you get from the children of Israel, giving out of it the Lord's lifted offering to Aaron the priest.

奉给你们的一切礼物，要从其中将至好的，就是分别为圣的，献给耶和华为举祭。
From everything given to you, let the best of it, the holy part of it, be offered as a lifted offering to the Lord.

所以你要对利未人说，你们从其中将至好的举起，这就算为你们场上的粮，又如酒榨的酒。
Say to them, then, When the best of it is lifted up on high, it is to be put to the account of the Levites as the increase of the grain-floor and of the place where the grapes are crushed.

你们和你们家属随处可以吃。这原是你们的赏赐，是酬你们在会幕里办事的劳。
It is to be your food, for you and your families in every place: it is your reward for your work in the Tent of meeting.

你们从其中将至好的举起，就不至因这物担罪。你们不可亵渎以色列人的圣物，免得死亡。
And no sin will be yours on account of it, when the best of it has been lifted up on high; you are not to make a wrong use of the holy things of the children of Israel, so that death may not overtake you.

耶和华晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

耶和华命定律法中的一条律例乃是这样说，你要吩咐以色列人，把一只没有残疾，未曾负轭，纯红的母牛牵到你这里来，
This is the rule of the law which the Lord has made, saying, Give orders to the children of Israel to give you a red cow without any mark on her, and on which the yoke has never been put:

交给祭司以利亚撒。他必牵到营外，人就把牛宰在他面前。
Give her to Eleazar the priest and let him take her outside the tent-circle and have her put to death before him.

祭司以利亚撒要用指头蘸这牛的血，向会幕前面弹七次。
Then let Eleazar the priest take some of her blood on his finger, shaking the blood seven times in the direction of the front of the Tent of meeting:

人要在他眼前把这母牛焚烧。牛的皮，肉，血，粪都要焚烧。
And the cow is to be burned before him, her skin and her flesh and her blood and her waste are to be burned:

祭司要把香柏木，牛膝草，朱红色线都丢在烧牛的火中。
Then let the priest take cedar-wood and hyssop and red thread, and put them into the fire where the cow is burning.

祭司必不洁净到晚上，要洗衣服，用水洗身，然后可以进营。
And the priest, after washing his clothing and bathing his body in water, may come back to the tent-circle, and will be unclean till evening.

烧牛的人必不洁净到晚上，也要洗衣服，用水洗身。
And he who does the burning is to have his clothing washed and his body bathed in water and be unclean till evening.

必有一个洁净的人收起母牛的灰，存在营外洁净的地方，为以色列会众调作除污秽的水。这本是除罪的。
Then let a man who is clean take the dust of the burned cow and put it outside the tent-circle in a clean place, where it is to be kept for the children of Israel and used in making the water which takes away what is unclean: it is a sin-offering.

收起母牛灰的人必不洁净到晚上，要洗衣服。这要给以色列人和寄居在他们中间的外人作为永远的定例。
And he who takes up the dust of the burned cow is to have his clothing washed with water and be unclean till evening: this is to be a law for ever, for the children of Israel as well as for the man from another country who is living among them.

摸了人死尸的，就必七天不洁净。
Anyone touching a dead body will be unclean for seven days:

那人到第三天要用这除污秽的水洁净自己，第七天就洁净了。他若在第三天不洁净自己，第七天就不洁净了。
On the third day and on the seventh day he is to make himself clean with the water, and so he will be clean: but if he does not do this on the third day and on the seventh day, he will not be clean.

凡摸了人死尸，不洁净自己的，就玷污了耶和华的帐幕，这人必从以色列中剪除。因为那除污秽的水没有洒在他身上，他就为不洁净，污秽还在他身上。
Anyone touching the body of a dead man without making himself clean in this way, makes the House of the Lord unclean; and that man will be cut off from Israel: because the water was not put on him, he will be unclean; his unclean condition is unchanged.

人死在帐棚里的条例乃是这样，凡进那帐棚的，和一切在帐棚里的，都必七天不洁净。
This is the law when death comes to a man in his tent: everyone who comes into the tent, and everyone who is in the tent, will be unclean for seven days.

凡敞口的器皿，就是没有扎上盖的，也是不洁净。
And every open vessel without a cover fixed on it will be unclean.

无论何人在田野里摸了被刀杀的，或是尸首，或是人的骨头，或是坟墓，就要七天不洁净。
And anyone touching one who has been put to death with the sword in the open country, or the body of one who has come to his end by a natural death, or a man's bone, or the resting-place of a dead body, will be unclean for seven days.

要为这不洁净的人拿些烧成的除罪灰放在器皿里，倒上活水。
And for the unclean, they are to take the dust of the burning of the sin-offering, and put flowing water on it in a vessel:

必当有一个洁净的人拿牛膝草蘸在这水中，把水洒在帐棚上，和一切器皿并帐棚内的众人身上，又洒在摸了骨头，或摸了被杀的，或摸了自死的，或摸了坟墓的那人身上。
And a clean person is to take hyssop and put it in the water, shaking it over the tent, and all the vessels, and the people who were there, and over him by whom the bone, or the body of one who has been put to death with the sword, or the body of one who has come to his end by a natural death, or the resting-place was touched.

第三天和第七天，洁净的人要洒水在不洁净的人身上，第七天就使他成为洁净。那人要洗衣服，用水洗澡，到晚上就洁净了。
Let the clean person do this to the unclean on the third day and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he is to make him clean; and after washing his clothing and bathing himself in water, he will be clean in the evening.

但那污秽而不洁净自己的，要将他从会中剪除，因为他玷污了耶和华的圣所。除污秽的水没有洒在他身上，他是不洁净的。
But the man who, being unclean, does not make himself clean in this way, will be cut off from the meeting of the people, because he has made the holy place of the Lord unclean: the water has not been put on him, he is unclean.

这要给你们作为永远的定例。并且那洒除污秽水的人要洗衣服。凡摸除污秽水的，必不洁净到晚上。
This is to be a law for them for ever: he who puts the water on the unclean person is to have his clothing washed; and anyone touching the water will be unclean till evening.

不洁净人所摸的一切物就不洁净。摸了这物的人必不洁净到晚上。
Anything touched by the unclean person will be unclean; and any person touching it will be unclean till evening.

正月间，以色列全会众到了寻的旷野，就住在加低斯。米利暗死在那里，就葬在那里。
In the first month all the children of Israel came into the waste land of Zin, and put up their tents in Kadesh; there death came to Miriam, and they put her body to rest in the earth.

会众没有水喝，就聚集攻击摩西，亚伦。
And there was no water for the people: and they came together against Moses and against Aaron.

百姓向摩西争闹说，我们的弟兄曾死在耶和华面前，我们恨不得与他们同死。
And the people were angry with Moses and said, If only death had overtaken us when our brothers came to their death before the Lord!

你们为何把耶和华的会众领到这旷野，使我们和牲畜都死在这里呢？
Why have you taken the Lord's people into this waste, for death to come to us and to our cattle there?

你们为何逼着我们出埃及，领我们到这坏地方呢？这地方不好撒种，也没有无花果树，葡萄树，石榴树，又没有水喝。
Why have you made us come out of Egypt into this evil place? This is no place of seed or figs or vines or other fruits, and there is no water for drinking.

摩西，亚伦离开会众，到会幕门口，俯伏在地。耶和华的荣光向他们显现。
Then Moses and Aaron went away from the people to the door of the Tent of meeting; and, falling on their faces there, they saw the glory of the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你拿着杖去，和你的哥哥亚伦招聚会众，在他们眼前吩咐磐石发出水来，水就从磐石流出，给会众和他们的牲畜喝。
Take the rod, you and Aaron, your brother, and make all the people come together, and before their eyes give orders to the rock to give out its water; and so make water come out of the rock for them, and give the people and their cattle drink.

于是摩西照耶和华所吩咐的，从耶和华面前取了杖去。
And Moses took the rod from before the Lord as he gave him orders.

摩西，亚伦就招聚会众到磐石前。摩西说，你们这些背叛的人听我说，我为你们使水从这磐石中流出来吗？
Then Moses and Aaron made the people come together in front of the rock, and he said to them, Give ear now, you people whose hearts are turned from the Lord; are we to get water for you out of the rock?

摩西举手，用杖击打磐石两下，就有许多水流出来，会众和他们的牲畜都喝了。
And lifting up his hand, Moses gave the rock two blows with his rod: and water came streaming out, and the people and their cattle had drink enough.

耶和华对摩西，亚伦说，因为你们不信我，不在以色列人眼前尊我为圣，所以你们必不得领这会众进我所赐给他们的地去。
Then the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, Because you had not enough faith in me to keep my name holy before the children of Israel, you will not take this people into the land which I have given them.

这水名叫米利巴水（米利巴就是争闹的意思），是因以色列人向耶和华争闹，耶和华就在他们面前显为圣。
These are the waters of Meribah; because the children of Israel went against the Lord, and they saw that he was holy among them.

摩西从加低斯差遣使者去见以东王，说，你的弟兄以色列人这样说，我们所遭遇的一切艰难，
Then Moses sent men from Kadesh to the king of Edom to say to him, Your brother Israel says, You have knowledge of all the things we have been through;

就是我们的列祖下到埃及，我们在埃及久住。埃及人恶待我们的列祖和我们，
How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we were living in Egypt for a long time; and the Egyptians were cruel to us and to our fathers:

我们哀求耶和华的时候，他听了我们的声音，差遣使者把我们从埃及领出来。这事你都知道。如今，我们在你边界上的城加低斯。
And the Lord gave ear to the voice of our cry, and sent an angel and took us out of Egypt: and now we are in Kadesh, a town on the edge of your land;

求你容我们从你的地经过。我们不走田间和葡萄园，也不喝井里的水，只走大道（原文作王道），不偏左右，直到过了你的境界。
Let us now go through your land: we will not go into field or vine-garden, or take the water of the springs; we will go by the highway, not turning to the right or to the left, till we have gone past the limits of your land.

以东王说，你不可从我的地经过，免得我带刀出去攻击你。
And Edom said, You are not to go through my land, for if you do I will come out against you with the sword.

以色列人说，我们要走大道上去。我们和牲畜若喝你的水，必给你价值。不求别的，只求你容我们步行过去。
And the children of Israel said to him, We will go up by the highway: and if we or our cattle take of your water, we will give you a price for it: only let us go through on our feet, nothing more.

以东王说，你们不可经过。就率领许多人出来，要用强硬的手攻击以色列人。
But he said, You are not to go through. And Edom came out against them in his strength, with a great army.

这样，以东王不肯容以色列人从他的境界过去。于是他们转去，离开他。
So Edom would not let Israel go through his land; and Israel went in another direction.

以色列全会众从加低斯起行，到了何珥山。
And they went on from Kadesh, and came, with all their people, to Mount Hor.

耶和华在附近以东边界的何珥山上晓谕摩西，亚伦说，
And at Mount Hor, at the edge of the land of Edom, the Lord said to Moses and Aaron,

亚伦要归到他列祖（原文作本民）那里。他必不得入我所赐给以色列人的地。因为在米利巴水，你们违背了我的命。
Aaron will be put to rest with his people; he will not go into the land which I have given to the children of Israel, because you went against my word at the waters of Meribah.

你带亚伦和他的儿子以利亚撒上何珥山，
So take Aaron and Eleazar, his son, up into Mount Hor;

把亚伦的圣衣脱下来，给他的儿子以利亚撒穿上。亚伦必死在那里，归他列祖。
And take Aaron's robes off him and put them on Eleazar, his son: and death will come to Aaron there, and he will be put to rest with his people.

摩西就照耶和华所吩咐的行。三人当着会众的眼前上了何珥山。
So Moses did as the Lord had said, and before the eyes of all the people they went up Mount Hor.

摩西把亚伦的圣衣脱下来，给他的儿子以利亚撒穿上，亚伦就死在山顶那里。于是摩西和以利亚撒下了山。
And Moses took off Aaron's robes, and put them on Eleazar, his son; and there on the top of the mountain death came to Aaron: then Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain.

全会众，就是以色列全家，见亚伦已经死了，便都为亚伦哀哭了三十天。
And when the people saw that Aaron was dead, all the children of Israel gave themselves up to weeping for him for thirty days.

住南地的迦南人亚拉得王，听说以色列人从亚他林路来，就和以色列人争战，掳了他们几个人。
And it came to the ears of the Canaanite, the king of Arad, living in the South, that Israel was coming by the way of Atharim, and he came out against them and took some of them prisoners.

以色列人向耶和华发愿说，你若将这民交付我手，我就把他们的城邑尽行毁灭。
Then Israel made an oath to the Lord, and said, If you will give up this people into my hands, then I will send complete destruction on all their towns.

耶和华应允了以色列人，把迦南人交付他们，他们就把迦南人和迦南人的城邑尽行毁灭。那地方的名便叫何珥玛（何珥玛就是毁灭的意思）。
And the Lord, in answer to the voice of Israel, gave the Canaanites up to them; and they put them and their towns completely to destruction: and that place was named Hormah.

他们从何珥山起行，往红海那条路走，要绕过以东地。百姓因这路难行，心中甚是烦躁，
Then they went on from Mount Hor by the way to the Red Sea, going round the land of Edom: and the spirit of the people was overcome with weariness on the way.

就怨？？神和摩西说，你们为什么把我们从埃及领出来，使我们死在旷野呢？这里没有粮，没有水，我们的心厌恶这淡薄的食物。
And crying out against God and against Moses, they said, Why have you taken us out of Egypt to come to our death in the waste land? For there is no bread and no water, and this poor bread is disgusting to us.

于是耶和华使火蛇进入百姓中间，蛇就咬他们。以色列人中死了许多。
Then the Lord sent poison-snakes among the people; and their bites were a cause of death to numbers of the people of Israel.

百姓到摩西那里，说，我们怨？？耶和华和你，有罪了。求你祷告耶和华，叫这些蛇离开我们。于是摩西为百姓祷告。
Then the people came to Moses and said, We have done wrong in crying out against the Lord and against you: make prayer to the Lord to take away the snakes from us. So Moses made prayer for the people.

耶和华对摩西说，你制造一条火蛇，挂在杆子上。凡被咬的，一望这蛇，就必得活。
And the Lord said to Moses, Make an image of a snake and put it on a rod, and anyone who has been wounded by the snakes, looking on it will be made well.

摩西便制造一条铜蛇，挂在杆子上。凡被蛇咬的，一望这铜蛇就活了。
So Moses made a snake of brass and put it on a rod; and anyone who had a snakebite, after looking on the snake of brass, was made well.

以色列人起行，安营在阿伯。
Then the children of Israel went on and put up their tents in Oboth.

又从阿伯起行，安营在以耶亚巴琳，与摩押相对的旷野，向日出之地。
And journeying on again from Oboth, they put up their tents in Iye-abarim, in the waste land before Moab looking east.

从那里起行，安营在撒烈谷。
And moving on from there, they put up their tents in the valley of Zered.

从那里起行，安营在亚嫩河那边。这亚嫩河是在旷野，从亚摩利的境界流出来的。原来亚嫩河是摩押的边界，在摩押和亚摩利人搭界的地方。
From there they went on and put up their tents on the other side of the Arnon, which is on the waste land at the edge of the land of the Amorites; for the Arnon is the line of division between Moab and the Amorites:

所以耶和华的战记上说，苏法的哇哈伯与亚嫩河的谷，
As it says in the book of the Wars of the Lord, Vaheb in Suphah, and the valley of the Amon;

并向亚珥城众谷的下坡，是靠近摩押的境界。
The slope of the valleys going down to the tents of Ar and touching the edge of Moab.

以色列人从那里起行，到了比珥（比珥就是井的意思）。从前耶和华吩咐摩西说，招聚百姓，我好给他们水喝，说的就是这井。
From there they went on to Beer, the water-spring of which the Lord said to Moses, Make the people come together and I will give them water.

当时，以色列人唱歌说，井阿，涌上水来。你们要向这井歌唱。
Then Israel gave voice to this song: Come up, O water-spring, let us make a song to it:

这井是首领和民中的尊贵人用圭用杖所挖所掘的。以色列人从旷野往玛他拿去，
The fountain made by the chiefs, made deep by the great ones of the people, with the law-givers' rod, and with their sticks. Then from the waste land they went on to Mattanah:

从玛他拿到拿哈列，从拿哈列到巴末，
And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:

从巴末到摩押地的谷，又到那下望旷野之毗斯迦的山顶。
And from Bamoth to the valley in the open country of Moab, and to the top of Pisgah looking over Jeshimon.

以色列人差遣使者去见亚摩利人的王西宏，说，
And Israel sent men to Sihon, king of the Amorites, saying,

求你容我们从你的地经过。我们不偏入田间和葡萄园，也不喝井里的水，只走大道（原文作王道），直到过了你的境界。
Let me go through your land: we will not go into field or vine-garden, or take the water of the springs; we will go by the highway till we have gone past the limits of your land.

西宏不容以色列人从他的境界经过，就招聚他的众民出到旷野，要攻击以色列人，到了雅杂与以色列人争战。
And Sihon would not let Israel go through his land; but got all his people together and went out against Israel into the waste land, as far as Jahaz, to make war on Israel.

以色列人用刀杀了他，得了他的地，从亚嫩河到雅博河，直到亚扪人的境界，因为亚扪人的境界多有坚垒。
But Israel overcame him, and took all his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, as far as the country of the children of Ammon, for the country of the children of Ammon was strongly armed.

以色列人夺取这一切的城邑，也住亚摩利人的城邑，就是希实本与希实本的一切乡村。
And Israel took all their towns, living in Heshbon and all the towns and small places of the Amorites.

这希实本是亚摩利王西宏的京城。西宏曾与摩押的先王争战，从他手中夺取了全地，直到亚嫩河。
For Heshbon was the town of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who had made war against an earlier king of Moab and taken from him all his land as far as the Arnon.

所以那些作诗歌的说，你们来到希实本。愿西宏的城被修造，被建立。
So the makers of wise sayings say, Come to Heshbon, building up the town of Sihon and making it strong:

因为有火从希实本发出，有火焰出于西宏的城，烧尽摩押的亚珥和亚嫩河丘坛的祭司（祭司原文作主）。
For a fire has gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the town of Sihon: for the destruction of Ar in Moab, and the lords of the high places of the Arnon.

摩押阿，你有祸了。基抹的民哪，你们灭亡了。基抹的男子逃奔，女子被掳，交付亚摩利的王西宏。
Sorrow is yours, O Moab! Destruction is your fate, O people of Chemosh: his sons have gone in flight, and his daughters are prisoners, in the hands of Sihon, king of the Amorites.

我们射了他们。希实本直到底本尽皆毁灭。我们使地变成荒场，直到挪法。这挪法直延到米底巴。
They are wounded with our arrows; destruction has come on Heshbon, even to Dibon; and we have made the land waste as far as Nophah, stretching out to Medeba.

这样，以色列人就住在亚摩利人之地。
So Israel put up their tents in the land of the Amorites.

摩西打发人去窥探雅谢，以色列人就占了雅谢的镇市，赶出那里的亚摩利人。
And Moses sent men secretly to Jazer, and they took its towns, driving out the Amorites who were living there.

以色列人转回，向巴珊去。巴珊王噩和他的众民都出来，在以得来与他们交战。
Then turning they went up by the way of Bashan; and Og, king of Bashan, went out against them with all his people, to the fight at Edrei.

耶和华对摩西说，不要怕他。因我已将他和他的众民，并他的地，都交在你手中。你要待他像从前待住希实本的亚摩利王西宏一般。
And the Lord said to Moses, Have no fear of him: for I have given him up into your hands, with all his people and his land; do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the Amorites, at Heshbon.

于是他们杀了他和他的众子，并他的众民，没有留下一个，就得了他的地。
So they overcame him and his sons and his people, driving them all out: and they took his land for their heritage.

以色列人起行，在摩押平原，约旦河东，对着耶利哥安营。
Then the children of Israel, journeying on, put up their tents in the lowlands of Moab, on the other side of Jordan at Jericho.

以色列人向亚摩利人所行的一切事，西拨的儿子巴勒都看见了。
Now Balak, the son of Zippor, saw what Israel had done to the Amorites.

摩押人因以色列民甚多，就大大惧怕，心内忧急，
And in Moab there was great fear of the people, because their numbers were so great: and the feeling of Moab was bitter against the children of Israel.

对米甸的长老说，现在这众人要把我们四围所有的一概舔尽，就如牛舔尽田间的草一般。那时西拨的儿子巴勒作摩押王。
Then Moab said to the responsible men of Midian, It is clear that this great people will be the destruction of everything round us, making a meal of us as the ox does of the grass of the field. At that time Balak, the son of Zippor, was king of Moab.

他差遣使者往大河边的毗夺去，到比珥的儿子巴兰本乡那里，召巴兰来，说，有一宗民从埃及出来，遮满地面，与我对居。
So he sent men to Balaam, son of Beor, at Pethor by the River in the land of the children of his people, saying to him, See, a people has come out of Egypt, covering all the face of the earth, and they have put up their tents opposite to me:

这民比我强盛，现在求你来为我咒诅他们，或者我能得胜，攻打他们，赶出此地。因为我知道，你为谁祝福，谁就得福。你咒诅谁，谁就受咒诅。
Come now, in answer to my prayer, and put a curse on this people, for they are greater than I: and then I may be strong enough to overcome them and send them out of the land: for it is clear that good comes to him who has your blessing, but he on whom you put your curse is cursed.

摩押的长老和米甸的长老手里拿着卦金，到了巴兰那里，将巴勒的话都告诉了他。
So the responsible men of Moab and Midian went away, taking in their hands rewards for the prophet; and they came to Balaam and said to him what Balak had given them orders to say.

巴兰说，你们今夜在这里住宿，我必照耶和华所晓谕我的回报你们。摩押的使臣就在巴兰那里住下了。
And he said to them, Take your rest here tonight, and I will give you an answer after hearing what the Lord says; so the chiefs of Moab kept there with Balaam that night.

神临到巴兰那里，说，在你这里的人都是谁？
And God came to Balaam and said, Who are these men with you?

巴兰回答说，是摩押王西拨的儿子巴勒打发人到我这里来，说，
And Balaam said to God, Balak, the son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent them to me, saying,

从埃及出来的民遮满地面，你来为我咒诅他们，或者我能与他们争战，把他们赶出去。
See, the people who have come out of Egypt are covering all the earth: now, put a curse on this people for me, so that I may be able to make war on them, driving them out of the land.

神对巴兰说，你不可同他们去，也不可咒诅那民，因为那民是蒙福的。
And God said to Balaam, You are not to go with them, or put a curse on this people, for they have my blessing.

巴兰早晨起来，对巴勒的使臣说，你们回本地去吧，因为耶和华不容我和你们同去。
In the morning Balaam got up and said to the chiefs of Balak, Go back to your land, for the Lord will not let me go with you.

摩押的使臣就起来，回巴勒那里去，说，巴兰不肯和我们同来。
So the chiefs of Moab went back to Balak and said, Balaam will not come with us.

巴勒又差遣使臣，比先前的又多又尊贵。
So Balak sent more chiefs, greater in number and of higher position than the others.

他们到了巴兰那里，对他说，西拨的儿子巴勒这样说，求你不容什么事拦阻你不到我这里来，
And they came to Balaam and said, Balak, son of Zippor, says, Let nothing keep you from coming to me:

因为我必使你得极大的尊荣。你向我要什么，我就给你什么。只求你来为我咒诅这民。
For I will give you a place of very great honour, and whatever you say to me I will do; so come, in answer to my prayer, and put a curse on this people.

巴兰回答巴勒的臣仆说，巴勒就是将他满屋的金银给我，我行大事小事也不得越过耶和华我神的命。
But Balaam, in answer; said to the servants of Balak, Even if Balak gave me his house full of silver and gold, it would not be possible for me to do anything more or less than the orders of the Lord my God.

现在我请你们今夜在这里住宿，等我得知耶和华还要对我说什么。
So take your rest here this night, till I have knowledge what more the Lord has to say to me.

当夜，神临到巴兰那里，说，这些人若来召你，你就起来同他们去，你只要遵行我对你所说的话。
And that night God came to Balaam and said to him, If these men have come for you, go with them: but do only what I say to you.

巴兰早晨起来，备上驴，和摩押的使臣一同去了。
So in the morning Balaam got up and, making his ass ready, went with the chiefs of Moab.

神因他去就发了怒。耶和华的使者站在路上敌挡他。他骑着驴，有两个仆人跟随他。
But God was moved to wrath because he went: and the angel of the Lord took up a position in the road to keep him from his purpose. Now he was seated on his ass, and his two servants were with him.

驴看见耶和华的使者站在路上，手里有拔出来的刀，就从路上跨进田间，巴兰便打驴，要叫它回转上路。
And the ass saw the angel of the Lord waiting in the road with his sword in his hand; and turning from the road, the ass went into the field; and Balaam gave the ass blows, to get her back on to the road.

耶和华的使者就站在葡萄园的窄路上。这边有墙，那边也有墙。
Then the angel of the Lord took up his position in a narrow road through the vine-gardens, with a wall on this side and on that.

驴看见耶和华的使者，就贴靠墙，将巴兰的脚挤伤了。巴兰又打驴。
And the ass saw the angel of the Lord, and went near the wall, crushing Balaam's foot against the wall; and he gave her more blows.

耶和华的使者又往前去，站在狭窄之处，左右都没有转折的地方。
Then the angel of the Lord went further, stopping in a narrow place where there was no room for turning to the right or to the left.

驴看见耶和华的使者，就卧在巴兰底下，巴兰发怒，用杖打驴。
And the ass saw the angel of the Lord and went down on the earth under Balaam; and full of wrath, Balaam gave her hard blows with his stick.

耶和华叫驴开口，对巴兰说，我向你行了什么，你竟打我这三次呢？
Then the Lord gave the ass the power of talking, and opening her mouth she said to Balaam, What have I done to you that you have given me blows these three times?

巴兰对驴说，因为你戏弄我，我恨不能手中有刀，把你杀了。
And Balaam said to the ass, You have made me seem foolish: if only I had a sword in my hand I would put you to death.

驴对巴兰说，我不是你从小时直到今日所骑的驴吗？我素常向你这样行过吗？巴兰说，没有。
And the ass said to Balaam, Am I not your ass upon which you have gone all your life till this day? and have I ever done this to you before? And he said, No.

当时，耶和华使巴兰的眼目明亮，他就看见耶和华的使者站在路上，手里有拔出来的刀，巴兰便低头俯伏在地。
Then the Lord made Balaam's eyes open, and he saw the angel of the Lord in the way with his sword in his hand: and he went down on his face to the earth.

耶和华的使者对他说，你为何这三次打你的驴呢？我出来敌挡你，因你所行的，在我面前偏僻。
And the angel of the Lord said to him, Why have you given your ass blows these three times? See, I have come out against you to keep you back, because your purpose is not pleasing to me.

驴看见我就三次从我面前偏过去。驴若没有偏过去，我早把你杀了，留它存活。
And the ass saw me, turning to one side from me three times: if she had not gone to one side, I would certainly have put you to death and kept her safe.

巴兰对耶和华的使者说，我有罪了。我不知道你站在路上阻挡我。你若不喜欢我去，我就转回。
And Balaam said to the angel of the Lord, I have done wrong, for I did not see that you were in the way against me: but now, if it is evil in your eyes, I will go back again.

耶和华的使者对巴兰说，你同这些人去吧。你只要说我对你说的话。于是巴兰同着巴勒的使臣去了。
And the angel of the Lord said to Balaam, Go with the men; but say only what I give you to say. Then Balaam went on with the chiefs of Balak.

巴勒听见巴兰来了，就往摩押京城去迎接他。这城是在边界上，在亚嫩河旁。
Now Balak, hearing that Balaam had come, went to the chief town of Moab, on the edge of the Arnon, in the farthest part of the land, for the purpose of meeting him.

巴勒对巴兰说，我不是急急地打发人到你那里去召你吗？你为何不到我这里来呢？我岂不能使你得尊荣吗？
And Balak said to Balaam, Did I not send to you, requesting you with all my heart to come to me? why did you not come? am I not able to give you a place of honour?

巴兰说，我已经到你这里来了。现在我岂能擅自说什么呢？神将什么话传给我，我就说什么。
Then Balaam said to Balak, Now I have come to you; but have I power to say anything? Only what God puts into my mouth may I say.

巴兰和巴勒同行，来到基列胡琐。
And Balaam went with Balak to Kiriath-huzoth.

巴勒宰了（原文作献）牛羊，送给巴兰和陪伴的使臣。
And Balak made offerings of oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam and the chiefs who were with him.

到了早晨，巴勒领巴兰到巴力的高处。巴兰从那里观看以色列营的边界。
And in the morning Balak took Balaam up to the high places of Baal, and from there he was able to see the outer limits of the people.

巴兰对巴勒说，你在这里给我筑七座坛，为我预备七只公牛，七只公羊。
And Balaam said to Balak, Make me here seven altars and get ready seven oxen and seven male sheep.

巴勒照巴兰的话行了。巴勒和巴兰在每座坛上献一只公牛，一只公羊。
And Balak did as Balaam had said; and Balak and Balaam made an offering on every altar of an ox and a male sheep.

巴兰对巴勒说，你站在你的燔祭旁边，我且往前去，或者耶和华来迎见我。他指示我什么，我必告诉你。于是巴兰上一净光的高处。
Then Balaam said to Balak, Take your place by your burned offering, and I will go and see if the Lord comes to me: and I will give you word of whatever he says to me. And he went to an open place on a hill.

神迎见巴兰。巴兰说，我预备了七座坛，在每座坛上献了一只公牛，一只公羊。
And God came to Balaam, and Balaam said to him, I have made ready seven altars, offering an ox and a male sheep on every altar.

耶和华将话传给巴兰，又说，你回到巴勒那里，要如此如此说。
And the Lord put words in Balaam's mouth, and said, Go back to Balak, and this is what you are to say.

他就回到巴勒那里，见他同摩押的使臣都站在燔祭旁边。
So he went back to him where he was waiting by his burned offering with all the chiefs of Moab.

巴兰便题起诗歌说，巴勒引我出亚兰，摩押王引我出东山，说，来阿，为我咒诅雅各。来阿，怒骂以色列。
And in the words which the Lord had given him he said, From Aram Balak has sent for me, the king of Moab from the mountains of the East: come, put curses on Jacob for me and be angry with Israel.

神没有咒诅的，我焉能咒诅，耶和华没有怒骂的，我焉能怒骂，
How may I put curses on him who is not cursed by God? how may I be angry with him with whom the Lord is not angry?

我从高峰看他，从小山望他。这是独居的民，不列在万民中。
From the top of the rocks I see him, looking down on him from the hills: it is a people made separate, not to be numbered among the nations.

谁能数点雅各的尘土，谁能计算以色列的四分之一，我愿如义人之死而死。我愿如义人之终而终。
Who is able to take the measure of the dust of Jacob or the number of the thousands of Israel? May my death be the death of the upright and my last end like his!

巴勒对巴兰说，你向我作的是什么事呢？我领你来咒诅我的仇敌，不料，你竟为他们祝福。
Then Balak said to Balaam, What have you done to me? I sent for you so that my haters might be cursed, and see, you have given them a blessing.

他回答说，耶和华传给我的话，我能不谨慎传说吗？
And in answer he said, Am I not ordered to say only what the Lord puts into my mouth?

巴勒说，求你同我往别处去，在那里可以看见他们。你不能全看见，只能看见他们边界上的人。在那里要为我咒诅他们。
And Balak said to him, Come with me now into another place from which you will not be able to see them all, but only the outskirts of them; and you will send curses on them from there.

于是领巴兰到了琐腓田，上了毗斯迦山顶，筑了七座坛。每座坛上献一只公牛，一只公羊。
So he took him into the country of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and there they made seven altars, offering an ox and a male sheep on every altar.

巴兰对巴勒说，你站在这燔祭旁边，等我往那边去迎见耶和华。
Then he said to Balak, Take your place here by your burned offering, while I go over there to the Lord.

耶和华临到巴兰那里，将话传给他。又说，你回到巴勒那里，要如此如此说。
And the Lord came to Balaam, and put words in his mouth, and said, Go back to Balak, and this is what you are to say.

他就回到巴勒那里，见他站在燔祭旁边。摩押的使臣也和他在一处。巴勒问他说，耶和华说了什么话呢？
So he came to him where he was waiting by his burned offering with the chiefs of Moab by his side. And Balak said to him, What has the Lord said?

巴兰就题诗歌说，巴勒，你起来听。西拨的儿子，你听我言。
And in the words which the Lord had given him he said, Up! Balak, and give ear; give attention to me, O son of Zippor:

神非人，必不致说谎，也非人子，必不致后悔。他说话岂不照着行呢？他发言岂不要成就呢？
God is not a man, to say what is false; or the son of man, that his purpose may be changed: what he has said, will he not do? and will he not give effect to the words of his mouth?

我奉命祝福。神也曾赐福，此事我不能翻转。
See, I have had orders to give blessing: and he has given a blessing which I have no power to take away.

他未见雅各中有罪孽，也未见以色列中有奸恶。耶和华他的神和他同在。有欢呼王的声音在他们中间。
He has seen no evil in Jacob or wrongdoing in Israel: the Lord his God is with him, and the glad cry of a king is among them.

神领他们出埃及。他们似乎有野牛之力。
It is God who has taken them out of Egypt; his horns are like those of the mountain ox.

断没有法术可以害雅各，也没有占卜可以害以色列。现在必有人论及雅各，就是论及以色列说，神为他行了何等的大事。
No evil power has effect against Jacob, no secret arts against Israel; at the right time it will be said of Jacob and of Israel, See what God has done!

这民起来，仿佛母狮，挺身，好像公狮，未曾吃野食，未曾喝被伤者之血，决不躺卧。
See, Israel comes up like a she-lion, lifting himself up like a lion: he will take no rest till he has made a meal of those he has overcome, drinking the blood of those he has put to death.

巴勒对巴兰说，你一点不要咒诅他们，也不要为他们祝福。
Then Balak said to Balaam, If you will not put a curse on them, at all events do not give them a blessing.

巴兰回答巴勒说，我岂不是告诉你说凡耶和华所说的，我必须遵行吗？
But Balaam in answer said to Balak, Did I not say to you, I may only do what the Lord says?

巴勒对巴兰说，来吧，我领你往别处去，或者神喜欢你在那里为我咒诅他们。
Then Balak said to Balaam, Come now, I will take you to another place; it may be that God will let you put a curse on them from there.

巴勒就领巴兰到那下望旷野的毗珥山顶上。
So Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, looking down over the waste land.

巴兰对巴勒说，你在这里为我筑七座坛，又在这里为我预备七只公牛，七只公羊。
And Balaam said to Balak, Make me seven altars here and get seven oxen and seven male sheep ready for me.

巴勒就照巴兰的话行，在每座坛上献一只公牛，一只公羊。
And Balak did as Balaam said, offering an ox and a male sheep on every altar.

巴兰见耶和华喜欢赐福与以色列，就不像前两次去求法术，却面向旷野。
Now when Balaam saw that it was the Lord's pleasure to give his blessing to Israel, he did not, as at other times, make use of secret arts, but turning his face to the waste land,

巴兰举目，看见以色列人照着支派居住。神的灵就临到他身上，
And lifting up his eyes, he saw Israel there, with their tents in the order of their tribes: and the spirit of God came on him.

他便题起诗歌说，比珥的儿子巴兰说，眼目闭住（闭住或作睁开）的人说，
And moved by the spirit, he said, These are the words of Balaam, son of Beor, the words of the man whose eyes are open:

得听神的言语，得见全能者的异象，眼目睁开而仆倒的人说，
He says, whose ears are open to the words of God, who has seen the vision of the Ruler of all, falling down, but having his eyes open:

雅各阿，你的帐棚何等华美。以色列阿，你的帐幕何其华丽。
How fair are your tents, O Jacob, your houses, O Israel!

如接连的山谷，如河旁的园子，如耶和华所栽的沉香树，如水边的香柏木。
They are stretched out like valleys, like gardens by the riverside, like flowering trees planted by the Lord, like cedar-trees by the waters.

水要从他的桶里流出。种子要撒在多水之处。他的王必超过亚甲。他的国必要振兴。
Peoples will be in fear before his strength, his arm will be on great nations: his king will be higher than Agag, and his kingdom made great in honour.

神领他出埃及。他似乎有野牛之力。他要吞吃敌国，折断他们的骨头，用箭射透他们。
It is God who has taken him out of Egypt; his horns are like those of the mountain ox; the nations warring against him will be his food, their bones will be broken, they will be wounded with his arrows.

他蹲如公狮，卧如母狮，谁敢惹他，凡给你祝福的，愿他蒙福。凡咒诅你的，愿他受咒诅。
He took his sleep stretched out like a lion, and like a she-lion: by whom will his rest be broken? May a blessing be on everyone who gives you blessing, and a curse on everyone by whom you are cursed.

巴勒向巴兰生气，就拍起手来，对巴兰说，我召你来为我咒诅仇敌，不料，你这三次竟为他们祝福。
Then Balak was full of wrath against Balaam, and angrily waving his hands he said to Balaam, I sent for you so that those who are against me might be cursed, but now, see, three times you have given them a blessing.

如今你快回本地去吧。我想使你得大尊荣，耶和华却阻止你不得尊荣。
Go back quickly to the place you came from: it was my purpose to give you a place of honour, but now the Lord has kept you back from honour.

巴兰对巴勒说，我岂不是对你所差遣到我那里的使者说，
Then Balaam said to Balak, Did I not say to the men you sent to me,

巴勒就是将他满屋的金银给我，我也不得越过耶和华的命，凭自己的心意行好行歹。耶和华说什么，我就要说什么，
Even if Balak gave me his house full of silver and gold, it would not be possible for me to go outside the orders of the Lord, doing good or evil at the impulse of my mind; whatever the Lord says I will say?

现在我要回本族去。你来，我告诉你这民日后要怎样待你的民。
So now I will go back to my people: but first let me make clear to you what this people will do to your people in days to come.

他就题起诗歌说，比珥的儿子巴兰说，眼目闭住（闭住或作睁开）的人说，
Then he went on with his story and said, These are the words of Balaam, the son of Beor, the words of him whose eyes are open:

得听神的言语，明白至高者的意旨，看见全能者的异象，眼目睁开而仆倒的人说，
He says, whose ear is open to the words of God, who has knowledge of the Most High, who has seen the vision of the Ruler of all, falling down and having his eyes open:

我看他却不在现时。我望他却不在近日。有星要出于雅各，有杖要兴于以色列，必打破摩押的四角，毁坏扰乱之子。
I see him, but not now: looking on him, but not near: a star will come out of Jacob, and a rod of authority out of Israel, sending destruction to the farthest limits of Moab and on the head of all the sons of Sheth.

他必得以东为基业，又得仇敌之地西珥为产业。以色列必行事勇敢。
Edom will be his heritage, and he will put an end to the last of the people of Seir.

有一位出于雅各的，必掌大权。他要除灭城中的余民。
And Israel will go on in strength, and Jacob will have rule over his haters.

巴兰观看亚玛力，就题起诗歌说，亚玛力原为诸国之首，但他终必沉沦。
Then, turning his eyes to Amalek, he went on with his story and said, Amalek was the first of the nations, but his part will be destruction for ever.

巴兰观看基尼人，就题起诗歌说，你的住处本是坚固。你的窝巢作在岩穴中。
And looking on the Kenites he went on with his story and said, Strong is your living-place, and your secret place is safe in the rock.

然而基尼必至衰微，直到亚述把你掳去。
But still the Kenites will be wasted, till Asshur takes you away prisoner.

巴兰又题起诗歌说，哀哉。神行这事，谁能得活，
Then he went on with his story and said, But who may keep his life when God does this?

必有人乘船从基提界而来，苦害亚述，苦害希伯。他也必至沉沦。
But ships will come from the direction of Kittim, troubling Asshur and troubling Eber, and like the others their fate will be destruction.

于是巴兰起来，回他本地去。巴勒也回去了。
Then Balaam got up and went back to his place: and Balak went away.

以色列人住在什亭，百姓与摩押女子行起淫乱。
Now when Israel was living in Shittim the people became false to the Lord, doing evil with the daughters of Moab:

因为这女子叫百姓来，一同给她们的神献祭，百姓就吃她们的祭物，跪拜她们的神。
For they sent for the people to be present at the offerings made to their gods; and the people took part in their feasts and gave honour to their gods.

以色列人与巴力毗珥连合，耶和华的怒气就向以色列人发作。
So Israel had relations with the women of Moab in honour of the Baal of Peor: and the Lord was moved to wrath against Israel.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，将百姓中所有的族长在我面前对着日头悬挂，使我向以色列人所发的怒气可以消了。
Then the Lord said to Moses, Take all the chiefs of the people, hanging them up in the sun before the Lord, so that the wrath of the Lord may be turned from Israel.

于是摩西吩咐以色列的审判官说，凡属你们的人，有与巴力毗珥连合的，你们各人要把他们杀了。
So Moses said to the judges of Israel, Let everyone put to death those of his men who have had relations with the women of Moab in honour of the Baal of Peor.

摩西和以色列全会众正在会幕门前哭泣的时候，谁知，有以色列中的一个人，当他们眼前，带着一个米甸女人到他弟兄那里去。
Then one of the children of Israel came to his brothers, taking with him a woman of Midian, before the eyes of Moses and all the meeting of the people, while they were weeping at the door of the Tent of meeting.

祭司亚伦的孙子，以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈看见了，就从会中起来，手里拿着枪，
And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, seeing it, got up from among the people and took a spear in his hand,

跟随那以色列人进亭子里去，便将以色列人和那女人由腹中刺透。这样，在以色列人中瘟疫就止息了。
And went after the man of Israel into the tent, driving the spear through the two of them, through the man of Israel and through the stomach of the woman. So the disease was stopped among the children of Israel.

那时遭瘟疫死的，有二万四千人。
But twenty-four thousand of them had come to their death by the disease.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

祭司亚伦的孙子，以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈，使我向以色列人所发的怒消了。因他在他们中间，以我的忌邪为心，使我不在忌邪中把他们除灭。
Through Phinehas, and because of his passion for my honour, my wrath has been turned away from the children of Israel, so that I have not sent destruction on them all in my wrath.

因此，你要说，我将我平安的约赐给他。
So say to them that I will make with him an agreement of peace:

这约要给他和他的后裔，作为永远当祭司职任的约。因他为神，有忌邪的心，为以色列人赎罪。
And by this agreement, he and his sons after him have the right to be priests for ever; because, by his care for the honour of his God, he took away the sin of the children of Israel.

那与米甸女人一同被杀的以色列人，名叫心利，是撒路的儿子，是西缅一个宗族的首领。
Now the man of Israel who was put to death with the woman of Midian was Zimri, the son of Salu, a chief of one of the families of the Simeonites.

那被杀的米甸女人，名叫哥斯比，是苏珥的女儿。这苏珥是米甸一个宗族的首领。
And the woman of Midian who was put to death was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was the head of a family in Midian.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
Then the Lord said to Moses,

你要扰害米甸人，击杀他们。
Take up arms against the Midianites and overcome them;

因为他们用诡计扰害你们，在毗珥的事上和他们的姊妹，米甸首领的女儿哥斯比的事上，用这诡计诱惑了你们。这哥斯比，当瘟疫流行的日子，因毗珥的事被杀了。
For they are a danger to you with their false ways, causing sin to come on you in the question of Peor, and because of Cozbi, their sister, the daughter of the chief of Midian, who was put to death at the time of the disease which came on you because of Peor.

瘟疫之后，耶和华晓谕摩西和祭司亚伦的儿子以利亚撒说，
Now after the disease was over, the Lord said to Moses and Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,

你们要将以色列全会众，按他们的宗族，凡以色列中从二十岁以外，能出去打仗的，计算总数。
Let all the children of Israel be numbered, by the names of their fathers' families, all those of twenty years old and over who are able to go to war in Israel.

摩西和祭司以利亚撒在摩押平原与耶利哥相对的约旦河边向以色列人说，
So Moses and Eleazar the priest gave them the order in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho, saying,

将你们中间从二十岁以外的计算总数。是照耶和华吩咐出埃及地的摩西和以色列人的话。
Let all the people of twenty years old and over be numbered, as the Lord has given orders to Moses and the children of Israel who have come out of Egypt.

以色列的长子是流便。流便的众子，属哈诺的，有哈诺族。属法路的，有法路族。
Reuben, the first son of Israel: the sons of Reuben by their families: of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:

属希斯伦的，有希斯伦族。属迦米的，有迦米族。
Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.

这就是流便的各族。其中被数的，共有四万三千七百三十名。
These are the families of the Reubenites: their number was forty-three thousand, seven hundred and thirty.

法路的儿子是以利押。
And the sons of Pallu, Eliab

以利押的众子是尼母利，大坍，亚比兰。这大坍，亚比兰，就是从会中选召的，与可拉一党同向耶和华争闹的时候也向摩西，亚伦争闹。
And the sons of Eliab: Nemuel and Dathan and Abiram. These are the same Dathan and Abiram who had a place in the meeting of the people, who together with Korah made an outcry against Moses and Aaron and against the Lord:

地便开口吞了他们，和可拉，可拉的党类一同死亡。那时火烧灭了二百五十个人。他们就作了警戒。
And they went down into the open mouth of the earth, together with Korah, when death overtook him and all his band; at the time when two hundred and fifty men were burned in the fire, and they became a sign.

然而可拉的众子没有死亡。
But death did not overtake the sons of Korah.

按着家族，西缅的众子，属尼母利的，有尼母利族。属雅悯的，有雅悯族。属雅斤的，有雅斤族。
The sons of Simeon by their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:

属谢拉的，有谢拉族。属扫罗的，有扫罗族。
Of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.

这就是西缅的各族，共有二万二千二百名。
These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty-two thousand, two hundred.

按着家族，迦得的众子，属洗分的，有洗分族。属哈基的，有哈基族。属书尼的，有书尼族。
The sons of Gad by their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:

属阿斯尼的，有阿斯尼族。属以利的，有以利族。
Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:

属亚律的，有亚律族。属亚列利的，有亚列利族。
Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.

这就是迦得子孙的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有四万零五百名。
These are the families of the sons of Gad as they were numbered, forty thousand, five hundred.

犹大的儿子是珥和俄南。这珥和俄南死在迦南地。
The sons of Judah, Er and Onan: and Er and Onan had come to their death in the land of Canaan.

按着家族，犹大其余的众子，属示拉的，有示拉族。属法勒斯的，有法勒斯族。属谢拉的有谢拉族。
And the sons of Judah by their families were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelahites: of Perez, the family of the Perezites: of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.

法勒斯的儿子，属希斯伦的，有希斯伦族。属哈母勒的，有哈母勒族。
And the sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

这就是犹大的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有七万六千五百名。
These are the families of Judah as they were numbered, seventy-six thousand, five hundred.

按着家族，以萨迦的众子，属陀拉的，有陀拉族。属普瓦的，有普瓦族。
The sons of Issachar by their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Puvah, the family of the Punites:

属雅述的，有雅述族。属伸仑的，有伸仑族。
Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.

这就是以萨迦的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有六万四千三百名。
These are the families of Issachar, as they were numbered, sixty-four thousand, three hundred.

按着家族，西布伦的众子，属西烈的，有西烈族。属以伦的，有以伦族。属雅利的，有雅利族。
The sons of Zebulun by their families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

这就是西布伦的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有六万零五百名。
These are the families of the Zebulunites as they were numbered, sixty thousand, five hundred.

按着家族，约瑟的儿子有玛拿西，以法莲。
The sons of Joseph by their families: Manasseh and Ephraim.

玛拿西的众子，属玛吉的，有玛吉族。玛吉生基列。属基列的，有基列族。
The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir was the father of Gilead: of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.

基列的众子，属伊以谢的，有伊以谢族。属希勒的，有希勒族。
These are the sons of Gilead: of Iezer, the family of the Iezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:

属亚斯烈的，有亚斯烈族。属示剑的，有示剑族。
And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:

属示米大的，有示米大族。属希弗的，有希弗族。
And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

希弗的儿子，西罗非哈没儿子，只有女儿。西罗非哈女儿的名字就是玛拉，挪阿，曷拉，密迦，得撒。
And Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, had no sons, but only daughters, and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

这就是玛拿西的各族。他们中间被数的，共有五万二千七百名。
These are the families of Manasseh; and those who were numbered of them were fifty-two thousand, seven hundred.

按着家族，以法莲的众子，属书提拉的，有书提拉族。属比结的，有比结族。属他罕的，有他罕族。
These are the sons of Ephraim by their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites: of Becher, the family of the Becherites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

书提拉的众子，属以兰的，有以兰族。
And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites:

这就是以法莲子孙的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有三万二千五百名。按着家族，这都是约瑟的子孙。
These are the families of Ephraim as they were numbered, thirty-two thousand, five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph by their families.

按着家族，便雅悯的众子，属比拉的，有比拉族。属亚实别的，有亚实别族。属亚希兰的，有亚希兰族。
The sons of Benjamin by their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:

属书反的，有书反族。属户反的，有户反族。
Of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites: and of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

比拉的众子是亚勒，乃幔。属亚勒的，有亚勒族。属乃幔的，有乃幔族。
And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.

按着家族，这就是便雅悯的子孙，其中被数的，共有四万五千六百名。
These are the sons of Benjamin by their families: and those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand, six hundred.

按着家族，但的众子，属书含的，有书含族。按着家族，这就是但的各族。
These are the sons of Dan by their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan by their families.

照其中被数的，书含所有的各族，共有六万四千四百名。
All the families of the Shuhamites, as they were numbered, were sixty-four thousand, four hundred.

按着家族，亚设的众子，属音拿的，有音拿族。属亦施韦的，有亦施韦族。属比利亚的，有比利亚族。
The sons of Asher by their families: of Imnah, the family of the Imnites: of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.

比利亚的众子，属希别的，有希别族。属玛结的，有玛结族。
Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites:

亚设的女儿名叫西拉。
And the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah.

这就是亚设子孙的各族，照他们中间被数的，共有五万三千四百名。
These are the families of the sons of Asher as they were numbered, fifty-three thousand, four hundred.

按着家族，拿弗他利的众子，属雅薛的，有雅薛族。属沽尼的，有沽尼族。
The sons of Naphtali by their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:

属耶色的，有耶色族。属示冷的，有示冷族。
Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.

按着家族，这就是拿弗他利的各族。他们中间被数的，共有四万五千四百名。
These are the families of Naphtali by their families: and those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand, four hundred.

以色列人中被数的，共有六十万零一千七百三十名。
Those who were numbered of the children of Israel were six hundred and one thousand, seven hundred and thirty.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要按着人名的数目将地分给这些人为业。
Let there be a division of the land among these, for their heritage, in relation to the number of names.

人多的，你要把产业多分给他们。人少的，你要把产业少分给他们。要照被数的人数，把产业分给各人。
To those families who are more in number, give a greater heritage; to those who are less in number, a smaller part: to every one let the heritage be given in relation to the number in his family.

虽是这样，还要拈阄分地。他们要按着祖宗各支派的名字承受为业。
But let the distribution of the land be made by the decision of the Lord: by the names of the tribes of their fathers let their heritage be given them.

要按着所拈的阄，看人数多，人数少，把产业分给他们。
As it is ordered by the decision of the Lord, let distribution be made between those who are more in number and those who are less.

利未人，按着他们的各族被数的，属革顺的，有革顺族。属哥辖的，有哥辖族。属米拉利的，有米拉利族。
These were those of the Levites who were numbered by their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.

利未的各族有立尼族，希伯伦族，玛利族，母示族，可拉族。哥辖生暗兰。
These are the families of Levi: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And Kohath was the father of Amram.

暗兰的妻名叫约基别，是利未女子，生在埃及。她给暗兰生了亚伦，摩西，并他们的姐姐米利暗。
Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom he had in Egypt: by Amram she had Moses and Aaron and their sister Miriam.

亚伦生拿答，亚比户，以利亚撒，以他玛。
Aaron's sons were Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

拿答，亚比户在耶和华面前献凡火的时候就死了。
Death overtook Nadab and Abihu when they made an offering of strange fire before the Lord.

利未人中，凡一个月以外，被数的男丁，共有二万三千。他们本来没有数在以色列人中。因为在以色列人中，没有分给他们产业。
Of these, twenty-three thousand males, from one month old and over, were numbered: they were not numbered with the rest of the children of Israel, for they had no heritage among the children of Israel.

这些就是被摩西和祭司以利亚撒所数的。他们在摩押平原与耶利哥相对的约旦河边数点以色列人。
All these were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest when the children of Israel were numbered in the lowlands of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

但被数的人中，没有一个是摩西和祭司亚伦从前在西乃的旷野所数的以色列人，
But among all these was not one of those numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest when the children of Israel were numbered in the waste land of Sinai.

因为耶和华论到他们说，他们必要死在旷野。所以，除了耶孚尼的儿子迦勒和嫩的儿子约书亚以外，连一个人也没有存留。
For the Lord had said of them, Death will certainly overtake them in the waste land. And of them all, only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua, the son of Nun, were still living.

属约瑟的儿子玛拿西的各族，有玛拿西的玄孙，玛吉的曾孙，基列的孙子，希弗的儿子西罗非哈的女儿，名叫玛拉，挪阿，曷拉，密迦，得撒。她们前来，
Then the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, came forward: their names are Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.

站在会幕门口，在摩西和祭司以利亚撒，并众首领与全会众面前，说，
They came before Moses and Eleazar the priest and the chiefs and all the people at the door of the Tent of meeting, and said,

我们的父亲死在旷野。他不与可拉同党聚集攻击耶和华，是在自己罪中死的。他也没有儿子。
Death overtook our father in the waste land; he was not among those who were banded together with Korah against the Lord; but death came to him in his sin; and he had no sons.

为什么因我们的父亲没有儿子就把他的名从他族中除掉呢？求你们在我们父亲的弟兄中分给我们产业。
Why is the name of our father to be taken away from among his family, because he had no son? Give us a heritage among our father's brothers.

于是，摩西将她们的案件呈到耶和华面前。
So Moses put their cause before the Lord.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

西罗非哈的女儿说得有理。你定要在她们父亲的弟兄中，把地分给她们为业。要将她们父亲的产业归给她们。
What the daughters of Zelophehad say is right: certainly you are to give them a heritage among their father's brothers: and let the property which would have been their father's go to them.

你也要晓谕以色列人说，人若死了没有儿子，就要把他的产业归给他的女儿。
And say to the children of Israel, If a man has no son at the time of his death, let his heritage go to his daughter.

他若没有女儿，就要把他的产业给他的弟兄。
And if he has no daughter, then give his heritage to his brothers.

他若没有弟兄，就要把他的产业给他父亲的弟兄。
And if he has no brothers, then give his heritage to his father's brothers.

他父亲若没有弟兄，就要把他的产业给他族中最近的亲属，他便要得为业。这要作以色列人的律例典章，是照耶和华吩咐摩西的。
And if his father has no brothers, then give it to his nearest relation in the family, as his heritage: this is to be a decision made by law for the children of Israel, as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

耶和华对摩西说，你上这亚巴琳山，观看我所赐给以色列人的地。
And the Lord said to Moses, Go up into this mountain of Abarim so that you may see the land which I have given to the children of Israel.

看了以后，你也必归到你列祖（原文作本民）那里，象你哥哥亚伦一样。
And when you have seen it, you will be put to rest with your people, as your brother Aaron was:

因为你们在寻的旷野，当会众争闹的时候，违背了我的命，没有在涌水之地，会众眼前尊我为圣。（这水就是寻的旷野加低斯米利巴水。）
Because in the waste land of Zin, when the people were angry, you and he went against my word and did not keep my name holy before their eyes, at the waters. (These are the waters of Meribah in Kadesh in the waste land of Zin.)

摩西对耶和华说，
Then Moses said to the Lord,

愿耶和华万人之灵的神，立一个人治理会众，
Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, put a man at the head of this people,

可以在他们面前出入，也可以引导他们，免得耶和华的会众如同没有牧人的羊群一般。
To go out and come in before them and be their guide; so that the people of the Lord may not be like sheep without a keeper.

耶和华对摩西说，嫩的儿子约书亚，是心中有圣灵的，你将他领来按手在他头上，
And the Lord said to Moses, Take Joshua, the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and put your hand on him;

使他站在祭司以利亚撒和全会众面前，嘱咐他，
And take him before Eleazar the priest and all the meeting of the people, and give him his orders before their eyes.

又将你的尊荣给他几分，使以色列全会众都听从他。
And put your honour on him, so that all the children of Israel may be under his authority.

他要站在祭司以利亚撒面前。以利亚撒要凭乌陵的判断，在耶和华面前为他求问。他和以色列全会众都要遵以利亚撒的命出入。
He will take his place before Eleazar the priest, so that he may get directions from the Lord for him, with the Urim: at his word they will go out, and at his word they will come in, he and all the children of Israel.

于是摩西照耶和华所吩咐的将约书亚领来，使他站在祭司以利亚撒和全会众面前。
So Moses did as the Lord said: he took Joshua and put him before Eleazar the priest and the meeting of the people:

按手在他头上，嘱咐他，是照耶和华借摩西所说的话。
And he put his hands on him and gave him his orders, as the Lord had said by Moses.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你要吩咐以色列人说，献给我的供物，就是献给我作馨香火祭的食物，你们要按日期献给我。
Give orders to the children of Israel and say to them, Let it be your care to give me my offerings at their regular times, the food of the offerings made by fire to me for a sweet smell.

又要对他们说，你们要献给耶和华的火祭，就是没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔，每日两只，作为常献的燔祭。
Say to them, This is the offering made by fire which you are to give to the Lord; he-lambs of the first year without any mark, two every day as a regular burned offering.

早晨要献一只，黄昏的时候要献一只。
Let one be offered in the morning, and the other at evening;

又用细面伊法十分之一，并捣成的油一欣四分之一，调和作为素祭。
And the tenth part of an ephah of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with the fourth part of a hin of clear oil.

这是西乃山所命定为常献的燔祭，是献给耶和华为馨香的火祭。
It is a regular burned offering, as it was ordered in Mount Sinai, for a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

为这一只羊羔，要同献奠祭的酒一欣四分之一。在圣所中，你要将醇酒奉给耶和华为奠祭。
And for its drink offering take the fourth part of a hin for one lamb: in the holy place let the wine be drained out for a drink offering for the Lord.

晚上，你要献那一只羊羔，必照早晨的素祭和同献的奠祭献上，作为馨香的火祭，献给耶和华。
Let the other lamb be offered at evening; like the meal offering of the morning and its drink offering, let it be offered as an offering made by fire for a sweet smell to the Lord.

当安息日，要献两只没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔，并用调油的细面伊法十分之二为素祭，又将同献的奠祭献上。
And on the Sabbath day, two he-lambs of the first year, without any mark, and two tenth parts of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil, and its drink offering:

这是每安息日献的燔祭。那常献的燔祭和同献的奠祭在外。
This is the burned offering for every Sabbath day, in addition to the regular burned offering, and its drink offering.

每月朔，你们要将两只公牛犊，一只公绵羊，七只没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔，献给耶和华为燔祭。
And on the first day of every month you are to give a burned offering to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and seven he-lambs of the first year, without any mark;

每只公牛要用调油的细面伊法十分之三作为素祭。那只公羊也用调油的细面伊法十分之二作为素祭。
And three tenth parts of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil, for every ox; and two tenth parts of the best meal for a meal offering mixed with oil, for the one sheep;

每只羊羔要用调油的细面伊法十分之一作为素祭和馨香的燔祭，是献给耶和华的火祭。
And a separate tenth part of the best meal mixed with oil for a meal offering for every lamb; for a burned offering of a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

一只公牛要奠酒半欣，一只公羊要奠酒一欣三分之一，一只羊羔也奠酒一欣四分之一。这是每月的燔祭，一年之中要月月如此。
And their drink offerings are to be half a hin of wine for an ox, and the third part of a hin for a male sheep, and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb: this is the burned offering for every month through all the months of the year.

又要将一只公山羊为赎罪祭，献给耶和华。要献在常献的燔祭和同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering to the Lord; it is to be offered in addition to the regular burned offering and its drink offering.

正月十四日是耶和华的逾越节。
And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the Lord's Passover.

这月十五日是节期，要吃无酵饼七日。
On the fifteenth day of this month there is to be a feast; for seven days let your food be unleavened cakes.

第一日当有圣会。什么劳碌的工都不可作。
On the first day there is to be a holy meeting: you may do no sort of field-work:

当将公牛犊两只，公绵羊一只，一岁的公羊羔七只，都要没有残疾的，用火献给耶和华为燔祭。
And you are to give an offering made by fire, a burned offering to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and seven he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

同献的素祭用调油的细面。为一只公牛要献伊法十分之三。为一只公羊要献伊法十分之二。
And their meal offering, the best meal mixed with oil: let three tenth parts of an ephah be offered for an ox and two tenth parts for a male sheep;

为那七只羊羔，每只要献伊法十分之一。
And a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lambs;

并献一只公山羊作赎罪祭，为你们赎罪。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering to take away your sin.

你们献这些，要在早晨常献的燔祭以外。
These are to be offered in addition to the morning burned offering, which is a regular burned offering at all times.

一连七日，每日要照这例把馨香火祭的食物献给耶和华，是在常献的燔祭和同献的奠祭以外。
In this way, every day for seven days, give the food of the offering made by fire, a sweet smell to the Lord: it is to be offered in addition to the regular burned offering, and its drink offering.

第七日当有圣会，什么劳碌的工都不可作。
Then on the seventh day there will be a holy meeting; you may do no field-work.

七七节庄稼初熟，你们献新素祭给耶和华的日子，当有圣会。什么劳碌的工都不可作。
And at the time of the first-fruits, when you give an offering of new meal to the Lord at your feast of weeks, there is to be a holy meeting: you may do no field-work:

只要将公牛犊两只，公绵羊一只，一岁的公羊羔七只，作为馨香的燔祭献给耶和华。
And give a burned offering for a sweet smell to the Lord; two oxen, one male sheep, and seven he-lambs of the first year;

同献的素祭用调油的细面。为每只公牛要献伊法十分之三。为一只公羊要献伊法十分之二。
And their meal offering, the best meal mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male sheep,

为那七只羊羔，每只要献伊法十分之一。
And a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lambs;

并献一只公山羊为你们赎罪。
And one he-goat to take away your sin.

这些，你们要献在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外，都要没有残疾的。
These are in addition to the regular burned offering and its meal offering; take care that they are without any mark, and let them be offered with their drink offerings.

七月初一日，你们当有圣会。什么劳碌的工都不可作，是你们当守为吹角的日子。
In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, let there be a holy meeting; on it you may do no field-work; let the day be marked by the blowing of horns;

你们要将公牛犊一只，公绵羊一只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔七只，作为馨香的燔祭献给耶和华。
And give to the Lord a burned offering for a sweet smell; one ox, one male sheep, seven he-lambs of the first year, without any mark on them:

同献的素祭用调油的细面。为一只公牛要献伊法十分之三。为一只公羊要献伊法十分之二。
And their meal offering, the best meal mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male sheep,

为那七只羊羔，每只要献伊法十分之一。
And a separate tenth part for every one of the seven lambs;

又献一只公山羊作赎罪祭，为你们赎罪。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering, to take away your sin:

这些是在月朔的燔祭和同献的素祭，并常献的燔祭与同献的素祭，以及照例同献的奠祭以外，都作为馨香的火祭献给耶和华。
In addition to the burned offering of the new moon, and its meal offering, and the regular burned offering and its meal offering, and their drink offerings, as they are ordered, for a sweet smell, an offering made by fire to the Lord.

七月初十日，你们当有圣会。要刻苦己心，什么工都不可作。
And on the tenth day of this seventh month there will be a holy meeting; keep yourselves from pleasure, and do no sort of work;

只要将公牛犊一只，公绵羊一只，一岁的公羊羔七只，都要没有残疾的，作为馨香的燔祭献给耶和华。
And give to the Lord a burned offering for a sweet smell; one ox, one male sheep, seven he-lambs of the first year: only those without any mark on them may be used:

同献的素祭用调油的细面，为一只公牛要献伊法十分之三。为一只公羊要献伊法十分之二。
And their meal offering, the best meal mixed with oil, three tenth parts for an ox, two tenth parts for a male sheep,

为那七只羊羔，每只要献伊法十分之一。
A separate tenth part for every one of the seven lambs;

又献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在赎罪祭和常献的燔祭，与同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
One he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the offering for taking away your sin, and the regular burned offering and its meal offering, and their drink offerings.

七月十五日，你们当有圣会。什么劳碌的工都不可作，要向耶和华守节七日。
And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month let there be a holy meeting; do no field-work, and keep a feast to the Lord for seven days;

又要将公牛犊十三只，公绵羊两只，一岁的公羊羔十四只，都要没有残疾的，用火献给耶和华为馨香的燔祭。
And give a burned offering, an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord, thirteen oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, all without any mark on them;

同献的素祭用调油的细面。为那十三只公牛，每只要献伊法十分之三。为那两只公羊，每只要献伊法十分之二。
And their meal offering, the best meal mixed with oil, three tenth parts for every one of the thirteen oxen, two tenth parts for every male sheep,

为那十四只羊羔，每只要献伊法十分之一。
And a separate tenth part for every one of the fourteen lambs;

并献一只公山羊为赎罪祭，这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its drink offering.

第二日要献公牛犊十二只，公绵羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
On the second day of the feast give an offering of twelve oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark on them;

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and their drink offerings for the oxen and the sheep and the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and their drink offerings.

第三日要献公牛十一只，公羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
And on the third day eleven oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark;

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and drink offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its drink offering.

第四日要献公牛十只，公羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
And on the fourth day ten oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and their drink offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered.

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its drink offering.

第五日要献公牛九只，公羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
And on the fifth day nine oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and their drink offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its drink offering.

第六日要献公牛八只，公羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
And on the sixth day eight oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and their drink offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, its meal offering, and its drink offerings.

第七日要献公牛七只，公羊两只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔十四只。
And on the seventh day seven oxen, two male sheep, fourteen he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
And their meal offering and their drink offerings for the oxen, for the male sheep, and for the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, its meal offering, and its drink offering.

第八日你们当有严肃会。什么劳碌的工都不可作。
On the eighth day let there be a holy meeting: you may do no field-work;

只要将公牛一只，公羊一只，没有残疾，一岁的公羊羔七只作火祭，献给耶和华为馨香的燔祭。
And give a burned offering, an offering made by fire of a sweet smell to the Lord: one ox, one male sheep, seven he-lambs of the first year, without any mark:

并为公牛，公羊，和羊羔，按数照例，献同献的素祭和同献的奠祭。
With the meal offering and the drink offerings for the ox, the male sheep, and the lambs, in relation to their number, as it is ordered:

又要献一只公山羊为赎罪祭。这是在常献的燔祭和同献的素祭并同献的奠祭以外。
And one he-goat for a sin-offering; in addition to the regular burned offering, and its meal offering, and its drink offering.

这些祭要在你们的节期献给耶和华，都在所许的愿并甘心所献的以外，作为你们的燔祭，素祭，奠祭，和平安祭。
These are the offerings which you are to give to the Lord at your regular feasts, in addition to the offerings for an oath, and the free offerings you give, for your burned offerings and your drink offerings and your peace-offerings.

于是，摩西照耶和华所吩咐他的一切话告诉以色列人。
So Moses gave the children of Israel all these directions as the Lord had given him orders.

摩西晓谕以色列各支派的首领说，耶和华所吩咐的乃是这样，
And Moses said to the heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, This is the order of the Lord.

人若向耶和华许愿或起誓，要约束自己，就不可食言，必要按口中所出的一切话行。
When a man takes an oath to the Lord, or gives an undertaking having the force of an oath, let him not go back from his word, but let him do whatever he has said he will do.

女子年幼，还在父家的时候，若向耶和华许愿，要约束自己，
If a woman, being young and under the authority of her father, takes an oath to the Lord or gives an undertaking;

她父亲也听见她所许的愿并约束自己的话，却向她默默不言，她所许的愿并约束自己的话就都要为定。
If her father, hearing of her oath or the undertaking she has given, says nothing to her, then all her oaths and every undertaking she has given will have force.

但她父亲听见的日子若不应承她所许的愿和约束自己的话，就都不得为定。耶和华也必赦免她，因为她父亲不应承。
But if her father, hearing of it, makes her take back her word, then the oaths or the undertakings she has given will have no force; and she will have forgiveness from the Lord, because her oath was broken by her father.

她若出了嫁，有愿在身，或是口中出了约束自己的冒失话，
And if she is married to a husband at the time when she is under an oath or an undertaking given without thought;

她丈夫听见的日子，却向她默默不言，她所许的愿并约束自己的话就都要为定。
If her husband, hearing of it, says nothing to her at the time, then the oaths she made and the undertakings she gave will have force.

但她丈夫听见的日子，若不应承，就算废了她所许的愿和她出口约束自己的冒失话。耶和华也必赦免她。
But if her husband, hearing of it, makes her take it back, then the oath she made and the undertaking she gave without thought will have no force or effect, and she will have the Lord's forgiveness.

寡妇或是被休的妇人所许的愿，就是她约束自己的话，都要为定。
But an oath made by a widow or one who is no longer married to her husband, and every undertaking she has given, will have force.

她若在丈夫家里许了愿或起了誓，约束自己，
If she made an oath while she was under the authority of her husband,

丈夫听见，却向她默默不言，也没有不应承，她所许的愿并约束自己的话就都要为定。
And her husband, hearing of it, said nothing to her and did not put a stop to it, then all her oaths and every undertaking she gave will have force.

丈夫听见的日子，若把这两样全废了，妇人口中所许的愿或是约束自己的话就都不得为定，因她丈夫已经把这两样废了。耶和华也必赦免她。
But if her husband, on hearing of it, made them without force or effect, then whatever she has said about her oaths or her undertaking has no force: her husband has made them without effect, and she will have the Lord's forgiveness.

凡她所许的愿和刻苦约束自己所起的誓，她丈夫可以坚定，也可以废去。
Every oath, and every undertaking which she gives, to keep herself from pleasure, may be supported or broken by her husband.

倘若她丈夫天天向她默默不言，就算是坚定她所许的愿和约束自己的话。因丈夫听见的日子向她默默不言，就使这两样坚定。
But if the days go on, and her husband says nothing whatever to her, then he is giving the support of his authority to her oaths and undertakings, because at the time of hearing them he said nothing to her.

但她丈夫听见以后，若使这两样全废了，就要担当妇人的罪孽。
But if at some time after hearing of them, he makes them without force, then he is responsible for her wrongdoing.

这是丈夫待妻子，父亲待女儿，女儿年幼，还在父家，耶和华所吩咐摩西的律例。
These are the laws which the Lord gave Moses in relation to a man and his wife, or a father and a young daughter who is under his authority.

耶和华吩咐摩西说，
Then the Lord said to Moses,

你要在米甸人身上报以色列人的仇，后来要归到你列祖（原文作本民）那里。
Give the Midianites punishment for the wrong they did to the children of Israel: and after that you will go to rest with your people.

摩西吩咐百姓说，要从你们中间叫人带兵器出去攻击米甸，好在米甸人身上为耶和华报仇。
So Moses said to the people, Let men from among you be armed for war to put into effect against Midian the Lord's punishment on them.

从以色列众支派中，每支派要打发一千人去打仗。
From every tribe of Israel send a thousand to the war.

于是从以色列千万人中，每支派交出一千人，共一万二千人，带着兵器预备打仗。
So from the thousands of Israel a thousand were taken from every tribe, twelve thousand men armed for war.

摩西就打发每支派的一千人去打仗，并打发祭司以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈同去。非尼哈手里拿着圣所的器皿和吹大声的号筒。
And Moses sent them out to war, a thousand from every tribe, and with them Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, taking in his hands the vessels of the holy place and the horns for sounding the note of war.

他们就照耶和华所吩咐摩西的，与米甸人打仗，杀了所有的男丁。
And they made war on Midian, as the Lord gave orders to Moses; and they put to death every male.

在所杀的人中，杀了米甸的五王，就是以未，利金，苏珥，户珥，利巴，又用刀杀了比珥的儿子巴兰。
They put the kings of Midian to death with the rest, Evi and Reken and Zur and Hur and Reba, the five kings of Midian: and Balaam, the son of Beor, they put to death with the sword.

以色列人掳了米甸人的妇女孩子，并将他们的牲畜，羊群，和所有的财物都夺了来，当作掳物，
The women of Midian with their little ones the children of Israel took prisoner; and all their cattle and flocks and all their goods they took for themselves;

又用火焚烧他们所住的城邑和所有的营寨，
And after burning all their towns and all their tent-circles,

把一切所夺的，所掳的，连人带牲畜都带了去，
They went away with the goods they had taken, man and beast.

将所掳的人，所夺的牲畜，财物，都带到摩押平原，在约旦河边与耶利哥相对的营盘，交给摩西和祭司以利亚撒，并以色列的会众。
And the prisoners and the goods and everything they had taken, they took to Moses and Eleazar the priest and the people of Israel, to the tent-circle in the lowlands of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

摩西和祭司以利亚撒，并会众一切的首领，都出到营外迎接他们。
Then Moses and Eleazar the priest and the chiefs of the people went out to them before they had come into the tent-circle.

摩西向打仗回来的军长，就是千夫长，百夫长，发怒，
And Moses was angry with the chiefs of the army, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds who had come back from the war.

对他们说，你们要存留这一切妇女的活命吗？
And Moses said to them, Why have you kept all the women safe?

这些妇女因巴兰的计谋，叫以色列人在毗珥的事上得罪耶和华，以致耶和华的会众遭遇瘟疫。
It was these who, moved by Balaam, were the cause of Israel's sin against the Lord in the question of Peor, because of which disease came on the people of the Lord.

所以，你们要把一切的男孩和所有已嫁的女子都杀了。
So now put every male child to death, and every woman who has had sex relations with a man.

但女孩子中，凡没有出嫁的，你们都可以存留她的活命。
But all the female children who have had no sex relations with men, you may keep for yourselves.

你们要在营外驻扎七日。凡杀了人的，和一切摸了被杀的，并你们所掳来的人口，第三日，第七日，都要洁净自己，
You yourselves will have to keep outside the tent-circle for seven days, anyone of you who has put any person to death or come near a dead body; and on the third day and on the seventh day make yourselves and your prisoners clean.

也要因一切的衣服，皮物，山羊毛织的物，和各样的木器，洁净自己。
And every bit of clothing, and anything made of leather or goats' hair or wood, you are to make clean.

祭司以利亚撒对打仗回来的兵丁说，耶和华所吩咐摩西律法中的条例乃是这样，
Then Eleazar the priest said to the men of war who had been to the fight, This is the rule of the law which the Lord has given to Moses:

金，银，铜，铁，锡，铅，
But gold and silver and brass and iron and tin and lead,

凡能见火的，你们要叫它经火就为洁净，然而还要用除污秽的水洁净它。凡不能见火的，你们要叫它过水。
And anything which may be heated, is to go through the fire and be made clean; but in addition it is to be put in the water of cleaning: and anything which may not go through the fire is to be put in the water.

第七日，你们要洗衣服，就为洁净，然后可以进营。
And on the seventh day, after washing your clothing, you will be clean, and then you may come into the tent-circle.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你和祭司以利亚撒，并会众的各族长，要计算所掳来的人口和牲畜的总数。
Get an account of everything which was taken in the war, of man and of beast, you and Eleazar the priest and the heads of families of the people:

把所掳来的分作两半，一半归与出去打仗的精兵，一半归与全会众。
And let division be made of it into two parts, one for the men of war who went out to the fight, and one for all the people:

又要从出去打仗所得的人口，牛，驴，羊群中，每五百取一，作为贡物奉给耶和华。
And from the men of war who went out let there be offered to the Lord one out of every five hundred, from the persons, and from the oxen and asses and sheep:

从他们一半之中，要取出来交给祭司以利亚撒，作为耶和华的举祭。
Take this from their part and give it to Eleazar the priest as an offering to be lifted up to the Lord.

从以色列人的一半之中，就是从人口，牛，驴，羊群，各样牲畜中，每五十取一，交给看守耶和华帐幕的利未人。
And from the part given to the children of Israel, take one out of every fifty, from the persons, and from the oxen and asses and sheep, and give it to the Levites who have the care of the House of the Lord.

于是摩西和祭司以利亚撒照耶和华所吩咐摩西的行了。
So Eleazar and Moses did as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

除了兵丁所夺的财物以外，所掳来的，羊六十七万五千只。
Now the beasts taken, in addition to what the fighting-men took for themselves, were six hundred and seventy-five thousand sheep,

牛七万二千只。
And seventy-two thousand oxen,

驴六万一千匹。
And sixty-one thousand asses;

女人共三万二千口，都是没有出嫁的。
And thirty-two thousand persons, that is, women who had never had sex relations with a man.

出去打仗之人的分，就是他们所得的那一半，共计羊三十三万七千五百只，
And the half given as their part to the men who went to the war, was three hundred and thirty-seven thousand, five hundred sheep,

从其中归耶和华为贡物的，有六百七十五只。
Of which the Lord's part was six hundred and seventy-five.

牛三万六千只，从其中归耶和华为贡物的，有七十二只。
The number of oxen was thirty-six thousand, of which the Lord's part was seventy-two;

驴三万零五百匹，从其中归耶和华为贡物的，有六十一匹。
The number of asses was thirty thousand, five hundred, of which the Lord's part was sixty-one.

人一万六千口，从其中归耶和华的，有三十二口。
And the number of persons was sixteen thousand, of which the Lord's part was thirty-two persons.

摩西把贡物，就是归与耶和华的举祭，交给祭司以利亚撒，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
And Moses gave the Lord's part, lifted up as an offering, to Eleazar the priest, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

以色列人所得的那一半，就是摩西从打仗的人取来分给他们的。
And from the half given to the children of Israel, which Moses had kept separate from that given to the fighting-men,

（会众的那一半有，羊三十三万七千五百只。
(Now the people's half was three hundred and thirty-seven thousand, five hundred sheep,

牛三万六千只。
And thirty-six thousand oxen,

驴三万零五百匹。
And thirty thousand, five hundred asses,

人一万六千口。）
And sixteen thousand persons;)

无论是人口是牲畜，摩西每五十取一，交给看守耶和华帐幕的利未人，是照耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
Even from the children of Israel's half, Moses took one out of every fifty, men and beasts, and gave them to the Levites who had the care of the House of the Lord; as the Lord gave orders to Moses.

带领千军的各军长，就是千夫长，百夫长，都近前来见摩西，
Then the men in authority over the thousands of the army, the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, came to Moses,

对他说，仆人权下的兵已经计算总数，并不短少一人。
And said to him, Your servants have taken note of the number of all the fighting-men under our orders, and every one is present;

如今我们将各人所得的金器，就是脚链子，镯子，打印的戒指，耳环，手钏，都送来为耶和华的供物，好在耶和华面前为我们的生命赎罪。
And we have here an offering for the Lord from what every man took in the war, ornaments of gold, leg-chains and arm-rings, finger-rings, ear-rings, and neck-ornaments, to make our souls free from sin before the Lord.

摩西和祭司以利亚撒就收了他们的金子，都是打成的器皿。
So Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, even all the worked ornaments.

千夫长，百夫长所献给耶和华为举祭的金子共有一万六千七百五十舍客勒。
And the gold which the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds gave, as an offering to be lifted up before the Lord, came to sixteen thousand, seven hundred and fifty shekels.

各兵丁都为自己夺了财物。
(For every man of the army had taken goods for himself in the war.)

摩西和祭司以利亚撒收了千夫长，百夫长的金子，就带进会幕，在耶和华面前作为以色列人的纪念。
Then Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold given by the captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, and took it into the Tent of meeting, to be a sign in memory of the children of Israel before the Lord.

流便子孙和迦得子孙的牲畜极其众多。他们看见雅谢地和基列地是可牧放牲畜之地，
Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a great number of cattle: and when they saw that the land of Jazer and the land of Gilead was a good place for cattle;

就来见摩西和祭司以利亚撒，并会众的首领，说，
The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and said to Moses and to Eleazar the priest and to the chiefs of the meeting,

亚大录，底本，雅谢，宁拉，希实本，以利亚利，示班，尼波，比稳，
Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,

就是耶和华在以色列会众前面所攻取之地，是可牧放牲畜之地，你仆人也有牲畜。
The land which the Lord gave into the hands of the children of Israel, is a land for cattle, and your servants have cattle.

又说，我们若在你眼前蒙恩，求你把这地给我们为业，不要领我们过约旦河。
And they said, With your approval, let this land be given to your servants as their heritage: do not take us over Jordan.

摩西对迦得子孙和流便子孙说，难道你们的弟兄去打仗，你们竟坐在这里吗？
And Moses said to the children of Gad and the children of Reuben, Are your brothers to go to the war, while you take your rest here?

你们为何使以色列人灰心丧胆，不过去进入耶和华所赐给他们的那地呢？
Why would you take from the children of Israel the desire to go over into the land which the Lord has given them?

我先前从加低斯巴尼亚打发你们先祖去窥探那地，他们也是这样行。
So did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.

他们上以实各谷，去窥探那地回来的时候，使以色列人灰心丧胆，不进入耶和华所赐给他们的地。
For when they went up to the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they took from the children of Israel the desire to go into the land which the Lord had given them.

当日，耶和华的怒气发作，就起誓说，
And at that time the Lord was moved to wrath, and made an oath, saying,

凡从埃及上来，二十岁以外的人断不得看见我对亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓应许之地，因为他们没有专心跟从我。
Truly, not one of the men of twenty years old and over who came out of Egypt will see the land which I gave by oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; because they have not been true to me with all their heart;

惟有基尼洗族耶孚尼的儿子迦勒和嫩的儿子约书亚可以看见，因为他们专心跟从我。
But only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, and Joshua, the son of Nun: because they have been true to the Lord.

耶和华的怒气向以色列人发作，使他们在旷野飘流四十年，等到在耶和华眼前行恶的那一代人都消灭了。
Then the Lord was angry with Israel, and he made them wanderers in the waste land for forty years? till all that generation who had done evil in the eyes of the Lord was dead.

谁知，你们起来接续先祖，增添罪人的数目，使耶和华向以色列大发烈怒。
And now you have come to take the place of your fathers, another generation of sinners, increasing the wrath of the Lord against Israel.

你们若退后不跟从他，他还要把以色列人撇在旷野，便是你们使这众民灭亡。
For if you are turned away from him, he will send them wandering again in the waste land; and you will be the cause of the destruction of all this people.

两支派的人挨近摩西，说，我们要在这里为牲畜垒圈，为妇人孩子造城。
Then they came to him, and said, We will make safe places for our cattle here, and towns for our little ones;

我们自己要带兵器行在以色列人的前头，好把他们领到他们的地方。但我们的妇人孩子，因这地居民的缘故，要住在坚固的城内。
But we ourselves will be ready armed to go before the children of Israel till we have taken them to their place: but our little ones will be safe in the walled towns against the people of the land.

我们不回家，直等到以色列人各承受自己的产业。
We will not come back to our houses till every one of the children of Israel has come into his heritage.

我们不和他们在约旦河那边一带之地同受产业，因为我们的产业是坐落在约旦河东边这里。
For we will not have our heritage with them on the other side of Jordan and forward; because our heritage has come to us on this side of Jordan to the east.

摩西对他们说，你们若这样行，在耶和华面前带着兵器出去打仗，
Then Moses said to them, If you will do this, arming yourselves to go before the Lord to the war,

所有带兵器的人都要在耶和华面前过约旦河，等他赶出他的仇敌，
Every armed man of you going across Jordan before the Lord till he has overcome and sent in flight all who are against him,

那地被耶和华制伏了，然后你们可以回来，向耶和华和以色列才为无罪，这地也必在耶和华面前归你们为业。
And the land is under the rule of the Lord: then after that you may come back, having done no wrong to the Lord and to Israel; and this land will be yours for your heritage before the Lord.

倘若你们不这样行，就得罪耶和华，要知道你们的罪必追上你们。
But if you do not do this, then you are sinners against the Lord; and you may be certain that your sin will have its reward.

如今你们口中所出的，只管去行，为你们的妇人孩子造城，为你们的羊群垒圈。
So get to work building your towns for your little ones, and safe places for your sheep; and do as you have said.

迦得子孙和流便子孙对摩西说，仆人要照我主所吩咐的去行。
And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben said to Moses, Your servants will do as my lord says.

我们的妻子，孩子，羊群，和所有的牲畜都要留在基列的各城。
Our little ones, our wives, and our flocks, and all our cattle, will be there in the towns of Gilead;

但你的仆人，凡带兵器的，都要照我主所说的话，在耶和华面前过去打仗。
But your servants will go over, every man armed for war, before the Lord to the fight, as my lord says.

于是，摩西为他们嘱咐祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚，并以色列众支派的族长，
So Moses gave orders about them to Eleazar the priest and to Joshua, the son of Nun, and to the heads of families of the tribes of the children of Israel.

说，迦得子孙和流便子孙，凡带兵器在耶和华面前去打仗的，若与你们一同过约旦河，那地被你们制伏了，你们就要把基列地给他们为业。
And Moses said to them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben go with you over Jordan, every man armed for the fight before the Lord, and all the land is given into your hands, then let them have the land of Gilead for a heritage:

倘若他们不带兵器和你们一同过去，就要在迦南地你们中间得产业。
But if they do not go over with you armed, they will have to take their heritage with you in the land of Canaan.

迦得子孙和流便子孙回答说，耶和华怎样吩咐仆人，仆人就怎样行。
Then the children of Gad and the children of Reuben said, As the Lord has said to your servants, so will we do.

我们要带兵器，在耶和华面前过去，进入迦南地，只是约旦河这边，我们所得为业之地仍归我们。
We will go over armed before the Lord into the land of Canaan, and you will give us our heritage on this side of Jordan.

摩西将亚摩利王西宏的国和巴珊王噩的国，连那地和周围的城邑，都给了迦得子孙和流便子孙，并约瑟的儿子玛拿西半个支派。
So Moses gave to them, even to the children of Gad and the children of Reuben and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon, king of the Amorites and Og, king of Bashan, all the land with its towns and the country round them.

迦得子孙建造底本，亚他录，亚罗珥，
And the children of Gad were the builders of Dibon and Ataroth and Aroer;

亚他录朔反，雅谢，约比哈，
And Atroth-shophan and Jazer and Jogbehah;

伯宁拉，伯哈兰，都是坚固城。他们又垒羊圈。
And Beth-nimrah and Beth-haran: walled towns and shut-in places for sheep.

流便子孙建造希实本，以利亚利，基列亭，
And the children of Reuben were the builders of Heshbon and Elealeh and Kiriathaim;

尼波，巴力免，西比玛（尼波，巴力免，名字是改了的），又给他们所建造的城另起别名。
And Nebo and Baal-meon, (their names being changed,) and Sibmah: and they gave other names to the towns they made.

玛拿西的儿子玛吉，他的子孙往基列去，占了那地，赶出那里的亚摩利人。
And the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh, went to Gilead and took it, driving out the Amorites who were living there.

摩西将基列赐给玛拿西的儿子玛吉，他子孙就住在那里。
And Moses gave Gilead to Machir, the son of Manasseh; and he made it his living-place.

玛拿西的子孙睚珥去占了基列的村庄，就称这些村庄为哈倭特睚珥。
And Jair, the son of Manasseh, went and took the towns of Gilead, naming them Havvoth-Jair.

挪巴去占了基纳和基纳的乡村，就按自己的名称基纳为挪巴。
And Nobah went and took Kenath and its small towns, naming it Nobah, after himself.

以色列人按着军队，在摩西，亚伦的手下出埃及地所行的路程（或作站口下同）记在下面。
These are the journeys of the children of Israel, when they went out of the land of Egypt in their armies, under the direction of Moses and Aaron.

摩西遵着耶和华的吩咐记载他们所行的路程，其路程乃是这样，
And the stages of their journey on their way out were put down in writing by Moses at the order of the Lord: these are the stages of their journey and the way they went.

正月十五日，就是逾越节的次日，以色列人从兰塞起行，在一切埃及人眼前昂然无惧地出去。
On the fifteenth day of the first month they went out from Rameses; on the day after the Passover the children of Israel went out by the power of the Lord before the eyes of all the Egyptians,

那时，埃及人正葬埋他们的长子，就是耶和华在他们中间所击杀的。耶和华也败坏他们的神。
While the Egyptians were placing in the earth the bodies of their sons on whom the Lord had sent destruction: and their gods had been judged by him.

以色列人从兰塞起行，安营在疏割。
So the children of Israel went from Rameses and put up their tents in Succoth.

从疏割起行，安营在旷野边的以倘。
And they went on from Succoth and put up their tents in Etham on the edge of the waste land.

从以倘起行，转到比哈希录，是在巴力洗分对面，就在密夺安营。
And from Etham, turning back to Pi-hahiroth which is before Baal-zephon, they put up their tents before Migdol.

从比哈希录对面起行，经过海中到了书珥旷野，又在伊坦的旷野走了三天的路程，就安营在玛拉。
And journeying on from before Hahiroth, they went through the sea into the waste land: they went three days' journey through the waste land of Etham and put up their tents in Marah.

从玛拉起行，来到以琳（以琳有十二股水泉，七十棵棕树），就在那里安营。
And from Marah they went on to Elim: and in Elim there were twelve water-springs and seventy palm-trees; and they put up their tents there.

从以琳起行，安营在红海边。
And they went on from Elim and put up their tents by the Red Sea.

从红海边起行，安营在汛的旷野。
Then from the Red Sea they went on and put up their tents in the waste land of Sin.

从汛的旷野起行，安营在脱加。
And they went on from the waste land of Sin, and put up their tents in Dophkah.

从脱加起行，安营在亚录。
And they went on from Dophkah, and put up their tents in Alush.

从亚录起行，安营在利非订。在那里，百姓没有水喝。
And they went on from Alush, and put up their tents in Rephidim, where there was no drinking-water for the people.

从利非订起行，安营在西乃的旷野。
And they went on from Rephidim, and put up their tents in the waste land of Sinai.

从西乃的旷野起行，安营在基博罗哈他瓦。
And they went on from the waste land of Sinai and put up their tents in Kibroth-hattaavah.

从基博罗哈他瓦起行，安营在哈洗录。
And they went on from Kibroth-hattaavah, and put up their tents in Hazeroth.

从哈洗录起行，安营在利提玛。
And they went on from Hazeroth, and put up their tents in Rithmah.

从利提玛起行，安营在临门帕烈。
And they went on from Rithmah, and put up their tents in Rimmon-perez.

从临门帕烈起行，安营在立拿。
And they went on from Rimmon-perez, and put up their tents in Libnah.

从立拿起行，安营在勒撒。
And they went on from Libnah, and put up their tents in Rissah.

从勒撒起行，安营在基希拉他。
And they went on from Rissah, and put up their tents in Kehelathah.

从基希拉他起行，安营在沙斐山。
And they went on from Kehelathah, and put up their tents in Mount Shepher.

从沙斐山起行，安营在哈拉大。
And they went on from Mount Shepher, and put up their tents in Haradah.

从哈拉大起行，安营在玛吉希录。
And they went on from Haradah, and put up their tents in Makheloth.

从玛吉希录起行，安营在他哈。
And they went on from Makheloth, and put up their tents in Tahath.

从他哈起行，安营在他拉。
And they went on from Tahath, and put up their tents in Terah.

从他拉起行，安营在密加。
And they went on from Terah, and put up their tents in Mithkah.

从密加起行，安营在哈摩拿。
And they went on from Mithkah, and put up their tents in Hashmonah.

从哈摩拿起行，安营在摩西录。
And they went on from Hashmonah, and put up their tents in Moseroth.

从摩西录起行，安营在比尼亚干。
And they went on from Moseroth, and put up their tents in Bene-jaakan.

从比尼亚干起行，安营在曷哈及甲。
And they went on from Bene-jaakan, and put up their tents in Hor-haggidgad.

从曷哈及甲起行，安营在约巴他。
And they went on from Hor-haggidgad, and put up their tents in Jotbathah.

从约巴他起行，安营在阿博拿。
And they went on from Jotbathah, and put up their tents in Abronah.

从阿博拿起行，安营在以旬迦别。
And they went on from Abronah, and put up their tents in Ezion-geber.

从以旬迦别起行，安营在寻的旷野，就是加低斯。
And they went on from Ezion-geber, and put up their tents in the waste land of Zin (which is Kadesh).

从加低斯起行，安营在何珥山，以东地的边界。
And they went on from Kadesh, and put up their tents in Mount Hor, on the edge of the land of Edom.

以色列人出了埃及地后四十年，五月初一日，祭司亚伦遵着耶和华的吩咐上何珥山，就死在那里。
And Aaron the priest went up into the mountain at the order of the Lord, and came to his death there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel had come out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.

亚伦死在何珥山的时候年一百二十三岁。
Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three years old at the time of his death in Mount Hor.

住在迦南南地的迦南人亚拉得王听说以色列人来了。
And news of the coming of the children of Israel came to the king of Arad, the Canaanite, who was living in the South in the land of Canaan.

以色列人从何珥山起行，安营在撒摩拿。
And from Mount Hor they went on, and put up their tents in Zalmonah.

从撒摩拿起行，安营在普嫩。
And they went on from Zalmonah, and put up their tents in Punon.

从普嫩起行，安营在阿伯。
And they went on from Punon, and put up their tents in Oboth.

从阿伯起行，安营在以耶亚巴琳，摩押的边界。
And they went on from Oboth, and put up their tents in Iye-abarim at the edge of Moab.

从以耶亚巴琳起行，安营在底本迦得。
And they went on from Iyim, and put up their tents in Dibon-gad.

从底本迦得起行，安营在亚门低比拉太音。
And from Dibon-gad they went on, and put up their tents in Almon-diblathaim.

从亚门低比拉太音起行，安营在尼波对面的亚巴琳山里。
And from Almon-diblathaim they went on, and put up their tents in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

从亚巴琳山起行，安营在摩押平原约旦河边，耶利哥对面。
And they went on from the mountains of Abarim, and put up their tents in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho;

他们在摩押平原沿约旦河边安营，从伯耶施末直到亚伯什亭。
Planting their tents by the side of Jordan from Beth-jeshimoth as far as Abel-shittim in the lowlands of Moab.

耶和华在摩押平原约旦河边，耶利哥对面晓谕摩西说，
And in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho, the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人说，你们过约旦河进迦南地的时候，
Say to the children of Israel, When you go over Jordan into the land of Canaan,

就要从你们面前赶出那里所有的居民，毁灭他们一切錾成的石像和他们一切铸成的偶像，又拆毁他们一切的丘坛。
See that all the people of the land are forced out from before you, and put to destruction all their pictured stones, and all their metal images, and all their high places:

你们要夺那地，住在其中，因我把那地赐给你们为业。
And take the land for yourselves, for your resting-place: for to you I have given the land as your heritage.

你们要按家室拈阄，承受那地。人多的，要把产业多分给他们。人少的，要把产业少分给他们。拈出何地给何人，就要归何人。你们要按宗族的支派承受。
And you will take up your heritage in the land by the decision of the Lord, to every family its part; the greater the family the greater its heritage, and the smaller the family the smaller will be its heritage; wherever the decision of the Lord gives to any man his part, that will be his; distribution will be made to you by your fathers' tribes.

倘若你们不赶出那地的居民，所容留的居民就必作你们眼中的刺，肋下的荆棘，也必在你们所住的地上扰害你们。
But if you are slow in driving out the people of the land, then those of them who are still there will be like pin-points in your eyes and like thorns in your sides, troubling you in the land where you are living.

而且我素常有意怎样待他们，也必照样待你们。
And it will come about that as it was my purpose to do to them, so I will do to you.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人说，你们到了迦南地，就是归你们为业的迦南四境之地，
Give orders to the children of Israel and say to them, When you come into the land of Canaan; (this is the land which is to be your heritage, the land of Canaan inside these limits,)

南角要从寻的旷野，贴着以东的边界。南界要从盐海东头起，
Then your south quarter will be from the waste land of Zin by the side of Edom, and your limit on the south will be from the east end of the Salt Sea,

绕到亚克拉滨坡的南边，接连到寻，直通到加低斯巴尼亚的南边，又通到哈萨亚达，接连到押们，
And round to the south of the slope of Akrabbim, and on to Zin: and its direction will be south of Kadesh-barnea, and it will go as far as Hazar-addar and on to Azmon:

从押们转到埃及小河，直通到海为止。
And from Azmon it will go round to the stream of Egypt as far as the sea.

西边要以大海为界。这就是你们的西界。
And for your limit on the west you will have the Great Sea and its edge: this will be your limit on the west.

北界要从大海起，划到何珥山，
And your limit on the north will be the line from the Great Sea to Mount Hor:

从何珥山划到哈马口，通到西达达，
And from Mount Hor the line will go in the direction of Hamath; the farthest point of it will be at Zedad:

又通到西斐仑，直到哈萨以难。这要作你们的北界。
And the limit will go on to Ziphron, with its farthest point at Hazar-enan: this will be your limit on the north.

你们要从哈萨以难划到示番为东界。
And on the east, your limit will be marked out from Hazar-enan to Shepham,

这界要从示番下到亚延东边的利比拉，又要达到基尼烈湖的东边。
Going down from Shepham to Riblah on the east side of Ain, and on as far as the east side of the sea of Chinnereth:

这界要下到约旦河，通到盐海为止。这四围的边界以内，要作你们的地。
And so down to Jordan, stretching to the Salt Sea: all the land inside these limits will be yours.

摩西吩咐以色列人说，这地就是耶和华吩咐拈阄给九个半支派承受为业的。
And Moses gave orders to the children of Israel saying, This is the land which is to be your heritage, by the decision of the Lord, which by the Lord's order is to be given to the nine tribes and the half-tribe:

因为流便支派和迦得支派按着宗族受了产业，玛拿西半个支派也受了产业。
For the tribe of the children of Reuben, by their fathers' families, and the tribe of the children of Gad, by their fathers' families, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, have been given their heritage:

这两个半支派已经在耶利哥对面，约旦河东，向日出之地受了产业。
The two tribes and the half-tribe have been given their heritage on the other side of Jordan at Jericho, on the east looking to the dawn.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

要给你们分地为业之人的名字是祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚。
These are the names of the men who are to make the distribution of the land among you: Eleazar the priest and Joshua, the son of Nun.

又要从每支派中选一个首领帮助他们。
And you are to take one chief from every tribe to make the distribution of the land.

这些人的名字，犹大支派有耶孚尼的儿子迦勒。
And these are the names of the men: of the tribe of Judah, Caleb, the son of Jephunneh.

西缅支派有亚米忽的儿子示母利。
And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel, the son of Ammihud.

便雅悯支派有基斯伦的儿子以利达。
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad, the son of Chislon.

但支派有一个首领，约利的儿子布基。
And of the tribe of the children of Dan, a chief, Bukki, the son of Jogli.

约瑟的子孙玛拿西支派有一个首领，以弗的儿子汉聂。
Of the children of Joseph: of the tribe of the children of Manasseh, a chief, Hanniel, the son of Ephod:

以法莲支派有一个首领，拾弗但的儿子基母利。
And of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, a chief, Kemuel, the son of Shiphtan.

西布伦支派有一个首领，帕纳的儿子以利撒番。
And of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, a chief, Elizaphan, the son of Parnach.

以萨迦支派有一个首领，阿散的儿子帕铁。
And of the tribe of the children of Issachar, a chief, Paltiel, the son of Azzan.

亚设支派有一个首领，示罗米的儿子亚希忽。
And of the tribe of the children of Asher, a chief, Ahihud, the son of Shelomi.

拿弗他利支派有一个首领，亚米忽的儿子比大黑。
And of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, a chief, Pedahel, the son of Ammihud.

这些人就是耶和华所吩咐，在迦南地把产业分给以色列人的。
These are they to whom the Lord gave orders to make the distribution of the heritage among the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.

耶和华在摩押平原约旦河边，耶利哥对面晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho,

你吩咐以色列人，要从所得为业的地中把些城给利未人居住，也要把这城四围的郊野给利未人。
Give orders to the children of Israel to give to the Levites, from the heritage which is theirs, towns for themselves, with land on the outskirts of the towns.

这城邑要归他们居住，城邑的郊野可以牧养他们的牛羊和各样的牲畜，又可以安置他们的财物。
These towns are to be their living-places, with land round them for their cattle and their food and all their beasts,

你们给利未人的郊野，要从城根起，四围往外量一千肘。
Stretching from the wall of the towns a distance of a thousand cubits all round.

另外东量二千肘，南量二千肘，西量二千肘，北量二千肘，为边界，城在当中。这要归他们作城邑的郊野。
The measure of this space of land is to be two thousand cubits outside the town on the east, and two thousand cubits on the south and on the west and on the north, the town being in the middle. This space will be the outskirts of their towns.

你们给利未人的城邑，其中当有六座逃城，使误杀人的可以逃到那里。此外还要给他们四十二座城。
And the towns which you give the Levites are to be the six safe places to which the taker of life may go in flight; and in addition you are to give them forty-two towns.

你们要给利未人的城，共有四十八座，连城带郊野都要给他们。
Forty-eight towns are to be given to the Levites, all with land round them.

以色列人所得的地业从中要把些城邑给利未人。人多的就多给，人少的就少给。各支派要按所承受为业之地把城邑给利未人。
And these towns are to be given out of the heritage of the children of Israel, taking the greater number from those who have much, and a smaller number from those who have little: everyone, in the measure of his heritage, is to give of his property to the Levites.

耶和华晓谕摩西说，
And the Lord said to Moses,

你吩咐以色列人说，你们过约旦河，进了迦南地，
Say to the children of Israel, when you have gone over Jordan into the land of Canaan;

就要分出几座城，为你们作逃城，使误杀人的可以逃到那里。
Then let certain towns be marked out as safe places to which anyone who takes the life of another in error may go in flight.

这些城可以作逃避报仇人的城，使误杀人的不至于死，等他站在会众面前听审判。
In these towns you may be safe from him who has the right of punishment; so that death may not overtake the taker of life till he has been judged by the meeting of the people.

你们所分出来的城，要作六座逃城。
Six of the towns which you give will be such safe places;

在约旦河东要分出三座城，在迦南地也要分出三座城，都作逃城。
Three on the other side of Jordan and three in the land of Canaan, to be safe places for flight.

这六座城要给以色列人和他们中间的外人，并寄居的，作为逃城，使误杀人的都可以逃到那里。
For the children of Israel and for the man from another country who is living among them, these six towns are to be safe places, where anyone causing the death of another through error may go in flight.

倘若人用铁器打人，以致打死，他就是故杀人的。故杀人的必被治死。
But if a man gives another man a blow with an iron instrument, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is certainly to be put to death.

若用可以打死人的石头打死了人，他就是故杀人的。故杀人的必被治死。
Or if he gives him a blow with a stone in his hand, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is certainly to be put to death.

若用可以打死人的木器打死了人，他就是故杀人的。故杀人的必被治死。
Or if he gave him blows with a wood instrument in his hands, causing his death, he is a taker of life and is certainly to be put to death.

报血仇的必亲自杀那故杀人的，一遇见就杀他。
He whose right it is to give punishment for blood, may himself put to death the taker of life when he comes face to face with him.

人若因怨恨把人推倒，或是埋伏往人身上扔物，以致于死，
If in his hate he put a sword through him, or waiting secretly for him sent a spear or stone at him, causing his death;

或是因仇恨用手打人，以致于死，那打人的必被治死。他是故杀人的。报血仇的一遇见就杀他。
Or in hate gave him blows with his hand, causing death; he who gave the death-blow is to be put to death; he is a taker of life: he whose right it is to give punishment for blood may put to death the taker of life when he comes face to face with him.

倘若人没有仇恨，忽然将人推倒，或是没有埋伏把物扔在人身上，
But if a man has given a wound to another suddenly and not in hate, or without design has sent something against him,

或是没有看见的时候用可以打死人的石头扔在人身上，以致于死，本来与他无仇，也无意害他。
Or has given him a blow with a stone, without seeing him, so causing his death, though he had nothing against him and no desire to do him evil:

会众就要照典章，在打死人的和报血仇的中间审判。
Then let the meeting of the people be judge between the man responsible for the death and him who has the right of punishment for blood, acting by these rules:

会众要救这误杀人的脱离报血仇人的手，也要使他归入逃城。他要住在其中，直等到受圣膏的大祭司死了。
And let the people keep the man responsible for the death safe from the hands of him who has the right of punishment for blood, and send him back to his safe town where he had gone in flight: there let him be till the death of the high priest who was marked with the holy oil.

但误杀人的，无论什么时候，若出了逃城的境外，
But if ever he goes outside the walls of the safe town where he had gone in flight,

报血仇的在逃城境外遇见他，将他杀了，报血仇的就没有流血之罪。
And the giver of punishment, meeting him outside the walls of the town, puts him to death, he will not be responsible for his blood:

因为误杀人的该住在逃城里，等到大祭司死了。大祭司死了以后，误杀人的才可以回到他所得为业之地。
Because he had been ordered to keep inside the safe town till the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the taker of life may come back to the place of his heritage.

这在你们一切的住处，要作你们世世代代的律例典章。
These rules are to be your guide in judging through all your generations wherever you may be living.

无论谁故杀人，要凭几个见证人的口把那故杀人的杀了，只是不可凭一个见证的口叫人死。
Anyone causing the death of another is himself to be put to death on the word of witnesses: but the word of one witness is not enough.

故杀人，犯死罪的，你们不可收赎价代替他的命。他必被治死。
Further, no price may be given for the life of one who has taken life and whose right reward is death: he is certainly to be put to death.

那逃到逃城的人，你们不可为他收赎价，使他在大祭司未死以先再来住在本地。
And no price may be offered for one who has gone in flight to a safe town, for the purpose of letting him come back to his place before the death of the high priest.

这样，你们就不污秽所住之地，因为血是污秽地的。若有在地上流人血的，非流那杀人者的血，那地就不得洁净（洁净原文作赎）。
So do not make the land where you are living unholy: for blood makes the land unholy: and there is no way of making the land free from the blood which has come on it, but only by the death of him who was the cause of it.

你们不可玷污所住之地，就是我住在其中之地，因为我耶和华住在以色列人中间。
Do not make unclean the land where you are living and in which is my House: for I the Lord am present among the children of Israel.

约瑟的后裔，玛拿西的孙子，玛吉的儿子基列，他子孙中的诸族长来到摩西和作首领的以色列人族长面前，
Now the heads of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came to Moses, the chiefs and the heads of families of the children of Israel being present,

说，耶和华曾吩咐我主拈阄分地给以色列人为业，我主也受了耶和华的吩咐将我们兄弟西罗非哈的产业分给他的众女儿。
And said, The Lord gave orders to my lord to make distribution of the land as their heritage to the children of Israel: and my lord was ordered by the Lord to give the heritage of Zelophehad, our brother, to his daughters.

她们若嫁以色列别支派的人，就必将我们祖宗所遗留的产业加在她们丈夫支派的产业中。这样，我们拈阄所得的产业就要减少了。
Now if they get married to any of the sons of other tribes of the children of Israel, then their property will be taken away from the heritage of our fathers, and become part of the heritage of the tribe into which they get married: and their heritage will be taken away from the heritage of our tribe.

到了以色列人的禧年，这女儿的产业就必加在她们丈夫支派的产业上。这样，我们祖宗支派的产业就减少了。
And at the time of the Jubilee of the children of Israel, their property will be joined to the heritage of the tribe of which they are part and will be taken away from the heritage of the tribe of our fathers.

摩西照耶和华的话吩咐以色列人说，约瑟支派的人说得有理。
So by the direction of the Lord, Moses gave orders to the children of Israel, saying, What the tribe of the sons of Joseph have said is right.

论到西罗非哈的众女儿，耶和华这样吩咐说，她们可以随意嫁人，只是要嫁同宗支派的人。
This is the order of the Lord about the daughters of Zelophehad: The Lord says, Let them take as their husbands whoever is most pleasing to them, but only among the family of their father's tribe.

这样，以色列人的产业就不从这支派归到那支派，因为以色列人要各守各祖宗支派的产业。
And so no property will be handed from tribe to tribe among the children of Israel; but every one of the children of Israel will keep the heritage of his father's tribe.

凡在以色列支派中得了产业的女子必作同宗支派人的妻，好叫以色列人各自承受他祖宗的产业。
And every daughter owning property in any tribe of the children of Israel is to be married to one of the family of her father's tribe, so that every man of the children of Israel may keep the heritage of his fathers.

这样，他们的产业就不从这支派归到那支派，因为以色列支派的人要各守各的产业。
And no property will be handed from one tribe to another, but every tribe of the children of Israel will keep its heritage.

耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，西罗非哈的众女儿就怎样行。
So the daughters of Zelophehad did as the Lord gave orders to Moses:

西罗非哈的女儿玛拉，得撒，曷拉，密迦，挪阿都嫁了他们伯叔的儿子。
For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, took as their husbands the sons of their father's brothers:

她们嫁入约瑟儿子，玛拿西子孙的族中。她们的产业仍留在同宗支派中。
And were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, and their property was kept in the tribe of their father's family

这是耶和华在摩押平原约旦河边，耶利哥对面借着摩西所吩咐以色列人的命令典章。
These are the laws and the orders which the Lord gave to the children of Israel by Moses, in the lowlands of Moab by Jordan at Jericho.

