耶和华借玛拉基传给以色列的默示。
The word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.

耶和华说，我曾爱你们。你们却说，你在何事上爱我们呢？耶和华说，以扫不是雅各的哥哥吗？我却爱雅各，
You have been loved by me, says the Lord. But you say, Where was your love for us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? says the Lord: but Jacob was loved by me,

恶以扫，使他的山岭荒凉，把他的地业交给旷野的野狗。
And Esau was hated, and I sent destruction on his mountains, and gave his heritage to the beasts of the waste land.

以东人说，我们现在虽被毁坏，却要重建荒废之处。万军之耶和华如此说，任他们建造，我必拆毁。人必称他们的地，为罪恶之境，称他们的民，为耶和华永远恼怒之民。
Though Edom says, We are crushed down but we will come back, building up the waste places; this is what the Lord of armies has said: They may put up buildings, but I will have them pulled down; and they will be named The land of evil-doing, and The people against whom the Lord keeps his wrath for ever.

你们必亲眼看见，也必说，愿耶和华在以色列境界之外，被尊为大。
And your eyes will see it; and you will say, The Lord is great even outside the limits of Israel.

藐视我名的祭司阿，万军之耶和华对你们说，儿子尊敬父亲，仆人敬畏主人。我既为父亲，尊敬我的在哪里呢？我既为主人，敬畏我的在哪里呢？你们却说，我们在何事上藐视你的名呢？
A son gives honour to his father, and a servant has fear of his master: if then I am a father, where is my honour? and if I am a master, where is the fear of me? says the Lord of armies to you, O priests, who give no value to my name. And you say, How have we not given value to your name?

你们将污秽的食物献在我的坛上，且说，我们在何事上污秽你呢？因你们说，耶和华的桌子是可藐视的。
You put unclean bread on my altar. And you say, How have we made it unclean? By your saying, The table of the Lord is of no value.

你们将瞎眼的献为祭物，这不为恶吗？将瘸腿的，有病的献上，这不为恶吗？你献给你的省长，他岂喜悦你，岂能看你的情面吗？这是万军之耶和华说的。
And when you give what is blind for an offering, it is no evil! and when you give what is damaged and ill, it is no evil! Give it now to your ruler; will he be pleased with you, or will you have his approval? says the Lord of armies.

现在我劝你们恳求神，他好施恩与我们。这妄献的事，既由你们经手，他岂能看你们的情面吗？这是万军之耶和华说的。
And now, make request for the grace of God so that he may have mercy on us: this has been your doing: will he give his approval to any of you? says the Lord of armies.

甚愿你们中间有一人关上殿门，免得你们徒然在我坛上烧火。万军之耶和华说，我不喜悦你们，也不从你们手中收纳供物。
If only there was one among you who would see that the doors were shut, so that you might not put a light to the fire on my altar for nothing! I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of armies, and I will not take an offering from your hands.

万军之耶和华说，从日出之地到日落之处，我的名在外邦中必尊为大。在各处，人必奉我的名烧香，献洁净的供物。因为我的名在外邦中必尊为大。
For, from the coming up of the sun till its going down, my name is great among the Gentiles; and in every place the smell of burning flesh is offered to my name, and a clean offering: for my name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of armies.

你们却亵渎我的名，说，耶和华的桌子是污秽的，其上的食物是可藐视的。
But you make it unholy by saying, The Lord's table has become unclean, and his food is of no value.

你们又说，这些事何等烦琐。并嗤之以鼻。这是万军之耶和华说的。你们把抢夺的，瘸腿的，有病的拿来献上为祭。我岂能从你们手中收纳呢？这是耶和华说的。
And you say, See, what a weariness it is! and you let out your breath at it, says the Lord of armies; and you have given what has been cut about by beasts, and what is damaged in its feet and ill; this is the offering you give: will this be pleasing to me from your hands? says the Lord.

行诡诈的在群中有公羊，他许愿却用有残疾的献给主，这人是可咒诅的。因为我是大君王，我的名在外邦中是可畏的。这是万军之耶和华说的。
A curse on the false man who has a male in his flock, and takes his oath, and gives to the Lord a damaged thing: for I am a great King, says the Lord of armies, and my name is to be feared among the Gentiles.

众祭司阿，这诫命是传给你们的。
And now, O you priests, this order is for you.

万军之耶和华说，你们若不听从，也不放在心上，将荣耀归与我的名，我就使咒诅临到你们，使你们的福分变为咒诅。因你们不把诫命放在心上，我已经咒诅你们了。
If you will not give ear and take it to heart, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of armies, then I will send the curse on you and will put a curse on your blessing: truly, even now I have put a curse on it, because you do not take it to heart.

我必斥责你们的种子，又把你们牺牲的粪，抹在你们的脸上。你们要与粪一同除掉。
See, I will have your arm cut off, and will put waste on your faces, even the waste from your feasts; and you will be taken away with it.

你们就知道我传这诫命给你们，使我与利未（或作利未人）所立的约，可以常存。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And you will be certain that I have sent this order to you, so that it might be my agreement with Levi, says the Lord of armies.

我曾与他立生命和平安的约。我将这两样赐给他，使他存敬畏的心，他就敬畏我，惧怕我的名。
My agreement with him was on my side life and peace, and I gave them to him; on his side fear, and he had fear of me and gave honour to my name.

真实的律法在他口中，他嘴里没有不义的话。他以平安和正直与我同行，使多人回头离开罪孽。
True teaching was in his mouth, and no evil was seen on his lips: he was walking with me in peace and righteousness, turning numbers of people away from evil-doing.

祭司的嘴里当存知识，人也当由他口中寻求律法，因为他是万军之耶和华的使者。
For it is right for the priest's lips to keep knowledge, and for men to be waiting for the law from his mouth: for he is the servant sent from the Lord of armies.

你们却偏离正道，使许多人在律法上跌倒。你们废弃我与利未所立的约。这是万军之耶和华说的。
But you are turned out of the way; you have made the law hard for numbers of people; you have made the agreement of Levi of no value, says the Lord of armies.

所以我使你们被众人藐视，看为下贱，因你们不守我的道，竟在律法上瞻徇情面。
And so I have taken away your honour and made you low before all the people, even as you have not kept my ways, and have given no thought to me in using the law.

我们岂不都是一位父吗？岂不是一位神所造的吗？我们各人怎么以诡诈待弟兄，背弃了神与我们列祖所立的约呢？
Have we not all one father? has not one God made us? why are we, every one of us, acting falsely to his brother, putting shame on the agreement of our fathers?

犹大人行事诡诈，并且在以色列和耶路撒冷中，行一件可憎的事。因为犹大人亵渎耶和华所喜爱的圣洁（或作圣地），娶事奉外邦神的女子为妻。
Judah has been acting falsely, and a disgusting thing has been done in Jerusalem; for Judah has made unclean the holy place of the Lord which is dear to him, and has taken as his wife the daughter of a strange god.

凡行这事的，无论何人（何人原文作叫醒的答应的），就是献供物给万军之耶和华，耶和华也必从雅各的帐棚中剪除他。
The Lord will have the man who does this cut off root and branch out of the tents of Jacob, and him who makes an offering to the Lord of armies.

你们又行了一件这样的事，使前妻叹息哭泣的眼泪，遮盖耶和华的坛，以致耶和华不再看顾那供物，也不乐意从你们手中收纳。
And this again you do: covering the altar of the Lord with weeping and with grief, so that he gives no more thought to the offering, and does not take it with pleasure from your hand.

你们还说，这是为什么呢？因耶和华在你和你幼年所娶的妻中间作见证。她虽是你的配偶，又是你盟约的妻，你却以诡诈待她。
But you say, For what reason? Because the Lord has been a witness between you and the wife of your early years, to whom you have been untrue, though she is your friend and the wife to whom you have given your word.

虽然神有灵的余力能造多人，他不是单造一人吗？为何只造一人呢？乃是他愿人得虔诚的后裔。所以当谨守你们的心，谁也不可以诡诈待幼年所娶的妻。
... So give thought to your spirit, and let no one be false to the wife of his early years.

耶和华以色列的神说，休妻的事，和以强暴待妻的人，都是我所恨恶的。所以当谨守你们的心，不可行诡诈。这是万军之耶和华说的。
For I am against the putting away of a wife, says the Lord, the God of Israel, and against him who is clothed with violent acts, says the Lord of armies: so give thought to your spirit and do not be false in your acts.

你们用言语烦琐耶和华，你们还说，我们在何事上烦琐他呢？因为你们说，凡行恶的，耶和华眼看为善，并且他喜悦他们。或说，公义的神在哪里呢？
You have made the Lord tired with your words. And still you say, How have we made him tired? By your saying, Everyone who does evil is good in the eyes of the Lord, and he has delight in them; or, Where is God the judge?

万军之耶和华说，我要差遣我的使者，在我前面预备道路。你们所寻求的主，必忽然进入他的殿。立约的使者，就是你们所仰慕的，快要来到。
See, I am sending my servant, and he will make ready the way before me; and the Lord, whom you are looking for, will suddenly come to his Temple; and the angel of the agreement, in whom you have delight, see, he is coming, says the Lord of armies.

他来的日子，谁能当得起呢？他显现的时候，谁能立得住呢？因为他如炼金之人的火，如漂布之人的碱。
But by whom may the day of his coming be faced? and who may keep his place when he is seen? for he is like the metal-tester's fire and the cleaner's soap.

他必坐下如炼净银子的，必洁净利未人，熬炼他们像金银一样。他们就凭公义献供物给耶和华。
He will take his seat, testing and cleaning the sons of Levi, burning away the evil from them as from gold and silver; so that they may make offerings to the Lord in righteousness.

那时，犹大和耶路撒冷所献的供物，必蒙耶和华悦纳，仿佛古时之日，上古之年。
Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the Lord, as in days gone by, and as in past years.

万军之耶和华说，我必临近你们，施行审判。我必速速作见证，警戒行邪术的，犯奸淫的，起假誓的，亏负人之工价的，欺压寡妇孤儿的，屈枉寄居的，和不敬畏我的。
And I will come near to you for judging; I will quickly be a witness against the wonder-workers, against those who have been untrue in married life, against those who take false oaths; against those who keep back from the servant his payment, and who are hard on the widow and the child without a father, who do not give his rights to the man from a strange country, and have no fear of me, says the Lord of armies.

因我耶和华是不改变的，所以你们雅各之子没有灭亡。
For I am the Lord, I am unchanged; and so you, O sons of Jacob, have not been cut off.

万军之耶和华说，从你们列祖的日子以来，你们常常偏离我的典章，而不遵守。现在你们要转向我，我就转向你们。你们却问说。我们如何才是转向呢？
From the days of your fathers you have been turned away from my rules and have not kept them. Come back to me, and I will come back to you, says the Lord of armies. But you say, How are we to come back?

人岂可夺取神之物呢？你们竟夺取我的供物，你们却说，我们在何事上夺取你的供物呢？就是你们在当纳的十分之一，和当献的供物上。
Will a man keep back from God what is right? But you have kept back what is mine. But you say, What have we kept back from you? Tenths and offerings.

因你们通国的人，都夺取我的供物，咒诅就临到你们身上。
You are cursed with a curse; for you have kept back from me what is mine, even all this nation.

万军之耶和华说，你们要将当纳的十分之一，全然送入仓库，使我家有粮，以此试试我，是否为你们敞开天上的窗户，倾福与你们，甚至无处可容。
Let your tenths come into the store-house so that there may be food in my house, and put me to the test by doing so, says the Lord of armies, and see if I do not make the windows of heaven open and send down such a blessing on you that there is no room for it.

万军之耶和华说，我必为你们斥责蝗虫（蝗虫原文作吞噬者），不容它毁坏你们的土产。你们田间的葡萄树在未熟之先，也不掉果子。
And on your account I will keep back the locusts from wasting the fruits of your land; and the fruit of your vine will not be dropped on the field before its time, says the Lord of armies

万军之耶和华说，万国必称你们为有福的，因你们的地必成为喜乐之地。
And you will be named happy by all nations: for you will be a land of delight, says the Lord of armies.

耶和华说，你们用话顶撞我，你们还说，我们用什么话顶撞了你呢？
Your words have been strong against me, says the Lord. And still you say, What have we said against you?

你们说，事奉神是徒然的，遵守神所吩咐的，在万军之耶和华面前苦苦斋戒，有什么益处呢？
You have said, It is no use worshipping God: what profit have we had from keeping his orders, and going in clothing of sorrow before the Lord of armies?

如今我们称狂傲的人为有福。并且行恶的人得建立。他们虽然试探神，却得脱离灾难。
And now to us the men of pride seem happy; yes, the evil-doers are doing well; they put God to the test and are safe.

那时，敬畏耶和华的彼此谈论。耶和华侧耳而听，且有纪念册在他面前，记录那敬畏耶和华，思念他名的人。
Then those in whom was the fear of the Lord had talk together: and the Lord gave ear, and it was recorded in a book to be kept in mind before him, for those who had the fear of the Lord and gave thought to his name.

万军之耶和华说，在我所定的日子，他们必属我，特特归我，我必怜恤他们，如同人怜恤服事自己的儿子。
And they will be mine, says the Lord, in the day when I make them my special property; and I will have mercy on them as a man has mercy on his son who is his servant.

那时，你们必归回，将善人和恶人。事奉神的和不事奉神的，分别出来。
Then you will again see how the upright man is different from the sinner, and the servant of God from him who is not.

万军之耶和华说，那日临近，势如烧着的火炉。凡狂傲的和行恶的必如碎秸。在那日必被烧尽，根本枝条一无存留。
For see, the day is coming, it is burning like an oven; all the men of pride and all who do evil will be dry stems of grass: and in the day which is coming they will be burned up, says the Lord of armies, till they have not a root or a branch.

但向你们敬畏我名的人，必有公义的日头出现。其光线有医治之能（光线原文作翅膀）。你们必出来跳跃，如圈里的肥犊。
But to you who give worship to my name, the sun of righteousness will come up with new life in its wings; and you will go out, playing like young oxen full of food.

你们必践踏恶人。在我所定的日子，他们必如灰尘在你们脚掌之下。这是万军之耶和华说的。
And the evil-doers will be crushed under you, they will be dust under your feet, in the day when I do my work, says the Lord of armies.

你们当记念我仆人摩西的律法，就是我在何烈山，为以色列众人所吩咐他的律例典章。
Keep in mind the law of Moses, my servant, which I gave him in Horeb for all Israel, even the rules and the decisions.

看哪，耶和华大而可畏之日未到以前，我必差遣先知以利亚到你们那里去。
See, I am sending you Elijah the prophet before the day of the Lord comes, that great day, greatly to be feared.

他必使父亲的心转向儿女，儿女的心转向父亲，免得我来咒诅遍地。
And by him the hearts of fathers will be turned to their children, and the hearts of children to their fathers; for fear that I may come and put the earth under a curse.

