以下所记的，是摩西在约旦河东的旷野，疏弗对面的亚拉巴，就是巴兰，陀弗，拉班，哈洗录，底撒哈中间，向以色列众人所说的话。
These are the words which Moses said to all Israel on the far side of Jordan, in the waste land in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran on the one side, and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab on the other.

从何烈山经过西珥山，到加低斯巴尼亚，有十一天的路程。
It is eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.

出埃及第四十年，十一月初一日，摩西照耶和华借着他所吩咐以色列人的话，都晓谕他们。
Now in the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses gave to the children of Israel all the orders which the Lord had given him for them;

那时，他已经击杀了住希实本的亚摩利王西宏，和住以得来，亚斯他录的巴珊王噩。
After he had overcome Sihon, king of the Amorites, ruling in Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, ruling in Ashtaroth, at Edrei:

摩西在约旦河东的摩押地讲律法说，
On the far side of Jordan in the land of Moab, Moses gave the people this law, saying,

耶和华我们的神在何烈山晓谕我们说，你们在这山上住的日子够了。
The Lord our God said to us in Horeb, You have been long enough in this mountain:

要起行转到亚摩利人的山地和靠近这山地的各处，就是亚拉巴，山地，高原，南地，沿海一带迦南人的地，并利巴嫩山又到伯拉大河。
Make a move now, and go on your way into the hill-country of the Amorites and the places near it, in the Arabah and the hill-country and in the lowlands and in the South and by the seaside, all the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.

如今我将这地摆在你们面前。你们要进去得这地，就是耶和华向你们列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓应许赐给他们和他们后裔为业之地。
See, all the land is before you: go in and take for yourselves the land which the Lord gave by an oath to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and to their seed after them.

那时，我对你们说，管理你们的重任，我独自担当不起。
At that time I said to you, I am not able to undertake the care of you by myself;

耶和华你们的神使你们多起来。看哪，你们今日像天上的星那样多。
The Lord your God has given you increase, and now you are like the stars of heaven in number.

惟愿耶和华你们列祖的神使你们比如今更多千倍，照他所应许你们的话赐福与你们。
May the Lord, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times greater in number than you are, and give you his blessing as he has said!

但你们的麻烦，和管理你们的重任，并你们的争讼，我独自一人怎能担当得起呢？
How is it possible for me by myself to be responsible for you, and undertake the weight of all your troubles and your arguments?

你们要按着各支派选举有智慧，有见识，为众人所认识的，我立他们为你们的首领。
Take for yourselves men who are wise, far-seeing, and respected among you, from your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.

你们回答我说，照你所说的行了为妙。
And you made answer and said to me, It is good for us to do as you say.

我便将你们各支派的首领，有智慧，为众人所认识的，照你们的支派，立他们为官长，千夫长，百夫长，五十夫长，十夫长，管理你们。
So I took the heads of your tribes, wise men and respected, and made them rulers over you, captains of thousands and captains of hundreds and captains of fifties and captains of tens, and overseers of your tribes.

当时，我嘱咐你们的审判官说，你们听讼，无论是弟兄彼此争讼，是与同居的外人争讼，都要按公义判断。
And at that time I gave orders to your judges, saying, Let all questions between your brothers come before you for hearing, and give decisions uprightly between a man and his brother or one from another nation who is with him.

审判的时候，不可看人的外貌。听讼不可分贵贱，不可惧怕人，因为审判是属乎神的。若有难断的案件，可以呈到我这里，我就判断。
In judging, do not let a man's position have any weight with you; give hearing equally to small and great; have no fear of any man, for it is God who is judge: and any cause in which you are not able to give a decision, you are to put before me and I will give it a hearing.

那时，我将你们所当行的事都吩咐你们了。
And at that time I gave you all the orders which you were to do.

我们照着耶和华我们神所吩咐的从何烈山起行，经过你们所看见那大而可怕的旷野，往亚摩利人的山地去，到了加低斯巴尼亚。
Then we went on from Horeb, through all that great and cruel waste which you saw, on our way to the hill-country of the Amorites, as the Lord gave us orders; and we came to Kadesh-barnea.

我对你们说，你们已经到了耶和华我们神所赐给我们的亚摩利人之山地。
And I said to you, You have come to the hill-country of the Amorites, which the Lord our God is giving us.

看哪，耶和华你的神已将那地摆在你面前，你要照耶和华你列祖的神所说的上去得那地为业。不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。
See now, the Lord your God has put the land into your hands: go up and take it, as the Lord, the God of your fathers, has said to you; have no fear and do not be troubled.

你们都就近我来说，我们要先打发人去，为我们窥探那地，将我们上去该走何道，必进何城，都回报我们。
And you came near to me, every one of you, and said, Let us send men before us to go through the land with care and give us an account of the way we are to go and the towns to which we will come.

这话我以为美，就从你们中间选了十二个人，每支派一人。
And what you said seemed good to me, and I took twelve men from among you, one from every tribe;

于是他们起身上山地去，到以实各谷，窥探那地。
And they went up into the hill-country and came to the valley of Eshcol, and saw what was there.

他们手里拿着那地的果子下来，到我们那里，回报说，耶和华我们的神所赐给我们的是美地。
And taking in their hands some of the fruit of the land, they came down again to us, and gave us their account, saying, It is a good land which the Lord our God is giving us.

你们却不肯上去，竟违背了耶和华你们神的命令，
But going against the order of the Lord your God, you would not go up:

在帐棚内发怨言说，耶和华因为恨我们，所以将我们从埃及地领出来，要交在亚摩利人手中，除灭我们。
And you made an angry outcry in your tents, and said, In his hate for us the Lord has taken us out of the land of Egypt, to give us up into the hands of the Amorites for our destruction.

我们上哪里去呢？我们的弟兄使我们的心消化，说那地的民比我们又大又高，城邑又广大又坚固，高得顶天，并且我们在那里看见亚衲族的人。
Where are we going up? Our brothers have made our hearts feeble with fear by saying, The people are greater and taller than we are, and the towns are great and walled up to heaven; and more than this, we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.

我就对你们说，不要惊恐，也不要怕他们。
Then I said to you, Have no fear of them.

在你们前面行的耶和华你们的神必为你们争战，正如他在埃及和旷野，在你们眼前所行的一样。
The Lord your God who goes before you will be fighting for you, and will do such wonders as he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;

你们在旷野所行的路上，也曾见耶和华你们的神抚养你们，如同人抚养儿子一般，直等你们来到这地方。
And in the waste land, where you have seen how the Lord was supporting you, as a man does his son, in all your journeying till you came to this place.

你们在这事上却不信耶和华你们的神。
But for all this, you had no faith in the Lord your God,

他在路上，在你们前面行，为你们找安营的地方。夜间在火柱里，日间在云柱里，指示你们所当行的路。
Who goes before you on your way, looking for a place where you may put up your tents, in fire by night, lighting up the way you are to go, and in a cloud by day.

耶和华听见你们这话，就发怒，起誓说，
And the Lord, hearing your words, was angry, and said with an oath,

这恶世代的人，连一个也不得见我起誓应许赐给你们列祖的美地。
Truly, not one of this evil generation will see that good land which I said I would give to your fathers,

惟有耶孚尼的儿子迦勒必得看见，并且我要将他所踏过的地赐给他和他的子孙，因为他专心跟从我。
But only Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, he will see it; and to him and to his children I will give the land over which his feet have gone, because he has been true to the Lord with all his heart.

耶和华为你的缘故也向我发怒，说，你必不得进入那地。
And, in addition, the Lord was angry with me because of you, saying, You yourself will not go into it:

伺候你，嫩的儿子约书亚，他必得进入那地。你要勉励他，因为他要使以色列人承受那地为业。
Joshua, the son of Nun, your servant, he will go into the land: say to him that he is to be strong, for he will be Israel's guide into their heritage.

并且你们的妇人孩子，就是你们所说，必被掳掠的，和今日不知善恶的儿女，必进入那地。我要将那地赐给他们，他们必得为业。
And your little ones, who, you said, would come into strange hands, your children, who now have no knowledge of good or evil, they will go into that land, and to them I will give it and it will be theirs.

至于你们，要转回，从红海的路往旷野去。
But as for you, go back, journeying into the waste land by the way of the Red Sea.

那时，你们回答我说，我们得罪了耶和华，情愿照耶和华我们神一切所吩咐的上去争战。于是你们各人带着兵器，争先上山地去了。
Then you said to me, We have done evil against the Lord, we will go up to the attack, as the Lord our God has given us orders. And arming yourselves every one, you made ready to go up without care into the hill-country.

耶和华吩咐我说，你对他们说，不要上去，也不要争战。因我不在你们中间，恐怕你们被仇敌杀败了。
And the Lord said to me, Say to them, Do not go up to the attack; for I am not among you, and you will be overcome by those who are against you.

我就告诉了你们，你们却不听从，竟违背耶和华的命令，擅自上山地去了。
This I said to you, but you gave no attention and went against the orders of the Lord, and in your pride went up into the hill-country.

住那山地的亚摩利人就出来攻击你们，追赶你们，如蜂拥一般，在西珥杀退你们，直到何珥玛。
And the Amorites who were in the hill-country came out against you and put you to flight, rushing after you like bees, and overcame you in Seir, driving you even as far as Hormah.

你们便回来，在耶和华面前哭号。耶和华却不听你们的声音，也不向你们侧耳。
And you came back, weeping before the Lord; but the Lord gave no attention to your cries and did not give ear to you.

于是你们在加低斯住了许多日子。
So you were kept waiting in Kadesh for a long time.

此后，我们转回，从红海的路往旷野去，是照耶和华所吩咐我的。我们在西珥山绕行了许多日子。
Then we went back, journeying into the waste land by the way to the Red Sea, as the Lord had said to me: and we were a long time going round Mount Seir.

耶和华对我说，
And the Lord said to me,

你们绕行这山的日子够了，要转向北去。
You have been journeying round this mountain long enough: now go to the north;

你吩咐百姓说，你们弟兄以扫的子孙住在西珥，你们要经过他们的境界。他们必惧怕你们，所以你们要分外谨慎。
And give the people orders, saying, You are about to go through the land of your brothers, the children of Esau, who are living in Seir; and they will have fear of you; so take care what you do:

不可与他们争战。他们的地，连脚掌可踏之处，我都不给你们，因我已将西珥山赐给以扫为业。
Make no attack on them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even space enough for a man's foot: because I have given Mount Seir to Esau for his heritage.

你们要用钱向他们买粮吃，也要用钱向他们买水喝。
You may get food for your needs from them for a price, and water for drinking.

因为耶和华你的神在你手里所办的一切事上已赐福与你。你走这大旷野，他都知道了。这四十年，耶和华你的神常与你同在，故此你一无所缺。
For the blessing of the Lord your God has been on you in all the work of your hands: he has knowledge of your wanderings through this great waste: these forty years the Lord your God has been with you, and you have been short of nothing.

于是，我们离了我们弟兄以扫子孙所住的西珥，从亚拉巴的路，经过以拉他，以旬迦别，转向摩押旷野的路去。
So we went on past our brothers, the children of Esau, living in Seir, by the road through the Arabah, from Elath and Ezion-geber. And turning, we went by the road through the waste land of Moab.

耶和华吩咐我说，不可扰害摩押人，也不可与他们争战。他们的地，我不赐给你为业，因我已将亚珥赐给罗得的子孙为业。
And the Lord said to me, Make no attack on Moab and do not go to war with them, for I will not give you any of his land: because I have given Ar to the children of Lot for their heritage.

（先前，有以米人住在那里，民数众多，身体高大，像亚衲人一样。
(In the past the Emim were living there; a great people, equal in numbers to the Anakim and as tall;

这以米人像亚衲人。也算为利乏音人。摩押人称他们为以米人。
They are numbered among the Rephaim, like the Anakim; but are named Emim by the Moabites.

先前，何利人也住在西珥，但以扫的子孙将他们除灭，得了他们的地，接着居住，就如以色列在耶和华赐给他为业之地所行的一样。）
And the Horites in earlier times were living in Seir, but the children of Esau took their place; they sent destruction on them and took their land for themselves, as Israel did to the land of his heritage which the Lord gave them.)

现在，起来过撒烈溪。于是我们过了撒烈溪。
Get up now, and go over the stream Zered. So we went over the stream Zered.

自从离开加低斯巴尼亚，到过了撒烈溪的时候，共有三十八年，等那世代的兵丁都从营中灭尽，正如耶和华向他们所起的誓。
Thirty-eight years had gone by from the time when we came away from Kadesh-barnea till we went over the stream Zered; by that time all the generation of the men of war among us were dead, as the Lord had said.

耶和华的手也攻击他们，将他们从营中除灭，直到灭尽。
For the hand of the Lord was against them, working their destruction, till all were dead.

兵丁从民中都灭尽死亡以后，
So when death had overtaken all the men of war among the people,

耶和华吩咐我说，
The word of the Lord came to me, saying,

你今天要从摩押的境界亚珥经过，
You are about to go by Ar, the limit of the country of Moab;

走近亚扪人之地，不可扰害他们，也不可与他们争战。亚扪人的地，我不赐给你们为业，因我已将那地赐给罗得的子孙为业。
And when you come near the land of the children of Ammon, give them no cause of trouble and do not make war on them, for I will not give you any of the land of the children of Ammon for your heritage: because I have given it to the children of Lot.

（那地也算为利乏音人之地，先前利乏音人住在那里，亚扪人称他们为散送冥。
(That land is said to have been a land of the Rephaim, for Rephaim had been living there in earlier times, but they were named Zamzummim by the Ammonites;

那民众多，身体高大，像亚衲人一样，但耶和华从亚扪人面前除灭他们，亚扪人就得了他们的地，接着居住。
They were a great people, tall as the Anakim, and equal to them in number; but the Lord sent destruction on them and the children of Ammon took their place, living in their land;

正如耶和华从前为住西珥的以扫子孙将何利人从他们面前除灭，他们得了何利人的地，接着居住一样，直到今日。
As he did for the children of Esau living in Seir, when he sent destruction on the Horites before them, and they took their land where they are living to this day:

从迦斐托出来的迦斐托人将先前住在乡村直到迦萨的亚卫人除灭，接着居住。）
And the Avvim, living in the small towns as far as Gaza, came to destruction by the hands of the Caphtorim who came out from Caphtor and took their land.)

你们起来前往，过亚嫩谷。我已将亚摩利人希实本王西宏和他的地交在你手中，你要与他争战，得他的地为业。
Get up now, and go on your journey, crossing over the valley of the Arnon: see, I have given into your hands Sihon, the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and all his land: go forward to make it yours, and make war on him,

从今日起，我要使天下万民听见你的名声都惊恐惧怕，且因你发颤伤恸。
From now on I will put the fear of you in all peoples under heaven, who, hearing of you, will be shaking with fear and grief of heart because of you.

我从基底莫的旷野差遣使者去见希实本王西宏，用和睦的话说，
Then from the waste land of Kedemoth I sent representatives to Sihon, king of Heshbon, with words of peace, saying,

求你容我从你的地经过，只走大道，不偏左右。
Let me go through your land: I will keep to the highway, not turning to the right or to the left;

你可以卖粮给我吃，也可以卖水给我喝，只要容我步行过去，
Let me have food, at a price, for my needs, and water for drinking: only let me go through on foot;

就如住西珥的以扫子孙和住亚珥的摩押人待我一样，等我过了约旦河，好进入耶和华我们神所赐给我们的地。
As the children of Esau did for me in Seir and the Moabites in Ar; till I have gone over Jordan into the land which the Lord our God is giving us.

但希实本王西宏不容我们从他那里经过。因为耶和华你的神使他心中刚硬，性情顽梗，为要将他交在你手中，像今日一样。
But Sihon, king of Heshbon, would not let us go through; for the Lord your God made his spirit hard and his heart strong, so that he might give him up into your hands as at this day.

耶和华对我说，从此起首，我要将西宏和他的地交给你。你要得他的地为业。
And the Lord said to me, See, from now on I have given Sihon and his land into your hands: go forward now to take his land and make it yours.

那时，西宏和他的众民出来攻击我们，在雅杂与我们交战。
Then Sihon came out against us with all his people, to make an attack on us at Jahaz.

耶和华我们的神将他交给我们，我们就把他和他的儿子，并他的众民，都击杀了。
And the Lord our God gave him into our hands; and we overcame him and his sons and all his people.

我们夺了他的一切城邑，将有人烟的各城，连女人带孩子，尽都毁灭，没有留下一个。
At that time we took all his towns, and gave them over to complete destruction, together with men, women, and children; we had no mercy on any:

惟有牲畜和所夺的各城，并其中的财物，都取为自己的掠物。
Only the cattle we took for ourselves, with the goods from the towns we had taken.

从亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥和谷中的城，直到基列，耶和华我们的神都交给我们了，没有一座城高得使我们不能攻取的。
From Aroer on the edge of the valley of the Arnon and from the town in the valley as far as Gilead, no town was strong enough to keep us out; the Lord our God gave them all into our hands:

惟有亚扪人之地，凡靠近雅博河的地，并山地的城邑，与耶和华我们神所禁止我们去的地方，都没有挨近。
But you did not go near the land of the children of Ammon, that is, all the side of the river Jabbok or the towns of the hill-country, wherever the Lord our God had said we were not to go.

以后，我们转回，向巴珊去。巴珊王噩和他的众民都出来，在以得来与我们交战。
Then turning we took the road to Bashan: and Og, king of Bashan, came out against us with all his people, and made an attack on us at Edrei.

耶和华对我说，不要怕他。因我已将他和他的众民，并他的地，都交在你手中。你要待他像从前待住希实本的亚摩利王西宏一样。
And the Lord said to me, Have no fear of him: for I have given him and all his people and his land into your hands; do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was ruling in Heshbon.

于是耶和华我们的神也将巴珊王噩和他的众民都交在我们手中。我们杀了他们，没有留下一个。
So the Lord our God gave up Og, king of Bashan, and all his people into our hands; and we overcame him so completely that all his people came to their end in the fight.

那时，我们夺了他所有的城，共有六十座，没有一座城不被我们所夺。这为亚珥歌伯的全境，就是巴珊地噩王的国。
At that time we took all his towns; there was not one town of the sixty towns, all the country of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which we did not take.

这些城都有坚固的高墙，有门有闩。此外还有许多无城墙的乡村。
All these towns had high walls round them with doors and locks; and in addition we took a great number of unwalled towns.

我们将这些都毁灭了，像从前待希实本王西宏一样，把有人烟的各城，连女人带孩子，尽都毁灭。
And we put them to the curse, every town together with men, women, and children.

惟有一切牲畜和城中的财物都取为自己的掠物。
But we took for ourselves all the cattle and the stored wealth of the towns.

那时，我们从约旦河东两个亚摩利王的手将亚嫩谷直到黑门山之地夺过来
At that time we took their land from the two kings of the Amorites on the far side of Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon;

（这黑门山，西顿人称为西连，亚摩利人称为示尼珥），
(By the Sidonians, Hermon is named Sirion, and by the Amorites Shenir;)

就是夺了平原的各城，基列全地，巴珊全地，直到撒迦和以得来，都是巴珊王噩国内的城邑。
All the towns of the table-land and all Gilead and Bashan as far as Salecah and Edrei, towns of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

（利乏音人所剩下的只有巴珊王噩。他的床是铁的，长九肘，宽四肘，都是以人肘为度。现今岂不是在亚扪人的拉巴吗？）
(For Og, king of Bashan, was the last of all the Rephaim; his bed was made of iron; is it not in Rabbah, in the land of the children of Ammon? It was nine cubits long and four cubits wide, measured by the common cubit.)

那时，我们得了这地。从亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥起，我将基列山地的一半，并其中的城邑，都给了流便人和迦得人。
And this land which we took at that time, from Aroer by the valley of the Arnon, and half the hill-country of Gilead with its towns, I gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites.

其余的基列地和巴珊全地，就是噩王的国，我给了玛拿西半支派。亚珥歌伯全地乃是巴珊全地。这叫作利乏音人之地。
The rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, all the land of Argob, together with Bashan, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh. (This land is named the land of the Rephaim.

玛拿西的子孙睚珥占了亚珥歌伯全境，直到基述人和玛迦人的交界，就按自己的名称这巴珊地为哈倭特睚珥，直到今日。
Jair, the son of Manasseh, took all the land of Argob, as far as the country of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, naming it, Bashan, Havvoth-Jair after himself, as it is to this day.)

我又将基列给了玛吉。
And Gilead I gave to Machir.

从基列到亚嫩谷，以谷中为界，直到亚扪人交界的雅博河，我给了流便人和迦得人，
And the land from Gilead to the valley of the Arnon, with the middle of the valley as a limit, as far as the river Jabbok which is the limit of the country of the children of Ammon, I gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites;

又将亚拉巴和靠近约旦河之地，从基尼烈直到亚拉巴海，就是盐海，并毗斯迦山根东边之地，都给了他们。
As well as the Arabah, with the river Jordan as their limit, from Chinnereth to the Salt Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah to the east.

那时，我吩咐你们说，耶和华你们的神已将这地赐给你们为业。你们所有的勇士都要带着兵器，在你们的弟兄以色列人前面过去。
At that time I gave you orders, saying, The Lord has given you this land for your heritage: all the men of war are to go over armed before your brothers the children of Israel.

但你们的妻子，孩子，牲畜，（我知道你们有许多的牲畜）可以住在我所赐给你们的各城里。
But your wives and your little ones and your cattle (for it is clear that you have much cattle) may go on living in the towns I have given you;

等到你们弟兄在约旦河那边，也得耶和华你们神所赐给他们的地，又使他们得享平安，与你们一样，你们才可以回到我所赐给你们为业之地。
Till the Lord has given rest to your brothers as to you, and till they have taken for themselves the land which the Lord your God is giving them on the other side of Jordan: then you may go back, every man of you, to the heritage which I have given you.

那时我吩咐约书亚说，你亲眼看见了耶和华你神向这二王所行的。耶和华也必向你所要去的各国照样行。
And I gave orders to Joshua at that time, saying, Your eyes have seen what the Lord your God has done to these two kings: so will the Lord do to all the kingdoms into which you come.

你不要怕他们，因那为你争战的是耶和华你的神。
Have no fear of them, for the Lord your God will be fighting for you.

那时，我恳求耶和华说，
And at that time I made request to the Lord, saying,

主耶和华阿，你已将你的大力大能显给仆人看。在天上，在地下，有什么神能象你行事，象你有大能的作为呢？
O Lord God, you have now for the first time let your servant see your great power and the strength of your hand; for what god is there in heaven or on earth able to do such great works and such acts of power?

求你容我过去，看约旦河那边的美地，就是那佳美的山地和利巴嫩。
Let me go over, O Lord, and see the good land on the other side of Jordan, and that fair mountain country, even Lebanon.

但耶和华因你们的缘故向我发怒，不应允我，对我说，罢了，你不要向我再提这事。
But the Lord was angry with me because of you and would not give ear to my prayer; and the Lord said to me, Let it be enough, say no more about this thing.

你且上毗斯迦山顶去，向东，西，南，北举目观望，因为你必不能过这约旦河。
Go up to the top of Pisgah, and turning your eyes to the west and the north, to the south and the east, see the land with your eyes: for you are not to go over Jordan.

你却要嘱咐约书亚，勉励他，使他胆壮。因为他必在这百姓前面过去，使他们承受你所要观看之地。
But give my orders to Joshua, comforting him and making him strong; for he is to go over Jordan at the head of this people, and he will give them this land which you will see for their heritage.

于是我们住在伯毗珥对面的谷中。
So we were waiting in the valley facing Beth-peor.

以色列人哪，现在我所教训你们的律例典章，你们要听从遵行，好叫你们存活，得以进入耶和华你们列祖之神所赐给你们的地，承受为业。
And now give ear, O Israel, to the laws and the decisions which I am teaching you, and do them; so that life may be yours, and you may go in and take for yourselves the land which the Lord, the God of your fathers, is giving you.

所吩咐你们的话，你们不可加添，也不可删减，好叫你们遵守我所吩咐的，就是耶和华你们神的命令。
Make no addition to the orders which I give you, and take nothing from them, but keep the orders of the Lord your God which I give you.

耶和华因巴力毗珥的事所行的，你们亲眼看见了。凡随从巴力毗珥的人，耶和华你们的神都从你们中间除灭了。
Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor: for destruction came from the Lord on all those among you who went after Baal-peor.

惟有你们专靠耶和华你们神的人，今日全都存活。
But you who kept faith with the Lord are living, every one of you, today.

我照着耶和华我神所吩咐的将律例典章教训你们，使你们在所要进去得为业的地上遵行。
I have been teaching you laws and decisions, as I was ordered to do by the Lord my God, so that you might keep them in the land to which you are going to take it for your heritage.

所以你们要谨守遵行。这就是你们在万民眼前的智慧，聪明。他们听见这一切律例，必说，这大国的人真是有智慧，有聪明。
So keep these laws and do them; for so will your wisdom and good sense be clear in the eyes of the peoples, who hearing all these laws will say, Truly, this great nation is a wise and far-seeing people.

哪一大国的人有神与他们相近，像耶和华我们的神，在我们求告他的时候与我们相近呢？
For what great nation has a god so near to them as the Lord our God is, whenever we are turned to him in prayer?

又哪一大国有这样公义的律例典章，像我今日在你们面前所陈明的这一切律法呢？
And what great nation has laws and decisions so right as all this law which I put before you today?

你只要谨慎，殷勤保守你的心灵，免得忘记你亲眼所看见的事，又免得你一生，这事离开你的心。总要传给你的子子孙孙。
Only take care, and keep watch on your soul, for fear that the things which your eyes have seen go from your memory and from your heart all the days of your life; but let the knowledge of them be given to your children and to your children's children;

你在何烈山站在耶和华你神面前的那日，耶和华对我说，你为我招聚百姓，我要叫他们听见我的话，使他们存活在世的日子，可以学习敬畏我，又可以教训儿女这样行。
That day when you were waiting before the Lord your God in Horeb, and the Lord said to me, Make all the people come together, so that hearing my words they may go in fear of me all the days of their life on earth and give this teaching to their children.

那时你们近前来，站在山下。山上有火焰冲天，并有昏黑，密云，幽暗。
And you came near, waiting at the foot of the mountain; and flames of fire went up from the mountain to the heart of heaven, with dark clouds, and all was black as night.

耶和华从火焰中对你们说话，你们只听见声音，却没有看见形像。
And the voice of the Lord came to you out of the fire: the sound of his words came to your ears but you saw no form; there was nothing but a voice.

他将所吩咐你们当守的约指示你们，就是十条诫，并将这诫写在两块石版上。
And he gave you his agreement with you, the ten rules which you were to keep, which he put in writing on the two stones of the law.

那时耶和华又吩咐我将律例典章教训你们，使你们在所要过去得为业的地上遵行。
And the Lord gave me orders at that time to make clear to you these laws and decisions, so that you might do them in the land to which you are going, and which is to be your heritage.

所以，你们要分外谨慎。因为耶和华在何烈山，从火中对你们说话的那日，你们没有看见什么形像。
So keep watch on yourselves with care; for you saw no form of any sort on the day when the voice of the Lord came to you in Horeb out of the heart of the fire:

惟恐你们败坏自己，雕刻偶像，仿佛什么男像女像，
So that you may not be turned to evil ways and make for yourselves an image in the form of any living thing, male or female,

或地上走兽的像，或空中飞鸟的像，
Or any beast of the earth, or winged bird of the air,

或地上爬物的像，或地底下水中鱼的像。
Or of anything which goes flat on the earth, or any fish in the water under the earth.

又恐怕你向天举目观看，见耶和华你的神为天下万民所摆列的日月星，就是天上的万象，自己便被勾引敬拜事奉它。
And when your eyes are lifted up to heaven, and you see the sun and the moon and the stars, all the army of heaven, do not let yourselves be moved to give them worship, or become the servants of what the Lord has given equally to all peoples under heaven.

耶和华将你们从埃及领出来，脱离铁炉，要特作自己产业的子民，像今日一样。
But the Lord has taken you out of the flaming fire, out of Egypt, to be to him the people of his heritage, as you are today.

耶和华又因你们的缘故向我发怒，起誓必不容我过约旦河，也不容我进入耶和华你神所赐你为业的那美地。
And the Lord was angry with me because of you, and made an oath that I was not to go over Jordan into the good land which the Lord is giving you for your heritage:

我只得死在这地，不能过约旦河。但你们必过去得那美地。
But death is to come to me in this land, I may not go over Jordan: but you will go over and take that good land for your heritage.

你们要谨慎，免得忘记耶和华你们神与你们所立的约，为自己雕刻偶像，就是耶和华你神所禁止你作的偶像。
Take care that you do not let the agreement of the Lord your God, which he has made with you, go out of your mind, or make for yourselves images of any sort, against the orders which the Lord your God has given you.

因为耶和华你的神乃是烈火，是忌邪的神。
For the Lord your God is an all-burning fire, and he will not let the honour which is his be given to any other.

你们在那地住久了，生子生孙，就雕刻偶像，仿佛什么形像，败坏自己，行耶和华你神眼中看为恶的事，惹他发怒。
If, when you have had children and children's children, and have been living a long time in the land, you are turned to evil ways, and make an image of any sort, and do evil in the eyes of the Lord your God, moving him to wrath:

我今日呼天唤地向你们作见证，你们必在过约旦河得为业的地上速速灭尽。你们不能在那地上长久，必尽行除灭。
May heaven and earth be my witnesses against you today, that destruction will quickly overtake you, cutting you off from that land which you are going over Jordan to take; your days will not be long in that land, but you will come to a complete end.

耶和华必使你们分散在万民中。在他所领你们到的万国里，你们剩下的人数稀少。
And the Lord will send you wandering among the peoples; only a small band of you will be kept from death among the nations where the Lord will send you.

在那里，你们必事奉人手所造的神，就是用木石造成，不能看，不能听，不能吃，不能闻的神。
There you will be the servants of gods, made by men's hands, of wood and stone, having no power of seeing or hearing or taking food or smelling.

但你们在那里必寻求耶和华你的神。你尽心尽性寻求他的时候，就必寻见。
But if in those lands you are turned again to the Lord your God, searching for him with all your heart and soul, he will not keep himself from you.

日后你遭遇一切患难的时候，你必归回耶和华你的神，听从他的话。
When you are in trouble and all these things have come on you, if, in the future, you are turned again to the Lord your God, and give ear to his voice:

耶和华你神原是有怜悯的神。他总不撇下你，不灭绝你，也不忘记他起誓与你列祖所立的约。
Because the Lord your God is a God of mercy, he will not take away his help from you or let destruction overtake you, or be false to the agreement which he made by an oath with your fathers.

你且考察在你以前的世代，自神造人在世以来，从天这边到天那边，曾有何民听见神在火中说话的声音，象你听见还能存活呢？这样的大事何曾有，何曾听见呢？
Give thought now to the days which are past, before your time, from the day when God first gave life to man on the earth, and searching from one end of heaven to the other, see if such a great thing as this has ever been, or if anything like it has been talked of in story.


Has any people ever gone on living after hearing the voice of God out of the heart of the fire as you did?

神何曾从别的国中将一国的人民领出来，用试验，神迹，奇事，争战，大能的手，和伸出来的膀臂，并大可畏的事，像耶和华你们的神在埃及，在你们眼前为你们所行的一切事呢？
Has God ever before taken a nation for himself from out of another nation, by punishments and signs and wonders, by war and by a strong hand and a stretched-out arm and great acts of wonder and fear, as the Lord your God did for you in Egypt, before your very eyes?

这是显给你看，要使你知道，惟有耶和华他是神，除他以外，再无别神。
All this he let you see, so that you might be certain that the Lord is God and there is no other.

他从天上使你听见他的声音，为要教训你，又在地上使你看见他的烈火，并且听见他从火中所说的话。
Out of heaven itself his voice came to you, teaching you; and on earth he let you see his great fire; and his words came to your ears out of the heart of the fire.

因他爱你的列祖，所以拣选他们的后裔，用大能亲自领你出了埃及，
And because of his love for your fathers, he took their seed and made it his, and he himself, present among you, took you out of Egypt by his great power;

要将比你强大的国民从你面前赶出，领你进去，将他们的地赐你为业，像今日一样。
Driving out before you nations greater and stronger than you, to take you into their land and give it to you for your heritage, as at this day.

所以，今日你要知道，也要记在心上，天上地下惟有耶和华他是神，除他以外，再无别神。
So today be certain, and keep the knowledge deep in your hearts, that the Lord is God, in heaven on high and here on earth; there is no other God.

我今日将他的律例诫命晓谕你，你要遵守，使你和你的子孙可以得福，并使你的日子在耶和华你神所赐的地上得以长久。
Then keep his laws and his orders which I give you today, so that it may be well for you and for your children after you, and that your lives may be long in the land which the Lord your God is giving you for ever.

那时，摩西在约旦河东，向日出之地，分定三座城，
Then Moses had three towns marked out on the far side of Jordan looking to the east;

使那素无仇恨，无心杀了人的，可以逃到这三城之中的一座城，就得存活，
To which anyone causing the death of his neighbour in error and not through hate, might go in flight; so that in one of these towns he might be kept from death:

为流便人分定旷野平原的比悉。为迦得人分定基列的拉末。为玛拿西人分定巴珊的哥兰。
The names of the towns were Bezer in the waste land, in the table-land, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan for Manasseh.

摩西在以色列人面前所陈明的律法
This is the law which Moses put before the children of Israel:

就是摩西在以色列人出埃及后所传给他们的法度，律例，典章。
These are the rules and the laws and the decisions which Moses gave to the children of Israel after they came out of Egypt;

在约旦河东伯毗珥对面的谷中，在住希实本，亚摩利王西宏之地。这西宏是摩西和以色列人出埃及后所击杀的。
On the far side of Jordan, in the valley facing Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was ruling in Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel overcame after they had come out of Egypt:

他们得了他的地，又得了巴珊王噩的地，就是两个亚摩利王，在约旦河东向日出之地。
And they took his land for a heritage, and the land of Og, king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, whose lands were on the other side of Jordan to the east;

从亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥，直到西云山，就是黑门山。
From Aroer on the edge of the valley of the Arnon as far as Mount Sion, which is Hermon,

还有约旦河东的全亚拉巴，直到亚拉巴海，靠近毗斯迦山根。
And all the Arabah on the far side of Jordan to the east, as far as the sea of the Arabah under the slopes of Pisgah.

摩西将以色列众人召了来，对他们说，以色列人哪，我今日晓谕你们的律例典章，你们要听，可以学习，谨守遵行。
And Moses sent for all Israel, and said to them, Give ear, O Israel, to the laws and the decisions which I give you today, and give attention to them so that you may keep and do them.

耶和华我们的神在何烈山与我们立约。
The Lord our God made an agreement with us in Horeb.

这约不是与我们列祖立的，乃是与我们今日在这里存活之人立的。
The Lord did not make this agreement with our fathers but with us, who are all living and present here today.

耶和华在山上，从火中，面对面与你们说话。
The word of the Lord came to you face to face on the mountain, out of the heart of the fire,

（那时我站在耶和华和你们中间，要将耶和华的话传给你们，因为你们惧怕那火，没有上山）
(I was between the Lord and you at that time, to make clear to you the word of the Lord: because, through fear of the fire, you did not go up the mountain;) saying,

说，我是耶和华你的神，曾将你从埃及地为奴之家领出来。
I am the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

除了我以外，你不可有别的神。
You are to have no other gods but me.

不可为自己雕刻偶像，也不可作什么形像，仿佛上天，下地和地底下，水中的百物。
You may not make for yourselves an image in the form of anything in heaven or on earth or in the waters under the earth:

不可跪拜那些像，也不可事奉它，因为我耶和华你的神是忌邪的神。恨我的，我必追讨他的罪，自父及子，直到三，四代。
You may not go down on your faces before them or give them worship: for I, the Lord your God, am a God who will not give his honour to another; and I will send punishment on the children for the wrongdoing of their fathers, to the third and fourth generation of my haters;

爱我，守我诫命的，我必向他们发慈爱，直到千代。
And I will have mercy through a thousand generations on those who have love for me and keep my laws.

不可妄称耶和华你神的名。因为妄称耶和华名的，耶和华必不以他为无罪。
You are not to make use of the name of the Lord your God for an evil purpose; whoever takes the Lord's name on his lips for an evil purpose will be judged as a sinner by the Lord.

当照耶和华你神所吩咐的守安息日为圣日。
Keep the Sabbath day as a holy day, as you have been ordered by the Lord your God.

六日要劳碌作你一切的工，
On six days do all your work:

但第七日是向耶和华你神当守的安息日。这一日，你和你的儿女，仆婢，牛，驴，牲畜，并在你城里寄居的客旅，无论何工都不可作，使你的仆婢可以和你一样安息。
But the seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God; on that day do no work, you or your son or your daughter, or your man-servant or your woman-servant, or your ox or your ass or any of your cattle, or the man from a strange country who is living among you; so that your man-servant and your woman-servant may have rest as well as you.

你也要记念你在埃及地作过奴仆。耶和华你神用大能的手和伸出来的膀臂将你从那里领出来。因此，耶和华你的神吩咐你守安息日。
And keep in mind that you were a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord your God took you out of that land by his strong hand and his stretched-out arm: for this reason the Lord has given you orders to keep the Sabbath day.

当照耶和华你神所吩咐的孝敬父母，使你得福，并使你的日子在耶和华你神所赐你的地上得以长久。
Give honour to your father and your mother, as you have been ordered by the Lord your God; so that your life may be long and all may be well for you in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

不可杀人。
Do not put anyone to death without cause.

不可奸淫。
Do not be false to the married relation.

不可偷盗。
Do not take the property of another.

不可作假见证陷害人。
Do not give false witness against your neighbour;

不可贪恋人的妻子。也不可贪图人的房屋，田地，仆婢，牛，驴，并他一切所有的。
Or let your desire be turned to your neighbour's wife, or his house or his field or his man-servant or his woman-servant or his ox or his ass or anything which is your neighbour's.

这些话是耶和华在山上，从火中，云中，幽暗中，大声晓谕你们全会众的。此外并没有添别的话。他就把这话写在两块石版上，交给我了。
These words the Lord said to all of you together on the mountain, out of the heart of the fire, out of the cloud and the dark, with a great voice: and he said no more; he put them in writing on the two stones of the law and gave them to me.

那时，火焰烧山，你们听见从黑暗中出来的声音。你们支派中所有的首领和长老都来就近我，
And after hearing the voice which came out of the dark while the mountain was burning with fire, all the heads of your tribes and your chiefs came to me,

说，看哪，耶和华我们神将他的荣光和他的大能显给我们看，我们又听见他的声音从火中出来。今日我们得见神与人说话，人还存活。
And said, The Lord has let us see his glory and his power, and his voice has come to us out of the fire: today we have seen that a man may go on living even after hearing the voice of God.

现在这大火将要烧灭我们，我们何必冒死呢？若再听见耶和华我们神的声音就必死亡。
Why then is death to be our fate? For if the voice of the Lord our God comes to us any more, death will overtake us, and we will be burned up in this great fire.

凡属血气的，曾有何人听见永生神的声音从火中出来，像我们听见还能存活呢？
For what man is there in all the earth, who, hearing the voice of the living God as we have, out of the heart of the fire, has been kept from death?

求你近前去，听耶和华我们神所要说的一切话，将他对你说的话都传给我们，我们就听从遵行。
Do you go near: and after hearing everything which the Lord our God has to say, give us an account of all he has said to you, and we will give ear, and do it.

你们对我说的话，耶和华都听见了。耶和华对我说，这百姓的话，我听见了。他们所说的都是。
Then the Lord, hearing your words to me, said to me, The words which this people have said to you have come to my ears: what they have said is well said.

惟愿他们存这样的心敬畏我，常遵守我的一切诫命，使他们和他们的子孙永远得福。
If only they had such a heart in them at all times, so that they might go in fear of me and keep my orders and that it might be well for them and for their children for ever!

你去对他们说，你们回帐棚去吧。
Now say to them, Go back to your tents.

至于你，可以站在我这里，我要将一切诫命，律例，典章传给你。你要教训他们，使他们在我赐他们为业的地上遵行。
But as for you, keep your place here by me, and I will give you all the orders and the laws and the decisions which you are to make clear to them, so that they may do them in the land which I am giving them for their heritage.

所以，你们要照耶和华你们神所吩咐的谨守遵行，不可偏离左右。
Take care, then, to do whatever the Lord your God has given you orders to do; let there be no turning away to the right hand or to the left.

耶和华你们神所吩咐你们行的，你们都要去行，使你们可以存活得福，并使你们的日子在所要承受的地上得以长久。
Go on walking in the way ordered for you by the Lord your God, so that life may be yours and it may be well for you, and your days may be long in the land of your heritage.

这是耶和华你们神所吩咐教训你们的诫命，律例，典章，使你们在所要过去得为业的地上遵行，
Now these are the orders and the laws and the decisions which the Lord your God gave me for your teaching, so that you might do them in the land of your heritage to which you are going:

好叫你和你子子孙孙一生敬畏耶和华你的神，谨守他的一切律例诫命，就是我所吩咐你的，使你的日子得以长久。
So that living in the fear of the Lord your God, you may keep all his laws and his orders, which I give you: you and your son and your son's son, all the days of your life; and so that your life may be long.

以色列阿，你要听，要谨守遵行，使你可以在那流奶与蜜之地得以享福，人数极其增多，正如耶和华你列祖的神所应许你的。
So give ear, O Israel, and take care to do this; so that it may be well for you, and you may be greatly increased, as the Lord the God of your fathers has given you his word, in a land flowing with milk and honey.

以色列阿，你要听。耶和华我们神是独一的主。
Give ear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord:

你要尽心，尽性，尽力爱耶和华你的神。
And the Lord your God is to be loved with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength.

我今日所吩咐你的话都要记在心上，
Keep these words, which I say to you this day, deep in your hearts;

也要殷勤教训你的儿女。无论你坐在家里，行在路上，躺下，起来，都要谈论。
Teaching them to your children with all care, talking of them when you are at rest in your house or walking by the way, when you go to sleep and when you get up.

也要系在手上为记号，戴在额上为经文。
Let them be fixed as a sign on your hand, and marked on your brow;

又要写在你房屋的门框上，并你的城门上。
Have them lettered on the pillars of your houses and over the doors of your towns.

耶和华你的神领你进他向你列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓应许给你的地。那里有城邑，又大又美，非你所建造的。
And when the Lord your God has taken you into the land which he gave his oath to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, that he would give you; with great and fair towns which were not of your building;

有房屋，装满各样美物，非你所装满的。有凿成的水井，非你所凿成的。还有葡萄园，橄榄园，非你所栽种的。你吃了而且饱足。
And houses full of good things not stored up by you, and places for storing water which you did not make, and vine-gardens and olive-trees not of your planting; and you have taken food and are full;

那时你要谨慎，免得你忘记将你从埃及地，为奴之家领出来的耶和华。
Then take care that you keep your hearts true to the Lord, who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

你要敬畏耶和华你的神，事奉他，指着他的名起誓。
Let the fear of the Lord your God be in your hearts, and be his servants, taking your oaths by his name.

不可随从别神，就是你们四围国民的神。
Do not go after other gods, the gods of the peoples round about you;

因为在你们中间的耶和华你神是忌邪的神，惟恐耶和华你神的怒气向你发作，就把你从地上除灭。
For the Lord your God who is with you is a God who will not let his honour be given to another; or the wrath of the Lord will be burning against you, causing your destruction from the face of the earth.

你们不可试探耶和华你们的神，象你们在玛撒那样试探他。
Do not put the Lord your God to the test as you did in Massah.

要留意遵守耶和华你们神所吩咐的诫命，法度，律例。
Keep with care the orders of the Lord your God, and his rules and his laws which he has given you;

耶和华眼中看为正，看为善的，你都要遵行，使你可以享福，并可以进去得耶和华向你列祖起誓应许的那美地，
And do what is upright and good in the eyes of the Lord your God, so that it may be well for you and you may go in and take for your heritage that good land from which the Lord undertook by an oath to your fathers,

照耶和华所说的，从你面前撵出你的一切仇敌。
To send out from before you all those who are against you.

日后，你的儿子问你说，耶和华我们神吩咐你们的这些法度，律例，典章是什么意思呢？
And when your son says to you in time to come, What is the reason for these rules and laws and decisions which the Lord our God has given you?

你就告诉你的儿子说，我们在埃及作过法老的奴仆。耶和华用大能的手将我们从埃及领出来，
Then you will say to your son, We were servants under Pharaoh's yoke in Egypt; and the Lord took us out of Egypt with a strong hand:

在我们眼前，将重大可怕的神迹奇事施行在埃及地和法老并他全家的身上，
And the Lord did great signs and wonders against Egypt, and against Pharaoh and all his house, before our eyes:

将我们从那里领出来，要领我们进入他向我们列祖起誓应许之地，把这地赐给我们。
And he took us out from that place, guiding us here to give us this land, as he said in his oath to our fathers.

耶和华又吩咐我们遵行这一切律例，要敬畏耶和华我们的神，使我们常得好处，蒙他保全我们的生命，像今日一样。
And the Lord gave us orders to keep all these laws, in the fear of the Lord our God, so that it might be well for us for ever, and that he might keep us from death, as he has done to this day.

我们若照耶和华我们神所吩咐的一切诫命谨守遵行，这就是我们的义了。
And it will be our righteousness if we take care to keep all this order before the Lord our God as he has given it to us.

耶和华你神领你进入要得为业之地，从你面前赶出许多国民，就是赫人，革迦撒人，亚摩利人，迦南人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人，共七国的民，都比你强大。
When the Lord your God takes you into the land where you are going, which is to be your heritage, and has sent out the nations before you, the Hittites and the Girgashites and the Amorites and the Canaanites and the Perizzites and the Hivites and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and stronger than you;

耶和华你神将他们交给你击杀，那时你要把他们灭绝净尽，不可与他们立约，也不可怜恤他们。
And when the Lord has given them up into your hands and you have overcome them, give them up to complete destruction: make no agreement with them, and have no mercy on them:

不可与他们结亲。不可将你的女儿嫁他们的儿子，也不可叫你的儿子娶他们的女儿。
Do not take wives or husbands from among them; do not give your daughters to their sons, or take their daughters for your sons.

因为他必使你儿子转离不跟从主，去事奉别神，以致耶和华的怒气向你们发作，就速速地将你们灭绝。
For through them your sons will be turned from me to the worship of other gods: and the Lord will be moved to wrath against you and send destruction on you quickly.

你们却要这样待他们，拆毁他们的祭坛，打碎他们的柱像，砍下他们的木偶，用火焚烧他们雕刻的偶像。
But this is what you are to do to them: their altars are to be pulled down and their pillars broken, and their holy trees cut down and their images burned with fire.

因为你归耶和华你神为圣洁的民。耶和华你神从地上的万民中拣选你，特作自己的子民。
For you are a holy people to the Lord your God: marked out by the Lord your God to be his special people out of all the nations on the face of the earth.

耶和华专爱你们，拣选你们，并非因你们的人数多于别民，原来你们的人数在万民中是最少的。
The Lord did not give you his love or take you for himself because you were more in number than any other people; for you were the smallest of the nations:

只因耶和华爱你们，又因要守他向你们列祖所起的誓，就用大能的手领你们出来，从为奴之家救赎你们脱离埃及王法老的手。
But because of his love for you, and in order to keep his oath to your fathers, the Lord took you out with the strength of his hand, making you free from the prison-house and from the hand of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.

所以，你要知道耶和华你的神，他是神，是信实的神。向爱他，守他诫命的人守约，施慈爱，直到千代。
Be certain, then, that the Lord your God is God; whose faith and mercy are unchanging, who keeps his word through a thousand generations to those who have love for him and keep his laws;

向恨他的人当面报应他们，将他们灭绝。凡恨他的人必报应他们，决不迟延。
Rewarding his haters to their face with destruction; he will have no mercy on his hater, but will give him open punishment.

所以，你要谨守遵行我今日所吩咐你的诫命，律例，典章。
So keep the orders and the laws and the decisions which I give you today and do them.

你们果然听从这些典章，谨守遵行，耶和华你神就必照他向你列祖所起的誓守约，施慈爱。
And it will be, that if you give attention to these decisions and keep and do them, then the Lord will keep his agreement with you and his mercy, as he said in his oath to your fathers.

他必爱你，赐福与你，使你人数增多，也必在他向你列祖起誓应许给你的地上赐福与你身所生的，地所产的，并你的五谷，新酒，和油，以及牛犊，羊羔。
And he will give you his love, blessing you and increasing you: he will send his blessing on the offspring of your body and the fruit of your land, your grain and your wine and your oil, the increase of your cattle and the young of your flock, in the land which by his oath to your fathers he undertook to give you.

你必蒙福胜过万民。你们的男女没有不能生养的，牲畜也没有不能生育的。
You will have greater blessings than any other people: no male or female among you or among your cattle will be without offspring.

耶和华必使一切的病症离开你。你所知道埃及各样的恶疾，他不加在你身上，只加在一切恨你的人身上。
And the Lord will take away from you all disease, and will not put on you any of the evil diseases of Egypt which you have seen, but will put them on your haters.

耶和华你神所要交给你的一切人民，你要将他们除灭。你眼不可顾惜他们。你也不可事奉他们的神，因这必成为你的网罗。
And you are to send destruction on all the peoples which the Lord your God gives into your hands; have no pity on them, and do not give worship to their gods; for that will be a cause of sin to you.

你若心里说，这些国的民比我更多，我怎能赶出他们呢？
If you say in your hearts, These nations are greater in number than we are: how are we to take their land from them?

你不要惧怕他们，要牢牢记念耶和华你神向法老和埃及全地所行的事，
Have no fear of them, but keep well in mind what the Lord your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt;

就是你亲眼所看见的大试验，神迹，奇事，和大能的手，并伸出来的膀臂，都是耶和华你神领你出来所用的。耶和华你神必照样待你所惧怕的一切人民。
The great punishments which your eyes saw, and the signs and the wonders and the strong hand and the stretched-out arm, by which the Lord your God took you out: so will the Lord your God do to all the peoples who are the cause of your fears.

并且耶和华你神必打发黄蜂飞到他们中间，直到那剩下而藏躲的人从你面前灭亡。
And the Lord will send a hornet among them, till all the rest who have kept themselves safe from you in secret places have been cut off.

你不要因他们惊恐，因为耶和华你神在你们中间是大而可畏的神。
Have no fear of them: for the Lord your God is with you, a great God greatly to be feared.

耶和华你神必将这些国的民从你面前渐渐赶出。你不可把他们速速灭尽，恐怕野地的兽多起来害你。
The Lord your God will send out the nations before you little by little; they are not to be rooted out quickly, for fear that the beasts of the field may be increased overmuch against you.

耶和华你神必将他们交给你，大大地扰乱他们，直到他们灭绝了。
But the Lord your God will give them up into your hands, overpowering them till their destruction is complete.

又要将他们的君王交在你手中，你就使他们的名从天下消灭。必无一人能在你面前站立得住，直到你将他们灭绝了。
He will give their kings into your hands, and you will put their names out of existence under heaven; there is not one of them who will not give way before you, till their destruction is complete.

他们雕刻的神像，你们要用火焚烧。其上的金银，你不可贪图，也不可收取，免得你因此陷入网罗。这原是耶和华你神所憎恶的。
The images of their gods are to be burned with fire: have no desire for the gold and silver on them, and do not take it for yourselves, for it will be a danger to you: it is a thing disgusting to the Lord your God:

可憎的物，你不可带进家去。不然，你就成了当毁灭的，与那物一样。你要十分厌恶，十分憎嫌，因为这是当毁灭的物。
And you may not take a disgusting thing into your house, and so become cursed with its curse: but keep yourselves from it, turning from it with fear and hate, for it is a cursed thing.

我今日所吩咐的一切诫命，你们要谨守遵行，好叫你们存活，人数增多，且进去得耶和华向你们列祖起誓应许的那地。
Take care to keep all the orders which I give you today, so that you may have life and be increased and go in and take as a heritage the land which the Lord, by his oath to your fathers, undertook to give you.

你也要记念耶和华你的神在旷野引导你这四十年，是要苦炼你，试验你，要知道你心内如何，肯守他的诫命不肯。
And keep in mind the way by which the Lord your God has taken you through the waste land these forty years, so that he might make low your pride and put you to the test, to see what was in your heart and if you would keep his orders or not.

他苦炼你，任你饥饿，将你和你列祖所不认识的吗哪赐给你吃，使你知道，人活着不是单靠食物，乃是靠耶和华口里所出的一切话。
And he made low your pride and let you be without food and gave you manna for your food, a thing new to you, which your fathers never saw; so that he might make it clear to you that bread is not man's only need, but his life is in every word which comes out of the mouth of the Lord.

这四十年，你的衣服没有穿破，你的脚也没有肿。
Through all these forty years your clothing did not get old or your feet become tired.

你当心里思想，耶和华你神管教你，好像人管教儿子一样。
Keep in mind this thought, that as a son is trained by his father, so you have been trained by the Lord your God.

你要谨守耶和华你神的诫命，遵行他的道，敬畏他。
Then keep the orders of the Lord your God, fearing him and walking in his ways.

因为耶和华你神领你进入美地，那地有河，有泉，有源，从山谷中流出水来。
For the Lord your God is guiding you into a good land, a land of water-springs, of fountains, and deep streams flowing out from the valleys and the hills;

那地有小麦，大麦，葡萄树，无花果树，石榴树，橄榄树，和蜜。
A land of grain and vines and fig-trees and fair fruits; a land of oil-giving olive-trees and honey;

你在那地不缺食物，一无所缺。那地的石头是铁，山内可以挖铜。
Where there will be bread for you in full measure and you will be in need of nothing; a land where the very stones are iron and from whose hills you may get copper.

你吃得饱足，就要称颂耶和华你的神，因他将那美地赐给你了。
And you will have food enough and be full, praising the Lord your God for the good land he has given you.

你要谨慎，免得忘记耶和华你的神，不守他的诫命，典章，律例，就是我今日所吩咐你的。
Then take care that you are not turned away from the Lord your God and from keeping his orders and decisions and laws which I give you this day:

恐怕你吃得饱足，建造美好的房屋居住，
And when you have taken food and are full, and have made fair houses for yourselves and are living in them;

你的牛羊加多，你的金银增添，并你所有的全都加增，
And when your herds and your flocks are increased, and your stores of silver and gold, and you have wealth of every sort;

你就心高气傲，忘记耶和华你的神，就是将你从埃及地为奴之家领出来的，
Take care that your hearts are not lifted up in pride, giving no thought to the Lord your God who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house;

引你经过那大而可怕的旷野，那里有火蛇，蝎子，干旱无水之地。他曾为你使水从坚硬的磐石中流出来，
Who was your guide through that great and cruel waste, where there were poison-snakes and scorpions and a dry land without water; who made water come out of the hard rock for you;

又在旷野将你列祖所不认识的吗哪赐给你吃，是要苦炼你，试验你，叫你终久享福。
Who gave you manna for your food in the waste land, a food which your fathers had never seen; so that your pride might be broken and your hearts tested for your good in the end;

恐怕你心里说，这货财是我力量，我能力得来的。
Say not then, in your hearts, My power and the strength of my hands have got me this wealth.

你要记念耶和华你的神，因为得货财的力量是他给你的，为要坚定他向你列祖起誓所立的约，像今日一样。
But keep in mind the Lord your God: for it is he who gives you the power to get wealth, so that he may give effect to the agreement which he made by his oath with your fathers, as at this day.

你若忘记耶和华你的神，随从别神，事奉敬拜，你们必定灭亡。这是我今日警戒你们的。
And it is certain that if at any time you are turned away from the Lord your God, and go after other gods, to be their servants and to give them worship, destruction will overtake you.

耶和华在你们面前怎样使列国的民灭亡，你们也必照样灭亡，因为你们不听从耶和华你们神的话。
Like the nations which the Lord is cutting off before you, so you will be cut off; because you would not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God.

以色列阿，你当听。你今日要过约旦河，进去赶出比你强大的国民，得着广大坚固，高得顶天的城邑。
Give ear, O Israel: today you are to go over Jordan, to take the heritage of nations greater and stronger than yourselves, and towns of great size with walls as high as heaven;

那民是亚衲族的人，又大又高，是你所知道的。也曾听见有人指着他们说，谁能在亚衲族人面前站立得住呢？
A people great and tall, the sons of the Anakim, of whom you have knowledge and of whom it has been said, All are forced to give way before the sons of Anak.

你今日当知道，耶和华你的神在你前面过去，如同烈火，要灭绝他们，将他们制伏在你面前。这样，你就要照耶和华所说的赶出他们，使他们速速灭亡。
Be certain then today that it is the Lord your God who goes over before you like an all-burning fire; he will send destruction on them, crushing them before you; and you will send them in flight, putting an end to them quickly, as the Lord has said.

耶和华你的神将这些国民从你面前撵出以后，你心里不可说，耶和华将我领进来得这地是因我的义。其实，耶和华将他们从你面前赶出去是因他们的恶。
And after the Lord has sent them in flight from before you, say not in your heart, Because of my righteousness the Lord has given me this land; when it is because of their evil-doing that the Lord is driving these nations out before you.

你进去得他们的地，并不是因你的义，也不是因你心里正直，乃是因这些国民的恶，耶和华你的神将他们从你面前赶出去，又因耶和华要坚定他向你列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓所应许的话。
Not for your righteousness or because your hearts are upright are you going in to take their land; but because of the evil-doing of these nations the Lord your God is driving them out from before you, and to give effect to his oath to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

你当知道，耶和华你神将这美地赐你为业，并不是因你的义。你本是硬着颈项的百姓。
Be certain then that the Lord your God is not giving you this good land as a reward for your righteousness; for you are a stiff-necked people.

你当记念不忘，你在旷野怎样惹耶和华你神发怒。自从你出了埃及地的那日，直到你们来到这地方，你们时常悖逆耶和华。
Keep well in mind how you made the Lord your God angry in the waste land; from the day when you went out of Egypt till you came to this place, you have gone against the orders of the Lord.

你们在何烈山又惹耶和华发怒。他恼怒你们，要灭绝你们。
Again in Horeb you made the Lord angry, and in his wrath he would have put an end to you.

我上了山，要领受两块石版，就是耶和华与你们立约的版。那时我在山上住了四十昼夜，没有吃饭，也没有喝水。
When I had gone up into the mountain to be given the stones on which was recorded the agreement which the Lord made with you, I was on the mountain for forty days and forty nights without taking food or drinking water.

耶和华把那两块石版交给我，是神用指头写的。版上所写的是照耶和华在大会的日子，在山上，从火中对你们所说的一切话。
And the Lord gave me the two stones with writing on them done by the finger of God: on them were recorded all the words which the Lord said to you on the mountain out of the heart of the fire, on the day of the great meeting.

过了四十昼夜，耶和华把那两块石版，就是约版，交给我。
Then at the end of forty days and forty nights the Lord gave me those stones, the stones of the agreement.

对我说，你起来，赶快下去。因为你从埃及领出来的百姓已经败坏了自己。他们快快地偏离了我所吩咐的道，为自己铸成了偶像。
And the Lord said to me, Get up now, and go down quickly from this place; for the people you have taken out of Egypt have given themselves over to evil; they have quickly been turned from the way in which I gave them orders to go; they have made themselves a metal image.

耶和华又对我说，我看这百姓是硬着颈项的百姓。
And then the Lord said to me, I have seen that this people is stiff-necked:

你且由着我，我要灭绝他们，将他们的名从天下涂抹，使你的后裔比他们成为更大更强的国。
Let me send destruction on them till their very name is cut off; and I will make of you a nation greater and stronger than they.

于是我转身下山，山被火烧着，两块约版在我两手之中。
So turning round I came down from the mountain, and the mountain was burning with fire; and the two stones of the agreement were in my hands.

我一看见你们得罪了耶和华你们的神，铸成了牛犊，快快地偏离了耶和华所吩咐你们的道，
And I saw that you had done evil against the Lord, and had made for yourselves a metal image of a young ox: you had quickly been turned from the way in which the Lord had given you orders to go.

我就把那两块版从我手中扔下去，在你们眼前摔碎了。
And I let the stones go from my hands, and they were broken before your eyes.

因你们所犯的一切罪，行了耶和华眼中看为恶的事，惹他发怒，我就像从前俯伏在耶和华面前四十昼夜，没有吃饭，也没有喝水。
And I went down on my face before the Lord, as at the first, for forty days and forty nights, without taking food or drinking water, because of all your sin, in doing evil in the eyes of the Lord and moving him to wrath.

我因耶和华向你们大发烈怒，要灭绝你们，就甚害怕。但那次耶和华又应允了我。
For I was full of fear because of the wrath of the Lord which was burning against you, with your destruction in view. But again the Lord's ear was open to my prayer.

耶和华也向亚伦甚是发怒，要灭绝他。那时我又为亚伦祈祷。
And the Lord, in his wrath, would have put Aaron to death: and I made prayer for Aaron at the same time.

我把那叫你们犯罪所铸的牛犊用火焚烧，又捣碎磨得很细，以至细如灰尘，我就把这灰尘撒在从山上流下来的溪水中。
And I took your sin, the image which you had made, and put it in the fire and had it hammered and crushed very small till it was only dust: and the dust I put in the stream flowing down from the mountain.

你们在他备拉，玛撒，基博罗哈他瓦又惹耶和华发怒。
Again at Taberah and at Massah and at Kibroth-hattaavah you made the Lord angry.

耶和华打发你们离开加低斯巴尼亚，说，你们上去得我所赐给你们的地。那时你们违背了耶和华你们神的命令，不信服他，不听从他的话。
And when the Lord sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and take the land which I have given you; you went against the orders of the Lord your God, and had no faith in him, and would not give ear to his voice.

自从我认识你们以来，你们常常悖逆耶和华。
From the day when I first had knowledge of you, you have gone against the word of the Lord.

我因耶和华说要灭绝你们，就在耶和华面前照旧俯伏四十昼夜。
So I went down on my face in prayer before the Lord for forty days and forty nights as I did at first; because the Lord had said that he would put an end to you.

我祈祷耶和华说，主耶和华阿，求你不要灭绝你的百姓。他们是你的产业，是你用大力救赎的，用大能从埃及领出来的。
And I made prayer to the Lord and said, O Lord God, do not send destruction on your people and your heritage, to whom, by your great power, you have given salvation, whom you have taken out of Egypt by the strength of your hand.

求你记念你的仆人亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各，不要想念这百姓的顽梗，邪恶，罪过，
Keep in mind your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not looking at the hard heart of this people, or their evil-doing and their sin:

免得你领我们出来的那地之人说，耶和华因为不能将这百姓领进他所应许之地，又因恨他们，所以领他们出去，要在旷野杀他们。
Or it may be said in the land from which you have taken them, Because the Lord was not able to take them into the land which he said he would give them, and because of his hate for them, he has taken them out to put them to death in the waste land.

其实他们是你的百姓，你的产业，是你用大能和伸出来的膀臂领出来的。
But still they are your people and your heritage, whom you took out by your great power and by your stretched-out arm.

那时，耶和华吩咐我说，你要凿出两块石版，和先前的一样，上山到我这里来，又要作一木柜。
At that time the Lord said to me, Make two other stones, cut like the first two, and come up to me on the mountain, and make an ark of wood.

你先前摔碎的那版，其上的字我要写在这版上。你要将这版放在柜中。
And I will put on the stones the words which were on the first stones which were broken by you, and you are to put them into the ark.

于是我用皂荚木作了一柜，又凿出两块石版，和先前的一样，手里拿这两块版上山去了。
So I made an ark of hard wood, and had two stones cut like the others, and went up the mountain with the stones in my hands.

耶和华将那大会之日，在山上从火中所传与你们的十条诫，照先前所写的，写在这版上，将版交给我了。
And he put on the stones, as in the first writing, the ten rules which the Lord gave you on the mountain out of the fire on the day of the great meeting: and the Lord gave the stones to me.

我转身下山，将这版放在我所作的柜中，现今还在那里，正如耶和华所吩咐我的。
And turning round I came down from the mountain and put the stones in the ark which I had made; and there they are as the Lord gave me orders.

（以色列人从比罗比尼，亚干（或作亚干井）起行，到了摩西拉。亚伦死在那里，就葬在那里。他儿子以利亚撒接续他供祭司的职分。
(And the children of Israel went on from Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah: there death came to Aaron and he was put to rest in the earth; and Eleazar, his son, took his place as priest.

他们从那里起行，到了谷歌大，又从谷歌大到了有溪水之地的约巴他。
From there they went on to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of streams of water.

那时，耶和华将利未支派分别出来，抬耶和华的约柜，又侍立在耶和华面前事奉他，奉他的名祝福，直到今日。
At that time the Lord had the tribe of Levi marked out to take up the ark of the Lord's agreement, to be before the Lord and to do his work and to give blessings in his name, to this day.

所以利未人在他弟兄中无分无业，耶和华是他的产业，正如耶和华你神所应许他的。）
For this reason Levi has no part or heritage for himself among his brothers: the Lord is his heritage, as the Lord your God said to him.)

我又像从前在山上住了四十昼夜。那次耶和华也应允我，不忍将你灭绝。
And I was in the mountain, as at the first time, for forty days and forty nights; and again the ears of the Lord were open to my prayer, and he did not send destruction on you.

耶和华吩咐我说，你起来引导这百姓，使他们进去得我向他们列祖起誓应许所赐之地。
Then the Lord said to me, Get up and go on your journey before the people, so that they may go in and take the land which I said in my oath to their fathers that I would give them.

以色列阿，现在耶和华你神向你所要的是什么呢？只要你敬畏耶和华你的神，遵行他的道，爱他，尽心尽性事奉他，
And now, Israel, what would the Lord your God have you do, but to go in the fear of the Lord your God, walking in all his ways and loving him and doing his pleasure with all your heart and all your soul,

遵守他的诫命律例，就是我今日所吩咐你的，为要叫你得福。
Doing the orders of the Lord and keeping his laws which I give you this day for your good?

看哪，天和天上的天，地和地上所有的，都属耶和华你的神。
The Lord your God is ruler of heaven, of the heaven of heavens, and of the earth with everything in it.

耶和华但喜悦你的列祖，爱他们，从万民中拣选他们的后裔，就是你们，像今日一样。
But the Lord had delight in your fathers and love for them, marking out for himself their seed after them, even you, from all peoples, as at this day.

所以你们要将心里的污秽除掉，不可再硬着颈项。
Let your circumcision be of the heart, and put away your pride.

因为耶和华你们的神他是万神之神，万主之主，至大的神，大有能力，大而可畏，不以貌取人，也不受贿赂。
For the Lord your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great God, strong in power and greatly to be feared, who has no respect for any man's position and takes no rewards:

他为孤儿寡妇伸冤，又怜爱寄居的，赐给他衣食。
Judging uprightly in the cause of the widow and of the child who has no father, and giving food and clothing in his mercy to the man from a strange country.

所以你们要怜爱寄居的，因为你们在埃及地也作过寄居的。
So be kind to the man from a strange country who is living among you, for you yourselves were living in a strange country in the land of Egypt.

你要敬畏耶和华你的神，事奉他，专靠他，也要指着他的名起誓。
Let the fear of the Lord your God be before you, give him worship and be true to him at all times, taking your oaths in his name.

他是你所赞美的，是你的神，为你作了那大而可畏的事，是你亲眼所看见的。
He is your God, the God of your praise, your God who has done for you all these works of power which your eyes have seen.

你的列祖七十人下埃及。现在耶和华你的神使你如同天上的星那样多。
Your fathers went down into Egypt with seventy persons; and now the Lord your God has made you like the stars of heaven in number.

你要爱耶和华你的神，常守他的吩咐，律例，典章，诫命。
So have love for the Lord your God, and give him worship, and keep his laws and his decisions and his orders at all times.

你们今日当知道，我本不是和你们的儿女说话。因为他们不知道，也没有看见耶和华你们神的管教，威严，大能的手，和伸出来的膀臂，
And be certain in your minds this day; for these words are not said to your children, who have had no experience of the training of the Lord your God, and who have not seen his great power or his strong hand and his stretched-out arm,

并他在埃及中向埃及王法老和其全地所行的神迹奇事。
Or his signs and wonders which he did in Egypt, to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and all his land;

也没有看见他怎样待埃及的军兵，车马，他们追赶你们的时候，耶和华怎样使红海的水淹没他们，将他们灭绝，直到今日，
And what he did to the army of Egypt, to their horses and their war-carriages; how he made the waters of the Red Sea come up over them when they went after you, and how the Lord put an end to them even to this day;

并他在旷野怎样待你们，以致你们来到这地方。
And what he did for you in the waste land, till you came to this place;

也没有看见他怎样待流便子孙以利押的儿子大坍，亚比兰，地怎样在以色列人中间开口，吞了他们和他们的家眷，并帐棚与跟他们的一切活物。
And what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben; when they went down into the open mouth of the earth, with their families and their tents and every living thing which was theirs, before the eyes of all Israel:

惟有你们亲眼看见耶和华所作的一切大事。
But your eyes have seen all the great works of the Lord which he has done.

所以，你们要守我今日所吩咐的一切诫命，使你们胆壮，能以进去，得你们所要得的那地，
So keep all the orders which I give you today, so that you may be strong, and go in and take the land which is to be your heritage;

并使你们的日子在耶和华向你们列祖起誓，应许给他们和他们后裔的地上得以长久。那是流奶与蜜之地。
And that your days may be long in the land which the Lord gave by an oath to your fathers and to their seed after them, a land flowing with milk and honey.

你要进去得为业的那地，本不象你出来的埃及地。你在那里撒种，用脚浇灌，像浇灌菜园一样。
For the land where you are going is not like the land of Egypt from which you have come, where you put in your seeds, watering them with your foot, like a planted garden:

你们要过去得为业的那地乃是有山有谷，雨水滋润之地，
But the land where you are going is a land of hills and valleys, drinking in the rain of heaven:

是耶和华你神所眷顾的。从岁首到年终，耶和华你神的眼目时常看顾那地。
A land cared for by the Lord your God: the eyes of the Lord your God are on it at all times from one end of the year to the other.

你们若留意听从我今日所吩咐的诫命，爱耶和华你们的神，尽心尽性事奉他，
And it will be that if you truly give ear to the orders which I put before you this day, loving the Lord your God and worshipping him with all your heart and all your soul,

他（原文作我）必按时降秋雨春雨在你们的地上，使你们可以收藏五谷，新酒，和油
Then I will send rain on your land at the right time, the early rains and the late rains, so that you may get in your grain and your wine and your oil.

也必使你吃得饱足，并使田野为你的牲畜长草。
And I will give grass in your fields for your cattle, so that you may have food in full measure.

你们要谨慎，免得心中受迷惑，就偏离正路，去事奉敬拜别神。
But take care that your hearts are not turned to false ways so that you become servants and worshippers of other gods;

耶和华的怒气向你们发作，就使天闭塞不下雨，地也不出产，使你们在耶和华所赐给你们的美地上速速灭亡。
For if you do so, the wrath of the Lord will be burning against you, and the heaven will be shut up so that there is no rain and the land will give no fruit; and in a very little time you will be cut off from the good land which the Lord is giving you.

你们要将我这话存在心内，留在意中，系在手上为记号，戴在额上为经文。
So keep these words deep in your heart and in your soul, and have them fixed on your hand for a sign and marked on your brow;

也要教训你们的儿女，无论坐在家里，行在路上，躺下，起来，都要谈论。
Teaching them to your children, and talking of them when you are at rest in your house or walking by the way, when you go to sleep and when you get up:

又要写在房屋的门框上，并城门上，
Writing them on the pillars of your houses and over the doors of your towns:

使你们和你们子孙的日子在耶和华向你们列祖起誓，应许给他们的地上得以增多，如天覆地的日子那样多。
So that your days, and the days of your children, may be long in the land which the Lord by his oath to your fathers said he would give them, like the days of the eternal heavens.

你们若留意谨守遵行我所吩咐这一切的诫命，爱耶和华你们的神，行他的道，专靠他，
For if you take care to keep all the orders which I give you, and to do them; loving the Lord your God and walking in all his ways and being true to him:

他必从你们面前赶出这一切国民，就是比你们更大更强的国民，你们也要得他们的地。
Then the Lord will send these nations in flight before you, and you will take the lands of nations greater and stronger than yourselves.

凡你们脚掌所踏之地都必归你们。从旷野和利巴嫩，并伯拉大河，直到西海，都要作你们的境界。
Every place where you put your foot will be yours: from the waste land and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates as far as the Great Sea, will be the limits of your land.

必无一人能在你们面前站立得住。耶和华你们的神必照他所说的，使惧怕惊恐临到你们所踏之地的居民。
All people will give way before you: for the Lord your God will put the fear of you on all the land through which you go, as he has said.

看哪，我今日将祝福与咒诅的话都陈明在你们面前。
Today I put before you a blessing and a curse:

你们若听从耶和华你们神的诫命，就是我今日所吩咐你们的，就必蒙福。
The blessing if you give ear to the orders of the Lord your God, which I give you this day:

你们若不听从耶和华你们神的诫命，偏离我今日所吩咐你们的道，去事奉你们素来所不认识的别神，就必受祸。
And the curse if you do not give ear to the orders of the Lord your God, but let yourselves be turned from the way which I have put before you this day, and go after other gods which are not yours.

及至耶和华你的神领你进入要去得为业的那地，你就要将祝福的话陈明在基利心山上，将咒诅的话陈明在以巴路山上。
And when the Lord your God has taken you into the land of your heritage, you are to put the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal.

这二山岂不是在约旦河那边，日落之处，在住亚拉巴的迦南人之地与吉甲相对，靠近摩利橡树吗？
Are they not on the other side of Jordan, looking west, in the land of the Canaanites living in the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, by the holy tree of Moreh?

你们要过约旦河，进去得耶和华你们神所赐你们为业之地，在那地居住。
For you are about to go over Jordan to take the heritage which the Lord your God is giving you, and it will be your resting-place.

你们要谨守遵行我今日在你们面前所陈明的一切律例典章。
And you are to take care to keep all the laws and the decisions which I put before you today.

你们存活于世的日子，在耶和华你们列祖的神所赐你们为业的地上，要谨守遵行的律例典章乃是这些，
These are the laws and the decisions which you are to keep with care in the land which the Lord, the God of your fathers, has given you to be your heritage all the days of your life on earth.

你们要将所赶出的国民事奉神的各地方，无论是在高山，在小山，在各青翠树下，都毁坏了。
You are to give up to the curse all those places where the nations, whom you are driving out, gave worship to their gods, on the high mountains and the hills and under every green tree:

也要拆毁他们的祭坛，打碎他们的柱像，用火焚烧他们的木偶，砍下他们雕刻的神像，并将其名从那地方除灭。
Their altars and their pillars are to be broken down, and their holy trees burned with fire, and the images of their gods cut down; you are to take away their names out of that place.

你们不可照他们那样事奉耶和华你们的神。
Do not so to the Lord your God.

但耶和华你们的神从你们各支派中选择何处为立他名的居所，你们就当往那里去求问，
But let your hearts be turned to the place which will be marked out by the Lord your God, among your tribes, to put his name there;

将你们的燔祭，平安祭，十分取一之物，和手中的举祭，并还愿祭，甘心祭，以及牛群羊群中头生的，都奉到那里。
And there you are to take your burned offerings and other offerings, and the tenth part of your goods, and the offerings to be lifted up to the Lord, and the offerings of your oaths, and those which you give freely from the impulse of your hearts, and the first births among your herds and your flocks;

在那里，耶和华你们神的面前，你们和你们的家属都可以吃，并且因你手所办的一切事蒙耶和华你的神赐福，就都欢乐。
There you and all your families are to make a feast before the Lord your God, with joy in everything to which you put your hand, because the Lord has given you his blessing.

我们今日在这里所行的是各人行自己眼中看为正的事，你们将来不可这样行。
You are not to do things then in the way in which we now do them here, every man as it seems right to him:

因为你们还没有到耶和华你神所赐你的安息地，所给你的产业。
For you have not come to the rest and the heritage which the Lord your God is giving you.

但你们过了约旦河，得以住在耶和华你们神使你们承受为业之地，又使你们太平，不被四围的一切仇敌扰乱，安然居住。
But when you have gone over Jordan and are living in the land which the Lord your God is giving you as your heritage, and when he has given you rest from all those on every side who are fighting against you, and you are living there safely;

那时要将我所吩咐你们的燔祭，平安祭，十分取一之物，和手中的举祭，并向耶和华许愿献的一切美祭，都奉到耶和华你们神所选择要立为他名的居所。
Then there will be a place marked out by the Lord your God as the resting-place for his name, and there you will take all the things which I give you orders to take: your burned offerings and other offerings, and the tenth part of your goods, and the offerings to be lifted up, and the offerings of your oaths which you make to the Lord;

你们和儿女，仆婢，并住在你们城里无分无业的利未人，都要在耶和华你们的神面前欢乐。
And you will be glad before the Lord your God, you and your sons and your daughters, and your men-servants and your women-servants, and the Levite who is with you in your house, because he has no part or heritage among you.

你要谨慎，不可在你所看中的各处献燔祭。
Take care that you do not make your burned offerings in any place you see:

惟独耶和华从你那一支派中所选择的地方，你就要在那里献燔祭，行我一切所吩咐你的。
But in the place marked out by the Lord in one of your tribes, there let your burned offerings be offered, and there do what I have given you orders to do.

然而，在你各城里都可以照耶和华你神所赐你的福分，随心所欲宰牲吃肉。无论洁净人不洁净人都可以吃，就如吃羚羊与鹿一般。
Only you may put to death animals, such as the gazelle or the roe, for your food in any of your towns, at the desire of your soul, in keeping with the blessing of the Lord your God which he has given you: the unclean and the clean may take of it.

只是不可吃血，要倒在地上，如同倒水一样。
But you may not take the blood for food, it is to be drained out on the earth like water.

你的五谷，新酒，和油的十分之一，或是牛群羊群中头生的，或是你许愿献的，甘心献的，或是手中的举祭，都不可在你城里吃。
In your towns you are not to take as food the tenth part of your grain, or of your wine or your oil, or the first births of your herds or of your flocks, or anything offered under an oath, or freely offered to the Lord, or given as a lifted offering;

但要在耶和华你的神面前吃，在耶和华你神所耀选择的地方，你和儿女，仆婢，并住在你城里的利未人，都可以吃。也要因你手所办的，在耶和华你神面前欢乐。
But they will be your food before the Lord your God in the place of his selection, where you may make a feast of them, with your son and your daughter, and your man-servant and your woman-servant, and the Levite who is living with you: and you will have joy before the Lord your God in everything to which you put your hand.

你要谨慎，在你所住的地方永不可丢弃利未人。
See that you do not give up caring for the Levite as long as you are living in your land.

耶和华你的神照他所应许扩张你境界的时候，你心里想要吃肉，说，我要吃肉，就可以随心所欲地吃肉。
When the Lord your God makes wide the limit of your land, as he has said, and you say, I will take flesh for my food, because you have a desire for it; then you may take whatever flesh you have a desire for.

耶和华你神所选择要立他名的地方若离你太远，就可以照我所吩咐的，将耶和华赐给你的牛羊取些宰了，可以随心所欲在你城里吃。
If the place marked out by the Lord your God as the resting-place for his name is far away from you, then take from your herds and from your flocks which the Lord has given you, as I have said, and have a meal of it in the towns where you may be living.

你吃那肉，要像吃羚羊与鹿一般。无论洁净人不洁净人都可以吃。
It will be your food, like the gazelle and the roe; the unclean and the clean may take of it.

只是你要心意坚定，不可吃血，因为血是生命。不可将血（原文作生命）与肉同吃。
But see that you do not take the blood for food; for the blood is the life; and you may not make use of the life as food with the flesh.

不可吃血，要倒在地上，如同倒水一样。
Do not take it for food but let it be drained out on the earth like water.

不可吃血。这样，你行耶和华眼中看为正的事，你和你的子孙就可以得福。
Do not take it for food; so that it may be well for you and for your children after you, while you do what is right in the eyes of the Lord.

只是你分别为圣的物和你的还愿祭要奉到耶和华所选择的地方去。
But the holy things which you have, and the offerings of your oaths, you are to take to the place which will be marked out by the Lord:

你的燔祭，连肉带血，都要献在耶和华你神的坛上。平安祭的血要倒在耶和华你神的坛上。平安祭的肉，你自己可以吃。
Offering the flesh and the blood of your burned offerings on the altar of the Lord your God; and the blood of your offerings is to be drained out on the altar of the Lord your God, and the flesh will be your food.

你要谨守听从我所吩咐的一切话，行耶和华你神眼中看为善，看为正的事。这样，你和你的子孙就可以永远享福。
Take note of all these orders I am giving you and give attention to them, so that it may be well for you and for your children after you for ever, while you do what is good and right in the eyes of the Lord your God.

耶和华你神将你要去赶出的国民从你面前剪除，你得了他们的地居住，
When the people of the land where you are going have been cut off before you by the Lord your God, and you have taken their land and are living in it;

那时就要谨慎，不可在他们除灭之后随从他们的恶俗，陷入网罗，也不可访问他们的神说，这些国民怎样事奉他们的神，我也要照样行。
After their destruction take care that you do not go in their ways, and that you do not give thought to their gods, saying, How did these nations give worship to their gods? I will do as they did.

你不可向耶和华你的神这样行，因为他们向他们的神行了耶和华所憎嫌所恨恶的一切事，甚至将自己的儿女用火焚烧，献与他们的神。
Do not so to the Lord your God: for everything which is disgusting to the Lord and hated by him they have done in honour of their gods: even burning their sons and daughters in the fire to their gods.

凡我所吩咐的，你们都要谨守遵行，不可加添，也不可删减。
You are to keep with care all the words I give you, making no addition to them and taking nothing from them.

你们中间若有先知或是作梦的起来，向你显个神迹奇事，
If ever you have among you a prophet or a dreamer of dreams and he gives you a sign or a wonder,

对你说，我们去随从你素来所不认识的别神，事奉它吧。他所显的神迹奇事虽有应验，
And the sign or the wonder takes place, and he says to you, Let us go after other gods, which are strange to you, and give them worship;

你也不可听那先知或是那作梦之人的话。因为这是耶和华你们的神试验你们，要知道你们是尽心尽性爱耶和华你们的神不是。
Then give no attention to the words of that prophet or that dreamer of dreams: for the Lord your God is testing you, to see if all the love of your heart and soul is given to him.

你们要顺从耶和华你们的神，敬畏他，谨守他的诫命，听从他的话，事奉他，专靠他。
But keep on in the ways of the Lord your God, fearing him and keeping his orders and hearing his voice, worshipping him and being true to him.

那先知或是那作梦的既用言语叛逆那领你们出埃及地，救赎你脱离为奴之家的耶和华你们的神，要勾引你离开耶和华你神所吩咐你行的道，你便要将他治死。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉。
And that prophet or that dreamer of dreams is to be put to death; for his words were said with the purpose of turning you away from the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt and made you free from the prison-house; and of forcing you out of the way in which the Lord your God has given you orders to go. So you are to put away the evil from among you.

你的同胞弟兄，或是你的儿女，或是你怀中的妻，或是如同你性命的朋友，若暗中引诱你，说，我们不如去事奉你和你列祖素来所不认识的别神
If your brother, the son of your mother, or your son or your daughter or the wife of your heart, or the friend who is as dear to you as your life, working on you secretly says to you, Let us go and give worship to other gods, strange to you and to your fathers;

是你四围列国的神。无论是离你近，离你远，从地这边到地那边的神，
Gods of the peoples round about you, near or far, from one end of the earth to the other;

你不可依从他，也不可听从他，眼不可顾惜他。你不可怜恤他，也不可遮庇他，
Do not be guided by him or give attention to him; have no pity on him or mercy, and give him no cover;

总要杀他。你先下手，然后众民也下手，将他治死。
But put him to death without question; let your hand be the first stretched out against him to put him to death, and then the hands of all the people.

要用石头打死他，因为他想要勾引你离开那领你出埃及地为奴之家的耶和华你的神。
Let him be stoned with stones till he is dead; because it was his purpose to make you false to the Lord your God, who took you out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house.

以色列众人都要听见害怕，就不敢在你们中间再行这样的恶了。
And all Israel, hearing of it, will be full of fear, and no one will again do such evil as this among you.

在耶和华你神所赐你居住的各城中，你若听人说，有些匪类从你们中间的一座城出来勾引本城的居民，说，我们不如去事奉你们素来所不认识的别神。
And if word comes to you, in one of the towns which the Lord your God is giving you for your resting-place,


That good-for-nothing persons have gone out from among you, turning the people of their town from the right way and saying, Let us go and give worship to other gods, of whom you have no knowledge;

你就要探听，查究，细细地访问，果然是真，准有这可憎恶的事行在你们中间，
Then let a full search be made, and let questions be put with care; and if it is true and certain that such a disgusting thing has been done among you;

你必要用刀杀那城里的居民，把城里所有的，连牲畜，都用刀杀尽。
Then take up arms against the people of that town and give it up to the curse, with all its cattle and everything in it.

你从那城里所夺的财物都要堆积在街市上，用火将城和其内所夺的财物都在耶和华你神面前烧尽。那城就永为荒堆，不可再建造。
And take all the goods into the middle of its open space, burning the town and all its property with fire as an offering to the Lord your God; it is to be a waste for ever; there is to be no more building there.

那当毁灭的物连一点都不可粘你的手。你要听从耶和华你神的话，遵守我今日所吩咐你的一切诫命，行耶和华你神眼中看为正的事，耶和华就必转意，不发烈怒，恩待你，怜恤你，照他向你列祖所起的誓使你人数增多。
Keep not a thing of what is cursed for yourselves: so the Lord may be turned away from the heat of his wrath, and have mercy on you, and give you increase as he said in his oath to your fathers:


So long as you give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, and keep all his orders which I give you today, and do what is right in the eyes of the Lord your God.

你们是耶和华你们神的儿女。不可为死人用刀划身，也不可将额上剃光。
You are the children of the Lord your God: you are not to make cuts on your bodies or take off the hair on your brows in honour of the dead;

因为你归耶和华你神为圣洁的民，耶和华从地上的万民中拣选你特作自己的子民。
For you are a holy people to the Lord your God, and the Lord has taken you to be his special people out of all the nations on the face of the earth.

凡可憎的物都不可吃。
No disgusting thing may be your food.

可吃的牲畜就是牛，绵羊，山羊，
These are the beasts which you may have for food: the ox, the sheep, and the goat;

鹿，羚羊，狍子，野山羊，麋鹿，黄羊，青羊。
The hart, the gazelle, and the roe, the mountain goat and the pygarg and the antelope and the mountain sheep.

凡分蹄成为两瓣又倒嚼的走兽，你们都可以吃。
Any beast which has a division in the horn of its foot and whose food comes back into its mouth to be crushed again, may be used for food.

但那些倒嚼或是分蹄之中不可吃的乃是骆驼，兔子，沙番因为是倒嚼不分蹄，就与你们不洁净。
But even among these, there are some which may not be used for food: such as the camel, the hare, and the coney, which are unclean to you, because, though their food comes back, the horn of their feet is not parted in two.

猪因为是分蹄却不倒嚼，就与你们不洁净。这些兽的肉，你们不可吃，死的也不可摸。
And the pig is unclean to you, because though it has a division in the horn of its foot, its food does not come back; their flesh may not be used for food or their dead bodies touched by you.

水中可吃的乃是这些，凡有翅有鳞的都可以吃。
And of the things living in the waters, you may take all those who have wings for swimming with and skins formed of thin plates.

凡无翅无鳞的都不可吃，是与你们不洁净。
But any which have no skin-plates or wings for swimming, you may not take; they are unclean for you.

凡洁净的鸟，你们都可以吃。
All clean birds may be used for food.

不可吃的乃是雕，狗头雕，红头雕，
But these birds you may not take: the eagle and the gier-eagle and the ospray;

？？，小鹰，鹞鹰与其类，
The falcon and the kite, and birds of that sort;

乌鸦与其类，
Every raven, and all birds of that sort;

鸵鸟，夜鹰，鱼鹰，鹰与其类，
And the ostrich and the night-hawk and the sea-hawk and birds of that sort;

？？鸟，猫头鹰，角鸱，
The little owl and the great owl and the water-hen;

鹈鹕，秃雕，鸬鹚，
And the pelican and the vulture and the cormorant;

鹳，鹭鸶与其类，戴？？与蝙蝠。
The stork and the heron and birds of that sort, and the hoopoe and the bat.

凡有翅膀爬行的物是与你们不洁净，都不可吃。
Every winged thing which goes flat on the earth is unclean to you and may not be used as food.

凡洁净的鸟，你们都可以吃。
But all clean birds you may take.

凡自死的，你们都不可吃，可以给你城里寄居的吃，或卖与外人吃，因为你是归耶和华你神为圣洁的民。不可用山羊羔母的奶煮山羊羔。
You may not have as food anything which has come to a natural death; the man from another country who is living with you may take it for food, or you may get a price for it from one of another nation; for you are a holy people to the Lord your God. The young goat is not to be cooked in its mother's milk.

你要把你撒种所产的，就是你田地每年所出的，十分取一分。
Put on one side a tenth of all the increase of your seed, produced year by year.

又要把你的五谷，新酒，和油的十分之一，并牛群羊群中头生的，吃在耶和华你神面前，就是他所选择要立为他名的居所。这样，你可以学习时常敬畏耶和华你的神。
And make a feast before the Lord your God, in the place which is to be marked out, where his name will be for ever, of the tenth part of your grain and your wine and your oil, and the first births of your herds and your flocks; so that you may have the fear of the Lord your God in your hearts at all times.

当耶和华你神赐福与你的时候，耶和华你神所选择要立为他名的地方若离你太远，那路也太长，使你不能把这物带到那里去，
And if the way is so long that you are not able to take these things to the place marked out by the Lord your God for his name, when he has given you his blessing, because it is far away from you;

你就可以换成银子，将银子包起来，拿在手中，往耶和华你神所要选择的地方去。
Then let these things be exchanged for money, and, taking the money in your hand, go to the place marked out by the Lord your God for himself;

你用这银子，随心所欲，或买牛羊，或买清酒浓酒，凡你心所想的都可以买。你和你的家属在耶和华你神的面前吃喝快乐。
And with the money get whatever you have a desire for, oxen or sheep or wine or strong drink, whatever your soul's desire may be: and make a feast there before the Lord your God, and be glad, you and all your house;

住在你城里的利未人，你不可丢弃他，因为他在你们中间无分无业。
And give a thought to the Levite who is living among you, for he has no part or heritage in the land.

每逢三年的末一年，你要将本年的土产十分之一都取出来，积存在你的城中。
At the end of every three years take a tenth part of all your increase for that year, and put it in store inside your walls:

在你城里无分无业的利未人，和你城里寄居的，并孤儿寡妇，都可以来，吃得饱足。这样，耶和华你的神必在你手里所办的一切事上赐福与你。
And the Levite, because he has no part or heritage in the land, and the man from a strange country, and the child who has no father, and the widow, who are living among you, will come and take food and have enough; and so the blessing of the Lord your God will be on you in everything you do.

每逢七年末一年，你要施行豁免。
At the end of every seven years there is to be a general forgiveness of debt.

豁免的定例乃是这样，凡债主要把所借给邻舍的豁免了。不可向邻舍和弟兄追讨，因为耶和华的豁免年已经宣告了。
This is how it is to be done: every creditor is to give up his right to whatever he has let his neighbour have; he is not to make his neighbour, his countryman, give it back; because a general forgiveness has been ordered by the Lord.

若借给外邦人，你可以向他追讨。但借给你弟兄，无论是什么，你要松手豁免了。
A man of another nation may be forced to make payment of his debt, but if your brother has anything of yours, let it go;

你若留意听从耶和华你神的话，谨守遵行我今日所吩咐你这一切的命令，就必在你们中间没有穷人了（在耶和华你神所赐你为业的地上，耶和华必大大赐福与你）。
But there will be no poor among you; for the Lord will certainly give you his blessing in the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage;


If only you give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, and take care to keep all these orders which I give you today.

因为耶和华你的神必照他所应许你的赐福与你。你必借给许多国民，却不至向他们借贷。你必管辖许多国民，他们却不能管辖你。
For the Lord your God will give you his blessing as he has said: you will let other nations have the use of your money, but you will not make use of theirs; you will be rulers over a number of nations, but they will not be your rulers.

在耶和华你神所赐你的地上，无论哪一座城里，你弟兄中若有一个穷人，你不可忍着心，？？着手不帮补你穷乏的弟兄。
If in any of your towns in the land which the Lord your God is giving you, there is a poor man, one of your countrymen, do not let your heart be hard or your hand shut to him;

总要向他松开手，照他所缺乏的借给他，补他的不足。
But let your hand be open to give him the use of whatever he is in need of.

你要谨慎，不可心里起恶念，说，第七年的豁免年快到了，你便恶眼看你穷乏的弟兄，什么都不给他，以致他因你求告耶和华，罪便归于你了。
And see that there is no evil thought in your heart, moving you to say to yourself, The seventh year, the year of forgiveness is near; and so looking coldly on your poor countryman you give him nothing; and he will make an outcry to the Lord against you, and it will be judged as sin in you.

你总要给他，给他的时候心里不可愁烦。因耶和华你的神必在你这一切所行的，并你手里所办的事上，赐福与你。
But it is right for you to give to him, without grief of heart: for because of this, the blessing of the Lord your God will be on all your work and on everything to which you put your hand.

原来那地上的穷人永不断绝。所以我吩咐你说，总要向你地上困苦穷乏的弟兄松开手。
For there will never be a time when there are no poor in the land; and so I give orders to you, Let your hand be open to your countrymen, to those who are poor and in need in your land.

你弟兄中，若有一个希伯来男人或希伯来女人被卖给你，服事你六年，到第七年就要任他自由出去。
If one of your countrymen, a Hebrew man or woman, becomes your servant for a price and does work for you six years, in the seventh year let him go free.

你任他自由的时候，不可使他空手而去，
And when you make him free, do not let him go away with nothing in his hands:

要从你羊群，禾场，酒榨之中多多地给他。耶和华你的神怎样赐福与你，你也要照样给他。
But give him freely from your flock and from your grain and your wine: in the measure of the wealth which the Lord your God has given you, you are to give to him.

要记念你在埃及地作过奴仆，耶和华你的神将你救赎。因此，我今日吩咐你这件事。
And keep in mind that you yourself were a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God made you free: so I give you this order today.

他若对你说，我不愿意离开你，是因他爱你和你的家，且因在你那里很好，
But if he says to you, I have no desire to go away from you; because you and your family are dear to him and he is happy with you;

你就要拿锥子将他的耳朵在门上刺透，他便永为你的奴仆了。你待婢女也要这样。
Then take a sharp-pointed instrument, driving it through his ear into the door, and he will be your servant for ever. And you may do the same for your servant-girl.

你任他自由的时候，不可以为难事，因他服事你六年，较比雇工的工价多加一倍了。耶和华你的神就必在你所作的一切事上赐福与你。
Let it not seem hard to you that you have to send him away free; for he has been working for you for six years, which is twice the regular time for a servant: and the blessing of the Lord your God will be on you in everything you do.

你牛群羊群中头生的，凡是公的，都要分别为圣，归耶和华你的神。牛群中头生的，不可用它耕地。羊群中头生的，不可剪毛。
All the first males to come to birth in your herd and your flock are to be holy to the Lord your God: the first birth of your ox is not to be used for work, the wool of your first lamb is not to be cut.

这头生的，你和你的家属，每年要在耶和华所选择的地方，在耶和华你神面前吃。
But year by year you and all your house are to take a meal of it before the Lord, in the place of his selection.

这头生的若有什么残疾，就如瘸腿的，瞎眼的，无论有什么恶残疾，都不可献给耶和华你的神。
But if it has any mark on it, if it is blind or has damaged legs, or if there is anything wrong with it, it may not be offered to the Lord your God.

可以在你城里吃。洁净人与不洁净人都可以吃，就如吃羚羊与鹿一般。
It may be used for food in your houses: the unclean and the clean may take of it, as of the gazelle and the roe.

只是不可吃它的血。要倒在地上，如同倒水一样。
Only do not take its blood for food, but let it be drained out on the earth like water.

你要注意亚笔月，向耶和华你的神守逾越节，因为耶和华你的神在亚笔月夜间领你出埃及。
Take note of the month of Abib and keep the Passover to the Lord your God: for in the month of Abib the Lord your God took you out of Egypt by night.

你当在耶和华所选择要立为他名的居所，从牛群羊群中，将逾越节的祭牲献给耶和华你的神。
The Passover offering, from your flock or your herd, is to be given to the Lord your God in the place marked out by him as the resting-place of his name.

你吃这祭牲，不可吃有酵的饼。七日之内要吃无酵饼，就是困苦饼。（你本是急忙出了埃及地）要叫你一生一世记念你从埃及地出来的日子。
Take no leavened bread with it; for seven days let your food be unleavened bread, that is, the bread of sorrow; for you came out of the land of Egypt quickly: so the memory of that day, when you came out of the land of Egypt, will be with you all your life.

在你四境之内，七日不可见面酵，头一日晚上所献的肉，一点不可留到早晨。
For seven days let no leaven be used through all your land; and nothing of the flesh which is put to death in the evening of the first day is to be kept through the night till morning.

在耶和华你神所赐的各城中，你不可献逾越节的祭。
The Passover offering is not to be put to death in any of the towns which the Lord your God gives you:

只当在耶和华你神所选择要立为他名的居所，晚上日落的时候，乃是你出埃及的时候，献逾越节的祭。
But in the place marked out by the Lord your God as the resting-place of his name, there you are to put the Passover to death in the evening, at sundown, at that time of the year when you came out of Egypt.

当在耶和华你神所选择的地方把肉烤了吃（烤或作煮），次日早晨就回到你的帐棚去。
It is to be cooked and taken as food in the place marked out by the Lord: and in the morning you are to go back to your tents.

你要吃无酵饼六日，第七日要向耶和华你的神守严肃会，不可作工。
For six days let your food be unleavened bread; and on the seventh day there is to be a holy meeting to the Lord your God; no work is to be done.

你要计算七七日，从你开镰收割禾稼时算起，共计七七日。
Let seven weeks be numbered from the first day when the grain is cut.

你要照耶和华你神所赐你的福，手里拿着甘心祭，献在耶和华你的神面前，守七七节。
Then keep the feast of weeks to the Lord your God, with an offering freely given to him from the wealth he has given you:

你和你儿女，仆婢，并住在你城里的利未人，以及在你们中间寄居的与孤儿寡妇，都要在耶和华你神所选择立为他名的居所，在耶和华你的神面前欢乐。
Then you are to be glad before the Lord your God, you and your son and your daughter, your man-servant and your woman-servant, and the Levite who is with you, and the man from a strange country, and the child without a father, and the widow, who are living among you, in the place marked out by the Lord your God as a resting-place for his name.

你也要记念你在埃及作过奴仆。你要谨守遵行这些律例。
And you will keep in mind that you were a servant in the land of Egypt: and you will take care to keep all these laws.

你把禾场的谷，酒榨的酒收藏以后，就要守住棚节七日。
You are to keep the feast of tents for seven days after you have got in all your grain and made your wine:

守节的时候，你和你儿女，仆婢，并住在你城里的利未人，以及寄居的与孤儿寡妇，都要欢乐。
You are to keep the feast with joy, you and your son and your daughter, your man-servant and your woman-servant, and the Levite, and the man from a strange country, and the child without a father, and the widow, who are living among you.

在耶和华所选择的地方，你当向耶和华你的神守节七日。因为耶和华你神在你一切的土产上和你手里所办的事上要赐福与你，你就非常地欢乐。
Keep the feast to the Lord your God for seven days, in the place marked out by the Lord: because the blessing of the Lord your God will be on all the produce of your land and all the work of your hands, and you will have nothing but joy.

你一切的男丁要在除酵节，七七节，住棚节，一年三次，在耶和华你神所选择的地方朝见他，却不可空手朝见。
Three times in the year let all your males come before the Lord your God in the place named by him; at the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of weeks, and the feast of tents: and they are not to come before the Lord with nothing in their hands;

各人要按自己的力量，照耶和华你神所赐的福分，奉献礼物。
Every man is to give as he is able, in the measure of the blessing which the Lord your God has given you.

你要在耶和华你神所赐的各城里，按着各支派设立审判官和官长。他们必按公义的审判判断百姓。
You are to make judges and overseers in all your towns which the Lord your God gives you, for every tribe: and they are to be upright men, judging the people in righteousness.

不可屈枉正直。不可看人的外貌。也不可受贿赂。因为贿赂能叫智慧人的眼变瞎了，又能颠倒义人的话。
You are not to be moved in your judging by a man's position, you are not to take rewards; for rewards make the eyes of the wise man blind, and the decisions of the upright false.

你要追求至公至义，好叫你存活，承受耶和华你神所赐你的地。
Let righteousness be your guide, so that you may have life, and take for your heritage the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

你为耶和华你的神筑坛，不可在坛旁栽什么树木作为木偶。
Let no holy tree of any sort be planted by the altar of the Lord your God which you will make.

也不可为自己设立柱像。这是耶和华你神所恨恶的。
You are not to put up stone pillars, for they are hated by the Lord your God.

凡有残疾，或有什么恶病的牛羊，你都不可献给耶和华你的神，因为这是耶和华你神所憎恶的。
No ox or sheep which has a mark on it or is damaged in any way may be offered to the Lord your God: for that is disgusting to the Lord your God.

在你们中间，在耶和华你神所赐你的诸城中，无论哪座城里，若有人，或男或女，行耶和华你神眼中看为恶的事，违背了他的约，
If there is any man or woman among you, in any of the towns which the Lord your God gives you, who does evil in the eyes of the Lord your God, sinning against his agreement,

去事奉敬拜别神，或拜日头，或拜月亮，或拜天象，是主不曾吩咐的。
By becoming a servant of other gods and worshipping them or the sun or the moon or all the stars of heaven, against my orders;

有人告诉你，你也听见了，就要细细地探听，果然是真，准有这可憎恶的事行在以色列中，
If word of this comes to your ears, then let this thing be looked into with care, and if there is no doubt that it is true, and such evil has been done in Israel;

你就要将行这恶事的男人或女人拉到城门外，用石头将他打死。
Then you are to take the man or woman who has done the evil to the public place of your town, and they are to be stoned with stones till they are dead.

要凭两三个人的口作见证将那当死的人治死。不可凭一个人的口作见证将他治死。
On the word of two or three witnesses, a man may be given the punishment of death; but he is not to be put to death on the word of one witness.

见证人要先下手，然后众民也下手将他治死。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉。
The hands of the witnesses will be the first to put him to death, and after them the hands of all the people. So you are to put away the evil from among you.

你城中若起了争讼的事，或因流血，或因争竞，或因殴打，是你难断的案件，你就当起来，往耶和华你神所选择的地方
If you are not able to give a decision as to who is responsible for a death, or who is right in a cause, or who gave the first blow in a fight, and there is a division of opinion about it in your town: then go to the place marked out by the Lord your God;

去见祭司利未人，并当时的审判官，求问他们，他们必将判语指示你。
And come before the priests, the Levites, or before him who is judge at the time: and they will go into the question and give you a decision:

他们在耶和华所选择的地方指示你的判语，你必照着他们所指教你的一切话谨守遵行。
And you are to be guided by the decision they give in the place named by the Lord, and do whatever they say:

要按他们所指教你的律法，照他们所断定的去行。他们所指示你的判语，你不可偏离左右。
Acting in agreement with their teaching and the decision they give: not turning to one side or the other from the word they have given you.

若有人擅敢不听从那侍立在耶和华你神面前的祭司，或不听从审判官，那人就必治死。这样，便将那恶从以色列中除掉。
And any man who, in his pride, will not give ear to the priest whose place is there before the Lord your God, or to the judge, is to be put to death: you are to put away the evil from Israel.

众百姓都要听见害怕，不再擅敢行事。
And all the people, hearing of it, will be full of fear and put away their pride.

到了耶和华你神所赐你的地，得了那地居住的时候，若说，我要立王治理我，像四围的国一样。
When you have come into the land which the Lord your God is giving you, and have taken it for a heritage and are living in it, if it is your desire to have a king over you, like the other nations round about you;

你总要立耶和华你神所拣选的人为王。必从你弟兄中立一人。不可立你弟兄以外的人为王。
Then see that you take as your king the man named by the Lord your God: let your king be one of your countrymen, not a man of another nation who is not one of yourselves.

只是王不可为自己加添马匹，也不可使百姓回埃及去，为要加添他的马匹，因耶和华曾吩咐你们说，不可再回那条路去。
And he is not to get together a great army of horses for himself, or make the people go back to Egypt to get horses for him: because the Lord has said, You will never again go back that way.

他也不可为自己多立妃嫔，恐怕他的心偏邪。也不可为自己多积金银。
And he is not to have a great number of wives, for fear that his heart may be turned away; or great wealth of silver and gold.

他登了国位，就要将祭司利未人面前的这律法书，为自己抄录一本，
And when he has taken his place on the seat of his kingdom, he is to make in a book a copy of this law, from that which the priests, the Levites, have in their care:

存在他那里，要平生诵读，好学习敬畏耶和华他的神，谨守遵行这律法书上的一切言语和这些律例，
And it is to be with him for his reading all the days of his life, so that he may be trained in the fear of the Lord his God to keep and do all the words of this teaching and these laws:

免得他向弟兄心高气傲，偏左偏右，离了这诫命。这样，他和他的子孙便可在以色列中，在国位上年长日久。
So that his heart may not be lifted up over his countrymen, and he may not be turned away from the orders, to one side or the other: but that his life and the lives of his children may be long in his kingdom in Israel.

祭司利未人和利未全支派必在以色列中无分无业。他们所吃用的就是献给耶和华的火祭和一切所捐的。
The priests, the Levites, that is, all the tribe of Levi, will have no part or heritage with Israel: their food and their heritage will be the offerings of the Lord made by fire.

他们在弟兄中必没有产业。耶和华是他们的产业，正如耶和华所应许他们的。
And they will have no heritage among their countrymen: the Lord is their heritage, as he has said to them.

祭司从百姓所当得的分乃是这样，凡献牛或羊为祭的，要把前腿和两腮并脾胃给祭司。
And this is to be the priests' right: those who make an offering of a sheep or an ox are to give to the priest the top part of the leg and the two sides of the head and the stomach.

初收的五谷，新酒和油，并初剪的羊毛，也要给他。
And in addition you are to give him the first of your grain and wine and oil, and the first wool cut from your sheep.

因为耶和华你的神从你各支派中将他拣选出来，使他和他子孙永远奉耶和华的名侍立，事奉。
For he, and his sons after him for ever, have been marked out by the Lord your God from all your tribes, to do the work of priests in the name of the Lord.

利未人无论寄居在以色列中的哪一座城，若从那里出来，一心愿意到耶和华所选择的地方，
And if a Levite, moved by a strong desire, comes from any town in all Israel where he is living to the place marked out by the Lord;

就要奉耶和华他神的名事奉，像他众弟兄利未人侍立在耶和华面前事奉一样。
Then he will do the work of a priest in the name of the Lord his God, with all his brothers the Levites who are there before the Lord.

除了他卖祖父产业所得的以外，还要得一分祭物与他们同吃。
His food will be the same as theirs, in addition to what has come to him as the price of his property.

你到了耶和华你神所赐之地，那些国民所行可憎恶的事，你不可学着行。
When you have come into the land which the Lord your God is giving you, do not take as your example the disgusting ways of those nations.

你们中间不可有人使儿女经火，也不可有占卜的，观兆的，用法术的，行邪术的，
Let there not be seen among you anyone who makes his son or his daughter go through the fire, or anyone using secret arts, or a maker of strange sounds, or a reader of signs, or any wonder-worker,

用迷术的，交鬼的，行巫术的，过阴的。
Or anyone using secret force on people, or putting questions to a spirit, or having secret knowledge, or going to the dead for directions.

凡行这些事的都为耶和华所憎恶。因那些国民行这可憎恶的事，所以耶和华你的神将他们从你面前赶出。
For all who do such things are disgusting to the Lord; and because of these disgusting things the Lord your God is driving them out before you.

你要在耶和华你的神面前作完全人。
You are to be upright in heart before the Lord your God.

因你所要赶出的那些国民都听信观兆的和占卜的，至于你，耶和华你的神从来不许你这样行。
For these nations, whose land you are taking, give attention to readers of signs and to those using secret arts: but the Lord your God will not let you do so.

耶和华你的神要从你们弟兄中间给你兴起一位先知，像我，你们要听从他。
The Lord your God will give you a prophet from among your people, like me; you will give ear to him;

正如你在何烈山大会的日子求耶和华你神一切的话，说，求你不再叫我听见耶和华我神的声音，也不再叫我看见这大火，免得我死亡。
In answer to the request you made to the Lord your God in Horeb on the day of the great meeting, when you said, Let not the voice of the Lord my God come to my ears again, and let me not see this great fire any more, or death will overtake me.

耶和华就对我说，他们所说的是。
Then the Lord said to me, What they have said is well said.

我必在他们弟兄中间，给他们兴起一位先知象你。我要将当说的话传给他。他要将我一切所吩咐的都传给他们。
I will give them a prophet from among themselves, like you, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he will say to them whatever I give him orders to say.

谁不听他奉我名所说的话，我必讨谁的罪。
And whoever does not give ear to my words which he will say in my name, will be responsible to me.

若有先知擅敢托我的名说我所未曾吩咐他说的话，或是奉别神的名说话，那先知就必治死。
But the prophet who takes it on himself to say words in my name which I have not given him orders to say, or who says anything in the name of other gods, will come to his death.

你心里若说，耶和华所未曾吩咐的话，我们怎能知道呢？
And if you say in your hearts, How are we to be certain that the word does not come from the Lord?

先知托耶和华的名说话，所说的若不成就，也无效验，这就是耶和华所未曾吩咐的，是那先知擅自说的，你不要怕他。
When a prophet makes a statement in the name of the Lord, if what he says does not take place and his words do not come true, then his word is not the word of the Lord: the words of the prophet were said in the pride of his heart, and you are to have no fear of him.

耶和华你神将列国之民剪除的时候，耶和华你神也将他们的地赐给你，你接着住他们的城邑并他们的房屋，
When the nations, whose land the Lord your God is giving you, have been cut off by him, and you have taken their place and are living in their towns and in their houses;

就要在耶和华你神所赐你为业的地上分定三座城。
You are to have three towns marked out in the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

要将耶和华你神使你承受为业的地分为三段。又要预备道路，使误杀人的，都可以逃到那里去。
You are to make ready a way, and see that the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, is marked out into three parts, to which any taker of life may go in flight.

误杀人的逃到那里可以存活，定例乃是这样，凡素无仇恨，无心杀了人的，
This is to be the rule for anyone who goes in flight there, after causing the death of his neighbour in error and not through hate;

就如人与邻舍同入树林砍伐树木，手拿斧子一砍，本想砍下树木，不料，斧头脱了把，飞落在邻舍身上，以致于死，这人逃到那些城的一座城，就可以存活，
For example, if a man goes into the woods with his neighbour for the purpose of cutting down trees, and when he takes his axe to give a blow to the tree, the head of the axe comes off, and falling on to his neighbour gives him a wound causing his death; then the man may go in flight to one of these towns and be safe:

免得报血仇的，心中火热追赶他，因路远就追上，将他杀死。其实他不该死，因为他与被杀的素无仇恨。
For if not, he who has the right of punishment may go running after the taker of life in the heat of his wrath, and overtake him because the way is long, and give him a death-blow; though it is not right for him to be put to death because he was not moved by hate.

所以我吩咐你说，要分定三座城。
And so I am ordering you to see that three towns are marked out for this purpose.

耶和华你神若照他向你列祖所起的誓扩张你的境界，将所应许赐你列祖的地全然给你，
And if the Lord your God makes wide the limits of your land, as he said in his oath to your fathers, and gives you all the land which he undertook to give to your fathers;

你若谨守遵行我今日所吩咐的这一切诫命，爱耶和华你的神，常常遵行他的道，就要在这三座城之外，再添三座城，
If you keep and do all these orders which I give you today, loving the Lord your God and walking ever in his ways; then let three more towns, in addition to these three, be marked out for you:

免得无辜之人的血流在耶和华你神所赐你为业的地上，流血的罪就归于你。
So that in all your land, which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, no man may be wrongly put to death, for which you will be responsible.

若有人恨他的邻舍，埋伏着起来击杀他，以致于死，便逃到这些城的一座城，
But if any man has hate for his neighbour, and waiting for him secretly makes an attack on him and gives him a blow causing his death, and then goes in flight to one of these towns;

本城的长老就要打发人去，从那里带出他来，交在报血仇的手中，将他治死。
The responsible men of his town are to send and take him, and give him up to the one who has the right of punishment to be put to death.

你眼不可顾惜他，却要从以色列中除掉流无辜血的罪，使你可以得福。
Have no pity on him, so that Israel may be clear from the crime of putting a man to death without cause, and it will be well for you.

在耶和华你神所赐你承受为业之地，不可挪移你邻舍的地界，那是先人所定的。
Your neighbour's landmark, which was put in its place by the men of old times, is not to be moved or taken away in the land of your heritage which the Lord your God is giving you.

人无论犯什么罪，作什么恶，不可凭一个人的口作见证，总要凭两三个人的口作见证才可定案。
One witness may not make a statement against a man in relation to any sin or wrongdoing which he has done: on the word of two or three witnesses a question is to be judged.

若有凶恶的见证人起来，见证某人作恶，
If a false witness makes a statement against a man, saying that he has done wrong,

这两个争讼的人就要站在耶和华面前，和当时的祭司，并审判官面前，
Then the two men, between whom the argument has taken place, are to come before the Lord, before the priests and judges who are then in power;

审判官要细细地查究，若见证人果然是作假见证的，以假见证陷害弟兄，
And the judges will have the question looked into with care: and if the witness is seen to be false and to have made a false statement against his brother,

你们就要待他如同他想要待的弟兄。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉。
Then do to him what it was his purpose to do to his brother: and so put away the evil from among you.

别人听见都要害怕，就不敢在你们中间再行这样的恶了。
And the rest of the people, hearing of it, will be full of fear, and never again do such evil among you.

你眼不可顾惜，要以命偿命，以眼还眼，以牙还牙，以手还手，以脚还脚。
Have no pity; let life be given for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

你出去与仇敌争战的时候，看见马匹，车辆，并有比你多的人民，不要怕他们，因为领你出埃及地的耶和华你神与你同在。
When you go out to war against other nations, and come face to face with horses and war-carriages and armies greater in number than yourselves, have no fear of them: for the Lord your God is with you, who took you up out of the land of Egypt.

你们将要上阵的时候，祭司要到百姓面前宣告，
And when you are on the point of attacking, let the priest come forward and say to the people,

说，以色列人哪，你们当听，你们今日将要与仇敌争战，不要胆怯，不要惧怕战兢，也不要因他们惊恐。
Give ear, O Israel: today you are going forward to the fight; let your heart be strong; do not let uncontrolled fear overcome you because of those who are against you;

因为耶和华你们的神与你们同去，要为你们与仇敌争战，拯救你们。
For the Lord your God goes with you, fighting for you to give you salvation from those who are against you.

官长也要对百姓宣告说，谁建造房屋，尚未奉献，他可以回家去，恐怕他阵亡，别人去奉献。
And let the overseers say to the people, If there is any man who has made for himself a new house and has not gone into it, let him go back to his house, so that in the event of his death in the fight, another may not take his house for himself.

谁种葡萄园，尚未用所结的果子，他可以回家去，恐怕他阵亡，别人去用。
Or if any man has made a vine-garden without taking the first-fruits of it, let him go back to his house, so that in the event of his death in the fight, another may not be the first to make use of the fruit.

谁聘定了妻，尚未迎娶，他可以回家去，恐怕他阵亡，别人去娶。
Or if any man is newly married and has had no sex relations with his wife, let him go back to his house, so that in the event of his death in the fight, another man may not take her.

官长又要对百姓宣告说，谁惧怕胆怯，他可以回家去，恐怕他弟兄的心消化，和他一样。
And let the overseers go on to say to the people, If there is any man whose heart is feeble with fear, let him go back to his house before he makes the hearts of his countrymen feeble.

官长对百姓宣告完了，就当派军长率领他们。
Then, after saying these words to the people, let the overseers put captains over the army.

你临近一座城，要攻打的时候，先要对城里的民宣告和睦的话。
When you come to a town, before attacking it, make an offer of peace.

他们若以和睦的话回答你，给你开了城，城里所有的人都要给你效劳，服事你。
And if it gives you back an answer of peace, opening its doors to you, then all the people in it may be put to forced work as your servants.

若不肯与你和好，反要与你打仗，你就要围困那城。
If however it will not make peace with you, but war, then let it be shut in on all sides:

耶和华你的神把城交付你手，你就要用刀杀尽这城的男丁。
And when the Lord your God has given it into your hands, let every male in it be put to death without mercy.

惟有妇女，孩子，牲畜，和城内一切的财物，你可以取为自己的掠物。耶和华你神把你仇敌的财物赐给你，你可以吃用。
But the women and the children and the cattle and everything in the town and all its wealth, you may take for yourselves: the wealth of your haters, which the Lord your God has given you, will be your food.

离你甚远的各城，不是这些国民的城，你都要这样待他。
So you are to do to all the towns far away, which are not the towns of these nations.

但这些国民的城，耶和华你神既赐你为业，其中凡有气息的，一个不可存留。
But in the towns of these peoples whose land the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, let no living thing be kept from death:

只要照耶和华你神所吩咐的将这赫人，亚摩利人，迦南人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人都灭绝净尽，
Give them up to the curse; the Hittite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, as the Lord your God has given you orders:

免得他们教导你们学习一切可憎恶的事，就是他们向自己神所行的，以致你们得罪耶和华你们的神。
So that you may not take them as your example and do all the disgusting things which they do in the worship of their gods, so sinning against the Lord your God.

你若许久围困，攻打所要取的一座城，就不可举斧子砍坏树木。因为你可以吃那树上的果子，不可砍伐。田间的树木岂是人，叫你糟蹋吗？
If in war a town is shut in by your armies for a long time, do not let its trees be cut down and made waste; for their fruit will be your food; are the trees of the countryside men for you to take up arms against them?

惟独你所知道不是结果子的树木可以毁坏，砍伐，用以修筑营垒，攻击那与你打仗的城，直到攻塌了。
Only those trees which you are certain are not used for food may be cut down and put to destruction: and you are to make walls of attack against the town till it is taken.

在耶和华你神所赐你为业的地上，若遇见被杀的人倒在田野，不知道是谁杀的，
If, in the land which the Lord your God is giving you, you come across the dead body of a man in the open country, and you have no idea who has put him to death:

长老和审判官就要出去，从被杀的人那里量起，直量到四围的城邑，
Then your responsible men and your judges are to come out, and give orders for the distance from the dead body to the towns round about it to be measured;

看哪城离被杀的人最近，那城的长老就要从牛群中取一只未曾耕地，未曾负轭的母牛犊，
And whichever town is nearest to the body, the responsible men of that town are to take from the herd a young cow which has never been used for work or put under the yoke;

把母牛犊牵到流水，未曾耕种的山谷去，在谷中打折母牛犊的颈项。
And they are to take the cow into a valley where there is flowing water, and which is not ploughed or planted, and there the neck of the cow is to be broken:

祭司利未的子孙要近前来。因为耶和华你的神拣选了他们事奉他，奉耶和华的名祝福，所有争讼殴打的事都要凭他们判断。
Then the priests, the sons of Levi, are to come near; for they have been marked out by the Lord your God to be his servants and to give blessings in the name of the Lord; and by their decision every argument and every blow is to be judged:

那城的众长老，就是离被杀的人最近的，要在那山谷中，在所打折颈项的母牛犊以上洗手，
And all the responsible men of that town which is nearest to the dead man, washing their hands over the cow whose neck was broken in the valley,

祷告（原文作回答）说，我们的手未曾流这人的血。我们的眼也未曾看见这事。
Will say, This death is not the work of our hands and our eyes have not seen it.

耶和华阿，求你赦免你所救赎的以色列民，不要使流无辜血的罪归在你的百姓以色列中间。这样，流血的罪必得赦免。
Have mercy, O Lord, on your people Israel whom you have made free, and take away from your people the crime of a death without cause. Then they will no longer be responsible for the man's death.

你行耶和华眼中看为正的事，就可以从你们中间除掉流无辜血的罪。
So you will take away the crime of a death without cause from among you, when you do what is right in the eyes of the Lord.

你出去与仇敌争战的时候，耶和华你的神将他们交在你手中，你就掳了他们去，
When you go out to war against other nations, and the Lord your God gives them up into your hands and you take them as prisoners;

若在被掳的人中见有美貌的女子，恋慕她，要娶她为妻，
If among the prisoners you see a beautiful woman and it is your desire to make her your wife;

就可以领她到你家里去。她便要剃头发，修指甲，
Then take her back to your house; and let her hair and her nails be cut;

脱去被掳时所穿的衣服，住在你家里哀哭父母一个整月，然后可以与她同房。你作她的丈夫，她作你的妻子。
And let her take off the dress in which she was made prisoner and go on living in your house and weeping for her father and mother for a full month: and after that you may go in to her and be her husband and she will be your wife.

后来你若不喜悦她，就要由她随意出去，决不可为钱卖她，也不可当婢女待她，因为你玷污了她。
But if you have no delight in her, you are to let her go wherever she will; you may not take a price for her as if she was your property, for you have made use of her for your pleasure.

人若有二妻，一为所爱，一为所恶，所爱的，所恶的都给他生了儿子，但长子是所恶之妻生的。
If a man has two wives, one greatly loved and the other hated, and the two of them have had children by him; and if the first son is the child of the hated wife:

到了把产业分给儿子承受的时候，不可将所爱之妻生的儿子立为长子，在所恶之妻生的儿子以上，
Then when he gives his property to his sons for their heritage, he is not to put the son of his loved one in the place of the first son, the son of the hated wife:

却要认所恶之妻生的儿子为长子，将产业多加一分给他。因这儿子是他力量强壮的时候生的，长子的名分本当归他。
But he is to give his first son his birthright, and twice as great a part of his property: for he is the first-fruits of his strength and the right of the first son is his.

人若有顽梗悖逆的儿子，不听从父母的话，他们虽惩治他，他仍不听从，
If a man has a son who is hard-hearted and uncontrolled, who gives no attention to the voice of his father and mother, and will not be ruled by them, though they give him punishment:

父母就要抓住他，将他带到本地的城门，本城的长老那里，
Then let his father and mother take him to the responsible men of the town, to the public place;

对长老说，我们这儿子顽梗悖逆，不听从我们的话，是贪食好酒的人。
And say to them, This son of ours is hard-hearted and uncontrolled, he will not give attention to us; he gives himself up to pleasure and strong drink.

本城的众人就要用石头将他打死。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉，以色列众人都要听见害怕。
Then he is to be stoned to death by all the men of the town: so you are to put away the evil from among you; and all Israel, hearing of it, will be full of fear.

人若犯该死的罪，被治死了，你将他挂在木头上，
If a man does a crime for which the punishment is death, and he is put to death by hanging him on a tree;

他的尸首不可留在木头上过夜，必要当日将他葬埋，免得玷污了耶和华你神所赐你为业之地。因为被挂的人是在神面前受咒诅的。
Do not let his body be on the tree all night, but put it to rest in the earth the same day; for the man who undergoes hanging is cursed by God; so do not make unclean the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

你若看见弟兄的牛或羊失迷了路，不可佯为不见，总要把它牵回来交给你的弟兄。
If you see your brother's ox or his sheep wandering, do not go by without helping, but take them back to your brother.

你弟兄若离你远，或是你不认识他，就要牵到你家去，留在你那里，等你弟兄来寻找就还给他。
If their owner is not near, or if you are not certain who he is, then take the beast to your house and keep it till its owner comes in search of it, and then you are to give it back to him.

你的弟兄无论失落什么，或是驴，或是衣服，你若遇见，都要这样行，不可佯为不见。
Do the same with his ass or his robe or anything which has gone from your brother's keeping and which you have come across: do not keep it to yourself.

你若看见弟兄的牛或驴跌倒在路上，不可佯为不见，总要帮助他拉起来。
If you see your brother's ox or his ass falling down on the road, do not go by without giving him help in lifting it up again.

妇女不可穿戴男子所穿戴的，男子也不可穿妇女的衣服，因为这样行都是耶和华你神所憎恶的。
It is not right for a woman to be dressed in man's clothing, or for a man to put on a woman's robe: whoever does such things is disgusting to the Lord your God.

你若路上遇见鸟窝，或在树上或在地上，里头有雏或有蛋，母鸟伏在雏上或在蛋上，你不可连母带雏一并取去。
If by chance you see a place which a bird has made for itself in a tree or on the earth, with young ones or eggs, and the mother bird seated on the young ones or on the eggs, do not take the mother bird with the young:

总要放母，只可取雏，这样你就可以享福，日子得以长久。
See that you let the mother bird go, but the young ones you may take; so it will be well for you and your life will be long.

你若建造房屋，要在房上的四围安栏杆，免得有人从房上掉下来，流血的罪就归于你家。
If you are building a house, make a railing for the roof, so that the blood of any man falling from it will not come on your house.

不可把两样种子种在你的葡萄园里，免得你撒种所结的和葡萄园的果子都要充公。
Do not have your vine-garden planted with two sorts of seed: or all of it may become a loss, the seed you have put in as well as the increase.

不可并用牛，驴耕地。
Do not do your ploughing with an ox and an ass yoked together.

不可穿羊毛，细麻两样搀杂料作的衣服。
Do not have clothing made of two sorts of thread, wool and linen together.

你要在所披的外衣上四围作？？子。
On the four edges of your robe, with which your body is covered, put ornaments of twisted threads.

人若娶妻，与她同房之后恨恶她，
If any man takes a wife, and having had connection with her, has no delight in her,

信口说她，将丑名加在她身上，说，我娶了这女子，与她同房，见她没有贞洁的凭据。
And says evil things about her and gives her a bad name, saying, I took this woman, and when I had connection with her it was clear to me that she was not a virgin:

女子的父母就要把女子贞洁的凭据拿出来，带到本城门长老那里。
Then let the girl's father and mother put before the responsible men of the town, in the public place, signs that the girl was a virgin:

女子的父亲要对长老说，我将我的女儿给这人为妻，他恨恶她，
And let the girl's father say to the responsible men, I gave my daughter to this man for his wife, but he has no love for her;

信口说她，说，我见你的女儿没有贞洁的凭据。其实这就是我女儿贞洁的凭据。父母就把那布铺在本城的长老面前。
And now he has put shame on her, saying that she is not a virgin; but here is the sign that she is a virgin. Then they are to put her clothing before the responsible men of the town.

本城的长老要拿住那人，惩治他，
Then the responsible men of the town are to give the man his punishment;

并要罚他一百舍客勒银子，给女子的父亲，因为他将丑名加在以色列的一个处女身上。女子仍作他的妻，终身不可休她。
They will take from him a hundred shekels of silver, which are to be given to the father of the girl, because he has given an evil name to a virgin of Israel: she will go on being his wife, he may never put her away all his life.

但这事若是真的，女子没有贞洁的凭据，
But if what he has said is true, and she is seen to be not a virgin,

就要将女子带到她父家的门口，本城的人要用石头将她打死。因为她在父家行了淫乱，在以色列中作了丑事。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉。
Then they are to make the girl come to the door of her father's house and she will be stoned to death by the men of the town, because she has done evil and put shame on Israel, by acting as a loose woman in her father's house: so you are to put away evil from among you.

若遇见人与有丈夫的妇人行淫，就要将奸夫淫妇一并治死。这样，就把那恶从以色列中除掉。
If a man is taken in the act of going in to a married woman, the two of them, the man as well as the woman, are to be put to death: so you are to put away the evil from Israel.

若有处女已经许配丈夫，有人在城里遇见她，与她行淫，
If a young virgin has given her word to be married to a man, and another man meeting her in the town, has connection with her;

你们就要把这二人带到本城门，用石头打死女子是因为虽在城里却没有喊叫。男子是因为玷污别人的妻。这样，就把那恶从你们中间除掉。
Then you are to take the two of them to the doorway of the town, and have them stoned to death; the young virgin, because she gave no cry for help, though it was in the town, and the man, because he has put shame on his neighbour's wife: so you are to put away evil from among you.

若有男子在田野遇见已经许配人的女子，强与她行淫，只要将那男子治死。
But if the man, meeting such a virgin in the open country, takes her by force, then only the man is to be put to death;

但不可办女子。她本没有该死的罪，这事就类乎人起来攻击邻舍，将他杀了一样。
Nothing is to be done to the virgin, because there is no cause of death in her: it is the same as if a man made an attack on his neighbour and put him to death:

因为男子是在田野遇见那已经许配人的女子，女子喊叫，并无人救她。
For he came across her in the open country, and there was no one to come to the help of the virgin in answer to her cry.

若有男子遇见没有许配人的处女，抓住她，与她行淫，被人看见，
If a man sees a young virgin, who has not given her word to be married to anyone, and he takes her by force and has connection with her, and discovery is made of it;

这男子就要拿五十舍客勒银子给女子的父亲。因他玷污了这女子，就要娶她为妻，终身不可休她。
Then the man will have to give the virgin's father fifty shekels of silver and make her his wife, because he has put shame on her; he may never put her away all his life.

人不可娶继母为妻。不可掀开他父亲的衣襟。
A man may not take his father's wife or have sex relations with a woman who is his father's.

凡外肾受伤的，或被阉割的，不可入耶和华的会。
No man whose private parts have been wounded or cut off may come into the meeting of the Lord's people.

私生子不可入耶和华的会。他的子孙，直到十代，也不可入耶和华的会。
One whose father and mother are not married may not come into the meeting of the Lord's people, or any of his family to the tenth generation.

亚扪人或是摩押人不可入耶和华的会。他们的子孙，虽过十代，也永不可入耶和华的会。
No Ammonite or Moabite or any of their people to the tenth generation may come into the meeting of the Lord's people:

因为你们出埃及的时候，他们没有拿食物和水在路上迎接你们，又因他们雇了米所波大米的毗夺人比珥的儿子巴兰来咒诅你们。
Because they gave you no bread or water on your way, when you came out of Egypt: and they got Balaam, the son of Peor, from Pethor in Aram-naharaim to put curses on you.

然而耶和华你的神不肯听从巴兰，却使那咒诅的言语变为祝福的话，因为耶和华你的神爱你。
But the Lord your God would not give ear to Balaam, but let the curse be changed into a blessing to you, because of his love for you.

你一生一世永不可求他们的平安和他们的利益。
Do nothing for their peace or well-being for ever.

不可憎恶以东人，因为他是你的弟兄。不可憎恶埃及人，因为你在他的地上作过寄居的。
But have no hate for an Edomite, because he is your brother, or for an Egyptian, for you were living in his land.

他们第三代子孙可以入耶和华的会。
Their children in the third generation may come into the meeting of the Lord's people.

你出兵攻打仇敌，就要远避诸恶。
When you go out to war and put your tents in position, keep from every evil thing.

你们中间，若有人夜间偶然梦遗，不洁净，就要出到营外，不可入营。
If any man among you becomes unclean through anything which has taken place in the night, he is to go out from the tent-circle and keep outside it:

到傍晚的时候，他要用水洗澡，及至日落了才可以入营。
But when evening comes near, let him take a bath: and after sundown he may come back to the tents.

你在营外也该定出一个地方作为便所。
Let there be a place outside the tent-circle to which you may go;

在你器械之中当预备一把锹，你出营外便溺以后，用以铲土，转身掩盖。
And have among your arms a spade; and when you have been to that place, let that which comes from you be covered up with earth:

因为耶和华你的神常在你营中行走，要救护你，将仇敌交给你，所以你的营理当圣洁，免得他见你那里有污秽，就离开你。
For the Lord your God is walking among your tents, to keep you safe and to give up into your hands those who are fighting against you; then let your tents be holy, so that he may see no unclean thing among you, and be turned away from you.

若有奴仆脱了主人的手，逃到你那里，你不可将他交付他的主人。
Do not give back to his master a servant who has gone in flight from his master and come to you:

他必在你那里与你同住，在你的城邑中，要由他选择一个所喜悦的地方居住。你不可欺负他。
Let him go on living among you in whatever place is most pleasing to him: do not be hard on him.

以色列的女子中不可有妓女。以色列的男子中不可有娈童。
No daughter of Israel is to let herself be used as a loose woman for a strange god, and no son of Israel is to give himself to a man.

娼妓所得的钱，或娈童（原文作狗）所得的价，你不可带入耶和华你神的殿还愿，因为这两样都是耶和华你神所憎恶的。
Do not take into the house of the Lord your God, as an offering for an oath, the price of a loose woman or the money given to one used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods: for these two things are disgusting to the Lord your God.

你借给你弟兄的，或是钱财或是粮食，无论什么可生利的物，都不可取利。
Do not take interest from an Israelite on anything, money or food or any other goods, which you let him have:

借给外邦人可以取利，只是借给你弟兄不可取利。这样，耶和华你神必在你所去得为业的地上和你手里所办的一切事上赐福与你。
From men of other nations you may take interest, but not from an Israelite: so that the blessing of the Lord your God may be on everything to which you put your hand, in the land which you are about to take as your heritage.

你向耶和华你的神许愿，偿还不可迟延。因为耶和华你的神必定向你追讨，你不偿还就有罪。
When you take an oath to the Lord, do not be slow to give effect to it: for without doubt the Lord your God will make you responsible, and will put it to your account as sin.

你若不许愿，倒无罪。
But if you take no oath, there will be no sin.

你嘴里所出的，就是你口中应许甘心所献的，要照你向耶和华你神所许的愿谨守遵行。
Whatever your lips have said, see that you do it; for you gave your word freely to the Lord your God.

你进了邻舍的葡萄园，可以随意吃饱了葡萄，只是不可装在器皿中。
When you go into your neighbour's vine-garden, you may take of his grapes at your pleasure, but you may not take them away in your vessel.

你进了邻舍站着的禾稼，可以用手摘穗子，只是不可用镰刀割取禾稼。
When you go into your neighbour's field, you may take the heads of grain with your hand; but you may not put your blade to his grain.

人若娶妻以后，见她有什么不合理的事，不喜悦她，就可以写休书交在她手中，打发她离开夫家。
If a man takes a wife, and after they are married she is unpleasing to him because of some bad quality in her, let him give her a statement in writing and send her away from his house.

妇人离开夫家以后，可以去嫁别人。
And when she has gone away from him, she may become another man's wife.

后夫若恨恶她，写休书交在她手中，打发她离开夫家，或是娶她为妻的后夫死了，
And if the second husband has no love for her and, giving her a statement in writing, sends her away; or if death comes to the second husband to whom she was married;

打发她去的前夫不可在妇人玷污之后再娶她为妻，因为这是耶和华所憎恶的。不可使耶和华你神所赐为业之地被玷污了。
Her first husband, who had sent her away, may not take her back after she has been wife to another; for that is disgusting to the Lord: and you are not to be a cause of sin in the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage.

新娶妻之人不可从军出征，也不可托他办理什么公事，可以在家清闲一年，使他所娶的妻快活。
A newly married man will not have to go out with the army or undertake any business, but may be free for one year, living in his house for the comfort of his wife.

不可拿人的全盘磨石或是上磨石作当头，因为这是拿人的命作当头。
No one is to take, on account of a debt, the stones with which grain is crushed: for in doing so he takes a man's living.

若遇见人拐带以色列中的一个弟兄，当奴才待他，或是卖了他，那拐带人的就必治死。这样，便将那恶从你们中间除掉。
If a man takes by force one of his countrymen, the children of Israel, using him as his property or getting a price for him, that thief is to be put to death: so you are to put away evil from among you.

在大麻疯的灾病上，你们要谨慎，照祭司利未人一切所指教你们的留意遵行。我怎样吩咐他们，你们要怎样遵行。
In connection with the leper's disease, take care to keep and do every detail of the teaching of the priests, the Levites: as I gave them orders, so you are to do.

当记念出埃及后，在路上，耶和华你神向米利暗所行的事。
Keep in mind what the Lord your God did to Miriam on the way, when you came out of Egypt.

你借给邻舍，不拘是什么，不可进他家拿他的当头。
If you let your brother have the use of anything which is yours, do not go into his house and take anything of his as a sign of his debt;

要站在外面，等那向你借贷的人把当头拿出来交给你。
But keep outside till he comes out and gives it to you.

他若是穷人，你不可留他的当头过夜。
If he is a poor man, do not keep his property all night;

日落的时候，总要把当头还他，使他用那件衣服盖着睡觉，他就为你祝福。这在耶和华你神面前就是你的义了。
But be certain to give it back to him when the sun goes down, so that he may have his clothing for sleeping in, and will give you his blessing: and this will be put to your account as righteousness before the Lord your God.

困苦穷乏的雇工，无论是你的弟兄或是在你城里寄居的，你不可欺负他。
Do not be hard on a servant who is poor and in need, if he is one of your countrymen or a man from another nation living with you in your land.

要当日给他工价，不可等到日落。因为他穷苦，把心放在工价上，恐怕他因你求告耶和华，罪便归你了。
Give him his payment day by day, not keeping it back over night; for he is poor and his living is dependent on it; and if his cry against you comes to the ears of the Lord, it will be judged as sin in you.

不可因子杀父，也不可因父杀子。凡被杀的都为本身的罪。
Fathers are not to be put to death for their children or children for their fathers: every man is to be put to death for the sin which he himself has done.

你不可向寄居的和孤儿屈枉正直，也不可拿寡妇的衣裳作当头。
Be upright in judging the cause of the man from a strange country and of him who has no father; do not take a widow's clothing on account of a debt:

要记念你在埃及作过奴仆。耶和华你的神从那里将你救赎，所以我吩咐你这样行。
But keep in mind that you were a servant in the land of Egypt, and the Lord your God made you free: for this is why I give you orders to do this.

你在田间收割庄稼，若忘下一捆，不可回去再取，要留给寄居的与孤儿寡妇。这样，耶和华你神必在你手里所办的一切事上赐福与你。
When you get in the grain from your field, if some of the grain has been dropped by chance in the field, do not go back and get it, but let it be for the man from a strange land, the child without a father, and the widow: so that the blessing of the Lord your God may be on all the work of your hands.

你打橄榄树，枝上剩下的，不可再打。要留给寄居的与孤儿寡妇。
When you are shaking the fruit from your olive-trees, do not go over the branches a second time: let some be for the man from a strange land, the child without a father, and the widow.

你摘葡萄园的葡萄，所剩下的，不可再摘。要留给寄居的与孤儿寡妇。
When you are pulling the grapes from your vines, do not take up those which have been dropped; let them be for the man from a strange land, the child without a father, and the widow.

你也要记念你在埃及地作过奴仆，所以我吩咐你这样行。
Keep in mind that you were a servant in the land of Egypt: for this is why I give you orders to do this.

人若有争讼，来听审判，审判官就要定义人有理，定恶人有罪。
If there is an argument between men and they go to law with one another, let the judges give their decision for the upright, and against the wrongdoer.

恶人若该受责打，审判官就要叫他当面伏在地上，按着他的罪照数责打。
And if the wrongdoer is to undergo punishment by whipping, the judge will give orders for him to go down on his face and be whipped before him, the number of the blows being in relation to his crime.

只可打他四十下，不可过数。若过数，便是轻贱你的弟兄了。
He may be given forty blows, not more; for if more are given, your brother may be shamed before you.

牛在场上踹谷的时候，不可笼住它的嘴。
Do not keep the ox from taking the grain when he is crushing it.

弟兄同居，若死了一个，没有儿子，死人的妻不可出嫁外人，她丈夫的兄弟当尽弟兄的本分，娶她为妻，与她同房。
If brothers are living together and one of them, at his death, has no son, the wife of the dead man is not to be married outside the family to another man: let her husband's brother go in to her and make her his wife, doing as it is right for a brother-in-law to do.

妇人生的长子必归死兄的名下，免得他的名在以色列中涂抹了。
Then the first male child she has will take the rights of the brother who is dead, so that his name may not come to an end in Israel.

那人若不愿意娶他哥哥的妻，他哥哥的妻就要到城门长老那里，说，我丈夫的兄弟不肯在以色列中兴起他哥哥的名字，不给我尽弟兄的本分。
But if the man says he will not take his brother's wife, then let the wife go to the responsible men of the town, and say, My husband's brother will not keep his brother's name living in Israel; he will not do what it is right for a husband's brother to do.

本城的长老就要召那人来问他，他若执意说，我不愿意娶她，
Then the responsible men of the town will send for the man, and have talk with him: and if he still says, I will not take her;

他哥哥的妻就要当着长老到那人的跟前，脱了他的鞋，吐唾沫在他脸上，说，凡不为哥哥建立家室的都要这样待他。
Then his brother's wife is to come to him, before the responsible men of the town, and take his shoe off his foot, and put shame on him, and say, So let it be done to the man who will not take care of his brother's name.

在以色列中，他的名必称为脱鞋之家。
And his family will be named in Israel, The house of him whose shoe has been taken off.

若有二人争斗，这人的妻近前来，要救她丈夫脱离那打她丈夫之人的手，抓住那人的下体，
If two men are fighting, and the wife of one of them, coming to the help of her husband, takes the other by the private parts;

就要砍断妇人的手，眼不可顾惜她。
Her hand is to be cut off; have no pity on her.

你囊中不可有一大一小两样的法码。
Do not have in your bag different weights, a great and a small;

你家里不可有一大一小两样的升斗。
Or in your house different measures, a great and a small.

当用对准公平的法码，公平的升斗。这样，在耶和华你神所赐你的地上，你的日子就可以长久。
But have a true weight and a true measure: so that your life may be long in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

因为行非义之事的人都是耶和华你神所憎恶的。
For all who do such things, and all whose ways are not upright, are disgusting to the Lord your God.

你要记念你们出埃及的时候，亚玛力人在路上怎样待你。
Keep in mind what Amalek did to you on your way from Egypt;

他们在路上遇见你，趁你疲乏困倦击杀你尽后边软弱的人，并不敬畏神。
How, meeting you on the way, he made an attack on you when you were tired and without strength, cutting off all the feeble ones at the end of your line; and the fear of God was not in him.

所以耶和华你神使你不被四围一切的仇敌扰乱，在耶和华你神赐你为业的地上得享平安。那时，你要将亚玛力的名号从天下涂抹了，不可忘记。
So when the Lord your God has given you rest from all who are against you on every side, in the land which the Lord your God is giving you for your heritage, see to it that the memory of Amalek is cut off from the earth; keep this in mind.

你进去得了耶和华你神所赐你为业之地居住，
Now when you have come into the land which the Lord is giving you for your heritage, and you have made it yours and are living in it;

就要从耶和华你神赐你的地上将所收的各种初熟的土产取些来，盛在筐子里，往耶和华你神所选择要立为他名的居所去，
You are to take a part of the first-fruits of the earth, which you get from the land which the Lord your God is giving you, and put it in a basket, and go to the place marked out by the Lord your God, as the resting-place of his name.

见当时作祭司的，对他说，我今日向耶和华你神明认，我已来到耶和华向我们列祖起誓应许赐给我们的地。
And you are to come to him who is priest at that time, and say to him, I give witness today before the Lord your God, that I have come into the land which the Lord made an oath to our fathers to give us.

祭司就从你手里取过筐子来，放在耶和华你神的坛前。
Then the priest will take the basket from your hand and put it down in front of the altar of the Lord your God.

你要在耶和华你神面前说，我祖原是一个将亡的亚兰人，下到埃及寄居。他人口稀少，在那里却成了又大又强，人数很多的国民。
And these are the words which you will say before the Lord your God: My father was a wandering Aramaean, and he went down with a small number of people into Egypt; there he became a great and strong nation:

埃及人恶待我们，苦害我们，将苦工加在我们身上。
And the Egyptians were cruel to us, crushing us under a hard yoke:

于是我们哀求耶和华我们列祖的神，耶和华听见我们的声音，看见我们所受的困苦，劳碌，欺压，
And our cry went up to the Lord, the God of our fathers, and the Lord's ear was open to the voice of our cry, and his eyes took note of our grief and the crushing weight of our work:

他就用大能的手和伸出来的膀臂，并大可畏的事与神迹奇事，领我们出了埃及，
And the Lord took us out of Egypt with a strong hand and a stretched-out arm, with works of power and signs and wonders:

将我们领进这地方，把这流奶与蜜之地赐给我们。
And he has been our guide to this place, and has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.

耶和华阿，现在我把你所赐给我地上初熟的土产奉了来。随后你要把筐子放在耶和华你神面前，向耶和华你的神下拜。
So now, I have come here with the first of the fruits of the earth which you, O Lord, have given me. Then you will put it down before the Lord your God and give him worship:

你和利未人，并在你们中间寄居的，要因耶和华你神所赐你和你家的一切福分欢乐。
And you will have joy in every good thing which the Lord your God has given to you and to your family; and the Levite, and the man from a strange land who is with you, will take part in your joy.

每逢三年，就是十分取一之年，你取完了一切土产的十分之一，要分给利未人和寄居的，与孤儿寡妇，使他们在你城中可以吃得饱足。
When you have taken out a tenth from the tenth of all your produce in the third year, which is the year when this has to be done, give it to the Levite, and the man from a strange land, and the child without a father, and the widow, so that they may have food in your towns and be full;

你又要在耶和华你神面前说，我已将圣物从我家里拿出来，给了利未人和寄居的，与孤儿寡妇，是照你所吩咐我的一切命令。你的命令我都没有违背，也没有忘记。
And say before the Lord your God, I have taken all the holy things out of my house and have given them to the Levite, and the man from a strange land, and him who has no father, and the widow, as you have given me orders: I have kept in mind all your orders, in nothing have I gone against them:

我守丧的时候，没有吃这圣物。不洁净的时候，也没有拿出来，又没有为死人送去。我听从了耶和华我神的话，都照你所吩咐的行了。
No part of these things has been used for food in a time of weeping, or put away when I was unclean, or given for the dead: I have given ear to the voice of the Lord my God, and have done all you have given me orders to do.

求你从天上，你的圣所垂看，赐福给你的百姓以色列与你所赐给我们的地，就是你向我们列祖起誓赐我们流奶与蜜之地。
So, looking down from your holy place in heaven, send your blessing on your people Israel and on the land which you have given us, as you said in your oath to our fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.

耶和华你的神今日吩咐你行这些律例典章，所以你要尽心尽性谨守遵行。
Today the Lord your God gives you orders to keep all these laws and decisions: so then keep and do them with all your heart and all your soul.

你今日认耶和华为你的神，应许遵行他的道，谨守他的律例，诫命，典章，听从他的话。
Today you have given witness that the Lord is your God, and that you will go in his ways and keep his laws and his orders and his decisions and give ear to his voice:

耶和华今日照他所应许你的，也认你为他的子民，使你谨守他的一切诫命，
And the Lord has made it clear this day that you are a special people to him, as he gave you his word; and that you are to keep all his orders;

又使你得称赞，美名，尊荣，超乎他所造的万民之上，并照他所应许的使你归耶和华你神为圣洁的民。
And that he will make you high over all the nations he has made, in praise, in name, and in honour, and that you are to be a holy people to the Lord your God as he has said.

摩西和以色列的众长老吩咐百姓说，你们要遵守我今日所吩咐的一切诫命。
Then Moses and the responsible men of Israel gave the people these orders: Keep all the orders which I have given you this day;

你们过约旦河，到了耶和华你神所赐给你的地，当天要立起几块大石头，墁上石灰，
And on the day when you go over Jordan into the land which the Lord your God is giving you, put up great stones, coating them with building-paste,

把这律法的一切话写在石头上。你过了河，可以进入耶和华你神所赐你流奶与蜜之地，正如耶和华你列祖之神所应许你的。
And writing on them all the words of this law, after you have gone over; so that you may take the heritage which the Lord your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, as the Lord, the God of your fathers, has said.

你们过了约旦河，就要在以巴路山上照我今日所吩咐的，将这些石头立起来，墁上石灰。
And when you have gone over Jordan, you are to put up these stones, as I have said to you today, in Mount Ebal, and have them coated with building-paste.

在那里要为耶和华你的神筑一座石坛。在石头上不可动铁器。
There you are to make an altar to the Lord your God, of stones on which no iron instrument has been used.

要用没有凿过的石头筑耶和华你神的坛，在坛上要将燔祭献给耶和华你的神。
You are to make the altar of the Lord your God of uncut stones; offering on it burned offerings to the Lord your God:

又要献平安祭，且在那里吃，在耶和华你的神面前欢乐。
And you are to make your peace-offerings, feasting there with joy before the Lord your God.

你要将这律法的一切话明明地写在石头上。
And put on the stones all the words of this law, writing them very clearly.

摩西和祭司利未人晓谕以色列众人说，以色列阿，要默默静听。你今日成为耶和华你神的百姓了。
Then Moses and the priests, the Levites, said to all Israel, Be quiet and give ear, O Israel; today you have become the people of the Lord your God.

所以要听从耶和华你神的话，遵行他的诫命律例，就是我今日所吩咐你的。
For this cause you are to give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, and do his orders and his laws which I give you this day.

当日，摩西嘱咐百姓说，
That same day Moses said to the people,

你们过了约旦河，西缅，利未，犹大，以萨迦，约瑟，便雅悯六个支派的人都要站在基利心山上为百姓祝福。
These are to take their places on Mount Gerizim for blessing the people when you have gone over Jordan: Simeon and Levi and Judah and Issachar and Joseph and Benjamin;

流便，迦得，亚设，西布伦，但，拿弗他利六个支派的人都要站在以巴路山上宣布咒诅。
And these are to be on Mount Ebal for the curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

利未人要向以色列众人高声说，
Then the Levites are to say in a loud voice to all the men of Israel,

有人制造耶和华所憎恶的偶像，或雕刻，或铸造，就是工匠手所作的，在暗中设立，那人必受咒诅。百姓都要答应说，阿们。
Cursed is the man who makes any image of wood or stone or metal, disgusting to the Lord, the work of man's hands, and puts it up in secret. And let all the people say, So be it.

轻慢父母的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who does not give honour to his father or mother. And let all the people say, So be it.

挪移邻舍地界的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who takes his neighbour's landmark from its place. And let all the people say, So be it.

使瞎子走差路的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he by whom the blind are turned out of the way. And let all the people say, So be it.

向寄居的和孤儿寡妇屈枉正直的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who gives a wrong decision in the cause of a man from a strange land, or of one without a father, or of a widow. And let all the people say, So be it.

与继母行淫的，必受咒诅。因为掀开他父亲的衣襟。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who has sex relations with his father's wife, for he has put shame on his father. And let all the people say, So be it.

与兽淫合的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who has sex relations with any sort of beast. And let all the people say, So be it.

与异母同父，或异父同母的姐妹行淫的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who has sex relations with his sister, the daughter of his father or of his mother. And let all the people say, So be it.

与岳母行淫的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who has sex relations with his mother-in-law. And let all the people say, So be it.

暗中杀人的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who takes his neighbour's life secretly. And let all the people say, So be it.

受贿赂害死无辜之人的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who for a reward puts to death one who has done no wrong. And let all the people say, So be it.

不坚守遵行这律法言语的，必受咒诅。百姓都要说，阿们。
Cursed is he who does not take this law to heart to do it. And let all the people say, So be it.

你若留意听从耶和华你神的话，谨守遵行他的一切诫命，就是我今日所吩咐你的，他必使你超乎天下万民之上。
Now if you give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, and keep with care all these orders which I have given you today, then the Lord your God will put you high over all the nations of the earth:

你若听从耶和华你神的话，这以下的福必追随你，临到你身上，
And all these blessings will come on you and overtake you, if your ears are open to the voice of the Lord your God.

你在城里必蒙福，在田间也必蒙福。
A blessing will be on you in the town, and a blessing in the field.

你身所生的，地所产的，牲畜所下的，以及牛犊，羊羔，都必蒙福。
A blessing will be on the fruit of your body, and on the fruit of your land, on the fruit of your cattle, the increase of your herd, and the young of your flock.

你的筐子和你的抟面盆都必蒙福。
A blessing will be on your basket and on your bread-basin.

你出也蒙福，入也蒙福。
A blessing will be on your coming in and on your going out.

仇敌起来攻击你，耶和华必使他们在你面前被你杀败。他们从一条路来攻击你，必从七条路逃跑。
By the power of the Lord, those who take arms against you will be overcome before you: they will come out against you one way, and will go in flight from you seven ways.

在你仓房里，并你手所办的一切事上，耶和华所命的福必临到你。耶和华你神也要在所给你的地上赐福与你。
The Lord will send his blessing on your store-houses and on everything to which you put your hand: his blessing will be on you in the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

你若谨守耶和华你神的诫命，遵行他的道，他必照着向你所起的誓立你作为自己的圣民。
The Lord will keep you as a people holy to himself, as he has said to you in his oath, if you keep the orders of the Lord your God and go on walking in his ways.

天下万民见你归在耶和华的名下，就要惧怕你。
And all the peoples of the earth will see that the name of the Lord is on you, and they will go in fear of you.

你在耶和华向你列祖起誓应许赐你的地上，他必使你身所生的，牲畜所下的，地所产的，都绰绰有余。
And the Lord will make you fertile in every good thing, in the fruit of your body, and the fruit of your cattle, and the fruit of your fields, in the land which the Lord, by his oath to your fathers, said he would give you.

耶和华必为你开天上的府库，按时降雨在你的地上。在你手里所办的一切事上赐福与你。你必借给许多国民，却不至向他们借贷。
Opening his store-house in heaven, the Lord will send rain on your land at the right time, blessing all the work of your hands: other nations will make use of your wealth, and you will have no need of theirs.

你若听从耶和华你神的诫命，就是我今日所吩咐你的，谨守遵行，不偏左右，也不随从事奉别神，耶和华就必使你作首不作尾，但居上不居下。
The Lord will make you the head and not the tail; and you will ever have the highest place, if you give ear to the orders of the Lord your God which I give you today, to keep and to do them;


Not turning away from any of the orders which I give you today, to the right hand or to the left, or going after any other gods to give them worship.

你若不听从耶和华你神的话，不谨守遵行他的一切诫命律例，就是我今日所吩咐你的，这以下的咒诅都必追随你，临到你身上，
But if you do not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, and take care to do all his orders and his laws which I give you today, then all these curses will come on you and overtake you:

你在城里必受咒诅，在田间也必受咒诅。
You will be cursed in the town and cursed in the field.

你的筐子和你的抟面盆都必受咒诅。
A curse will be on your basket and on your bread-basin.

你身所生的，地所产的，以及牛犊，羊羔，都必受咒诅。
A curse will be on the fruit of your body, and on the fruit of your land, on the increase of your cattle, and the young of your flock.

你出也受咒诅，入也受咒诅。
You will be cursed when you come in and cursed when you go out.

耶和华因你行恶离弃他，必在你手里所办的一切事上，使咒诅，扰乱，责罚临到你，直到你被毁灭，速速地灭亡。
The Lord will send on you cursing and trouble and punishment in everything to which you put your hand, till sudden destruction overtakes you; because of your evil ways in which you have been false to me.

耶和华必使瘟疫贴在你身上，直到他将你从所进去得为业的地上灭绝。
The Lord will send disease after disease on you, till you have been cut off by death from the land to which you are going.

耶和华要用痨病，热病，火症，疟疾，刀剑，旱风（或作干旱），霉烂攻击你。这都要追赶你，直到你灭亡。
The Lord will send wasting disease, and burning pain, and flaming heat against you, keeping back the rain till your land is waste and dead; so will it be till your destruction is complete.

你头上的天要变为铜，脚下的地要变为铁。
And the heaven over your heads will be brass, and the earth under you hard as iron.

耶和华要使那降在你地上的雨变为尘沙，从天临在你身上，直到你灭亡。
The Lord will make the rain of your land powder and dust, sending it down on you from heaven till your destruction is complete.

耶和华必使你败在仇敌面前，你从一条路去攻击他们，必从七条路逃跑。你必在天下万国中抛来抛去。
The Lord will let you be overcome by your haters: you will go out against them one way, and you will go in flight before them seven ways: you will be the cause of fear among all the kingdoms of the earth.

你的尸首必给空中的飞鸟和地上的走兽作食物，并无人哄赶。
Your bodies will be meat for all the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth; there will be no one to send them away.

耶和华必用埃及人的疮并痔疮，牛皮癣与疥攻击你，使你不能医治。
The Lord will send on you the disease of Egypt, and other sorts of skin diseases which nothing will make well.

耶和华必用癫狂，眼瞎，心惊攻击你。
He will make your minds diseased, and your eyes blind, and your hearts wasted with fear:

你必在午间摸索，好像瞎子在暗中摸索一样。你所行的必不亨通，时常遭遇欺压，抢夺，无人搭救。
You will go feeling your way when the sun is high, like a blind man for whom all is dark, and nothing will go well for you: you will be crushed and made poor for ever, and you will have no saviour.

你聘定了妻，别人必与她同房。你建造房屋，不得住在其内。你栽种葡萄园，也不得用其中的果子。
You will take a wife, but another man will have the use of her: the house which your hands have made will never be your resting-place: you will make a vine-garden, and never take the fruit of it.

你的牛在你眼前宰了，你必不得吃它的肉。你的驴在你眼前被抢夺，不得归还。你的羊归了仇敌，无人搭救。
Your ox will be put to death before your eyes, but its flesh will not be your food: your ass will be violently taken away before your face, and will not be given back to you: your sheep will be given to your haters, and there will be no saviour for you.

你的儿女必归与别国的民。你的眼目终日切望，甚至失明，你手中无力拯救。
Your sons and your daughters will be given to another people, and your eyes will be wasted away with looking and weeping for them all the day: and you will have no power to do anything.

你的土产和你劳碌得来的，必被你所不认识的国民吃尽。你时常被欺负，受压制，
The fruit of your land and all the work of your hands will be food for a nation which is strange to you and to your fathers; you will only be crushed down and kept under for ever:

甚至你因眼中所看见的，必致疯狂。
So that the things which your eyes have to see will send you out of your minds.

耶和华必攻击你，使你膝上腿上，从脚掌到头顶，长毒疮无法医治。
The Lord will send a skin disease, attacking your knees and your legs, bursting out from your feet to the top of your head, so that nothing will make you well.

耶和华必将你和你所立的王领到你和你列祖素不认识的国去。在那里你必事奉木头石头的神。
And you, and the king whom you have put over you, will the Lord take away to a nation strange to you and to your fathers; there you will be servants to other gods of wood and stone.

你在耶和华领你到的各国中，要令人惊骇，笑谈，讥诮。
And you will become a wonder and a name of shame among all the nations where the Lord will take you.

你带到田间的种子虽多，收进来的却少，因为被蝗虫吃了。
You will take much seed out into the field, and get little in; for the locust will get it.

你栽种，修理葡萄园，却不得收葡萄，也不得喝葡萄酒，因为被虫子吃了。
You will put in vines and take care of them, but you will get no wine or grapes from them; for they will be food for worms.

你全境有橄榄树，却不得其油抹身，因为树上的橄榄不熟自落了。
Your land will be full of olive-trees, but there will be no oil for the comfort of your body; for your olive-tree will give no fruit.

你生儿养女，却不算是你的，因为必被掳去。
You will have sons and daughters, but they will not be yours; for they will go away prisoners into a strange land.

你所有的树木和你地里的出产必被蝗虫所吃。
All your trees and the fruit of your land will be the locust's.

在你中间寄居的，必渐渐上升，比你高而又高。你必渐渐下降，低而又低。
The man from a strange land who is living among you will be lifted up higher and higher over you, while you go down lower and lower.

他必借给你，你却不能借给他。他必作首，你必作尾。
He will let you have his wealth at interest, and will have no need of yours: he will be the head and you the tail.

这一切咒诅必追随你，赶上你，直到你灭亡。因为你不听从耶和华你神的话，不遵守他所吩咐的诫命律例。
And all these curses will come after you and overtake you, till your destruction is complete; because you did not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, or keep his laws and his orders which he gave you:

这些咒诅必在你和你后裔的身上成为异迹奇事，直到永远。
These things will come on you and on your seed, to be a sign and a wonder for ever;

因为你富有的时候，不欢心乐意地事奉耶和华你的神，
Because you did not give honour to the Lord your God, worshipping him gladly, with joy in your hearts on account of all your wealth of good things;

所以你必在饥饿，干渴，赤露，缺乏之中事奉耶和华所打发来攻击你的仇敌。他必把铁轭加在你的颈项上，直到将你灭绝。
For this cause you will become servants to those whom the Lord your God will send against you, without food and drink and clothing, and in need of all things: and he will put a yoke of iron on your neck till he has put an end to you.

耶和华要从远方，地极带一国的民，如鹰飞来攻击你。这民的言语，你不懂得。
The Lord will send a nation against you from the farthest ends of the earth, coming with the flight of an eagle; a nation whose language is strange to you;

这民的面貌凶恶，不顾恤年老的，也不恩待年少的。
A hard-faced nation, who will have no respect for the old or mercy for the young:

他们必吃你牲畜所下的和你地土所产的，直到你灭亡。你的五谷，新酒，和油，以及牛犊，羊羔，都不给你留下，直到将你灭绝。
He will take the fruit of your cattle and of your land till death puts an end to you: he will let you have nothing of your grain or wine or oil or any of the increase of your cattle or the young of your flock, till he has made your destruction complete.

他们必将你困在你各城里，直到你所倚靠，高大坚固的城墙都被攻塌。他们必将你困在耶和华你神所赐你遍地的各城里。
Your towns will be shut in by his armies, till your high walls, in which you put your faith, have come down: his armies will be round your towns, through all your land which the Lord your God has given you.

你在仇敌围困窘迫之中，必吃你本身所生的，就是耶和华你神所赐给你的儿女之肉。
And your food will be the fruit of your body, the flesh of the sons and daughters which the Lord your God has given you; because of your bitter need and the cruel grip of your haters.

你们中间，柔弱娇嫩的人必恶眼看他弟兄和他怀中的妻，并他余剩的儿女。
That man among you who is soft and used to comfort will be hard and cruel to his brother, and to his dear wife, and to of those his children who are still living;

甚至在你受仇敌围困窘迫的城中，他要吃儿女的肉，不肯分一点给他的亲人，因为他一无所剩。
And will not give to any of them the flesh of his children which will be his food because he has no other; in the cruel grip of your haters on all your towns.

你们中间，柔弱娇嫩的妇人，是因娇嫩柔弱不肯把脚踏地的，必恶眼看她怀中的丈夫和她的儿女。
The most soft and delicate of your women, who would not so much as put her foot on the earth, so delicate is she, will be hard-hearted to her husband and to her son and to her daughter;

她两腿中间出来的婴孩与她所要生的儿女，她因缺乏一切就要在你受仇敌围困窘迫的城中将他们暗暗地吃了。
And to her baby newly come to birth, and to the children of her body; for having no other food, she will make a meal of them secretly, because of her bitter need and the cruel grip of your haters on all your towns.

这书上所写律法的一切话是叫你敬畏耶和华你神可荣可畏的名。你若不谨守遵行，耶和华就必将奇灾，就是至大至长的灾，至重至久的病，加在你和你后裔的身上，
If you will not take care to do all the words of this law, recorded in this book, honouring that name of glory and of fear, THE LORD YOUR GOD;


Then the Lord your God will make your punishment, and the punishment of your seed, a thing to be wondered at; great punishments and cruel diseases stretching on through long years.

也必使你所惧怕，埃及人的病都临到你，贴在你身上，
He will send on you again all the diseases of Egypt, which were a cause of fear to you, and they will take you in their grip.

又必将没有写在这律法书上的各样疾病，灾殃降在你身上，直到你灭亡。
And all the diseases and the pains not recorded in the book of this law will the Lord send on you till your destruction is complete.

你们先前虽然像天上的星那样多，却因不听从耶和华你神的话，所剩的人数就稀少了。
And you will become a very small band, though your numbers were like the stars of heaven; because you did not give ear to the voice of the Lord your God.

先前耶和华怎样喜悦善待你们，使你们众多，也要照样喜悦毁灭你们，使你们灭亡。并且你们从所要进去得的地上必被拔除。
And as the Lord took delight in doing you good and increasing you, so the Lord will take pleasure in cutting you off and causing your destruction, and you will be uprooted from the land which you are about to take as your heritage.

耶和华必使你们分散在万民中，从地这边到地那边，你必在那里事奉你和你列祖素不认识，木头石头的神。
And the Lord will send you wandering among all peoples, from one end of the earth to the other: there you will be servants to other gods, of wood and stone, gods of which you and your fathers had no knowledge.

在那些国中，你必不得安逸，也不得落脚之地。耶和华却使你在那里心中跳动，眼目失明，精神消耗。
And even among these nations there will be no peace for you, and no rest for your feet: but the Lord will give you there a shaking heart and wasting eyes and weariness of soul:

你的性命必悬悬无定。你昼夜恐惧，自料性命难保。
Your very life will be hanging in doubt before you, and day and night will be dark with fears, and nothing in life will be certain:

你因心里所恐惧的，眼中所看见的，早晨必说，巴不得到晚上才好。晚上必说，巴不得到早晨才好。
In the morning you will say, If only it was evening! And at evening you will say, If only morning would come! Because of the fear in your hearts and the things which your eyes will see.

耶和华必使你坐船回埃及去，走我曾告诉你不得再见的路。在那里你必卖己身与仇敌作奴婢，却无人买。
And the Lord will take you back to Egypt again in ships, by the way of which I said to you, You will never see it again: there you will be offering yourselves as men-servants and women-servants to your haters for a price, and no man will take you.

这是耶和华在摩押地吩咐摩西与以色列人立约的话，是在他和他们于何烈山所立的约之外。
These are the words of the agreement which Moses was ordered by the Lord to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, in addition to the agreement which he made with them in Horeb.

摩西召了以色列众人来，对他们说，耶和华在埃及地，在你们眼前向法老和他众臣仆，并他全地所行的一切事，你们都看见了，
And Moses said in the hearing of all Israel, You have seen all the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and all his land;

就是你亲眼看见的大试验和神迹，并那些大奇事。
The great tests which your eyes saw, and the signs and wonders:

但耶和华到今日没有使你们心能明白，眼能看见，耳能听见。
But even to this day the Lord has not given you a mind open to knowledge, or seeing eyes or hearing ears.

我领你们在旷野四十年，你们身上的衣服并没有穿破，脚上的鞋也没有穿坏。
For forty years I have been your guide through the waste land: your clothing has not become old on your backs, or your shoes on your feet.

你们没有吃饼，也没有喝清酒浓酒。这要使你们知道，耶和华是你们的神。
You have had no bread, or wine, or strong drink: so that you might see that I am the Lord your God.

你们来到这地方，希实本王西宏，巴珊王噩都出来与我们交战，我们就击杀了他们，
When you came to this place, Sihon, king of Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, came out to make war against us and we overcame them:

取了他们的地给流便支派，迦得支派，和玛拿西半支派为业。
And we took their land and gave it to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, for their heritage.

所以你们要谨守遵行这约的话，好叫你们在一切所行的事上亨通。
So keep the words of this agreement and do them, so that it may be well for you in everything you do.

今日你们的首领，族长（原文作支派），长老，官长，以色列的男丁，你们的妻子，儿女和营中寄居的，以及为你们劈柴挑水的人，都站在耶和华你们的神面前，
You have come here today, all of you, before the Lord your God; the heads of your tribes, the overseers, and those who are in authority over you, with all the men of Israel,


And your little ones, your wives, and the men of other lands who are with you in your tents, down to the wood-cutter and the servant who gets water for you:

为要你顺从耶和华你神今日与你所立的约，向你所起的誓。
With the purpose of taking part in the agreement of the Lord your God, and his oath which he makes with you today:

这样，他要照他向你所应许的话，又向你列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各所起的誓，今日立你作他的子民，他作你的神。
And so that he may make you his people today, and be your God, as he has said to you, and as he made an oath to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

我不但与你们立这约，起这誓，
And not with you only do I make this agreement and this oath;

凡与我们一同站在耶和华我们神面前的，并今日不在我们这里的人，我也与他们立这约，起这誓。
But with everyone who is here with us today before the Lord our God, as well as with those who are not here:

（我们曾住过埃及地，也从列国经过。这是你们知道的。
(For you have in mind how we were living in the land of Egypt; and how we came through all the nations which were on your way;

你们也看见他们中间可憎之物，并他们木，石，金，银的偶像。）
And you have seen their disgusting doings, and the images of wood and stone and silver and gold which were among them:)

惟恐你们中间，或男或女，或族长或支派长，今日心里偏离耶和华我们的神，去事奉那些国的神。又怕你们中间有恶根生出苦菜和茵陈来，
So that there may not be among you any man or woman or family or tribe whose heart is turned away from the Lord our God today, to go after other gods and give them worship; or any root among you whose fruit is poison and bitter sorrow;

听见这咒诅的话，心里仍是自夸说，我虽然行事心里顽梗，连累众人，却还是平安。
If such a man, hearing the words of this oath, takes comfort in the thought that he will have peace even if he goes on in the pride of his heart, taking whatever chance may give him:

耶和华必不饶恕他。耶和华的怒气与愤恨要向他发作，如烟冒出，将这书上所写的一切咒诅都加在他身上。耶和华又要从天下涂抹他的名，
The Lord will have no mercy on him, but the wrath of the Lord will be burning against that man, and all the curses recorded in this book will be waiting for him, and the Lord will take away his name completely from the earth.

也必照着写在律法书上，约中的一切咒诅将他从以色列众支派中分别出来，使他受祸。
He will be marked out by the Lord, from all the tribes of Israel, for an evil fate, in keeping with all the curses of the agreement recorded in this book of the law.

你们的后代，就是以后兴起来的子孙，和远方来的外人，看见这地的灾殃，并耶和华所降与这地的疾病，
And future generations, your children coming after you, and travellers from far countries, will say, when they see the punishments of that land and the diseases which the Lord has sent on it;

又看见遍地有硫磺，有盐卤，有火迹，没有耕种，没有出产，连草都不生长，好像耶和华在忿怒中所倾覆的所多玛，蛾摩拉，押玛，洗扁一样。
And that all the land is a salt and smoking waste, not planted or giving fruit or clothed with grass, but wasted like Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, on which the Lord sent destruction in the heat of his wrath:

所看见的人，连万国人，都必问说，耶和华为何向此地这样行呢？这样大发烈怒是什么意思呢？
Truly all the nations will say, Why has the Lord done so to this land? what is the reason for this great and burning wrath?

人必回答说，是因这地的人离弃了耶和华他们列祖的神，领他们出埃及地的时候与他们所立的约，
Then men will say, Because they gave up the agreement of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which he made with them when he took them out of the land of Egypt:

去事奉敬拜素不认识的别神，是耶和华所未曾给他们安排的。
And they went after other gods and gave them worship, gods who were strange to them, and whom he had not given them:

所以耶和华的怒气向这地发作，将这书上所写的一切咒诅都降在这地上。
And so the wrath of the Lord was moved against this land, to send on it all the curse recorded in this book:

耶和华在怒气，忿怒，大恼恨中将他们从本地拔出来，扔在别的地上，像今日一样。
Rooting them out of their land, in the heat of his wrath and passion, and driving them out into another land, as at this day.

隐秘的事是属耶和华我们神的。惟有明显的事是永远属我们和我们子孙的，好叫我们遵行这律法上的一切话。
The secret things are the Lord our God's: but the things which have been made clear are ours and our children's for ever, so that we may do all the words of this law.

我所陈明在你面前的这一切咒诅都临到你身上。你在耶和华你神追赶你到的万国中必心里追念祝福的话。
Now when all these things have come on you, the blessing and the curse which I have put before you, if the thought of them comes back to your minds, when you are living among the nations where the Lord your God has sent you,

你和你的子孙若尽心尽性归向耶和华你的神，照着我今日一切所吩咐的听从他的话。
And your hearts are turned again to the Lord your God, and you give ear to his word which I give you today, you and your children, with all your heart and with all your soul:

那时，耶和华你的神必怜恤你，救回你这被掳的子民。耶和华你的神要回转过来，从分散你到的万民中将你招聚回来。
Then the Lord will have pity on you, changing your fate, and taking you back again from among all the nations where you have been forced to go.

你被赶散的人，就是在天涯的，耶和华你的神也必从那里将你招聚回来。
Even if those who have been forced out are living in the farthest part of heaven, the Lord your God will go in search of you, and take you back;

耶和华你的神必领你进入你列祖所得的地，使你可以得着。又必善待你，使你的人数比你列祖众多。
Placing you again in the land of your fathers as your heritage; and he will do you good, increasing you till you are more in number than your fathers were.

耶和华你神必将你心里和你后裔心里的污秽除掉，好叫你尽心尽性爱耶和华你的神，使你可以存活。
And the Lord your God will give to you and to your seed a circumcision of the heart, so that, loving him with all your heart and all your soul, you may have life.

耶和华你的神必将这一切咒诅加在你仇敌和恨恶你，逼迫你的人身上。
And the Lord your God will put all these curses on those who are against you, and on your haters who put a cruel yoke on you.

你必归回，听从耶和华的话，遵行他的一切诫命，就是我今日所吩咐你的。
And you will again give ear to the voice of the Lord, and do all his orders which I have given you today.

你若听从耶和华你神的话，谨守这律法书上所写的诫命，律例，又尽心尽性归向耶和华你的神，他必使你手里所办的一切事，并你身所生的，牲畜所下的，地土所产的，都绰绰有余，因为耶和华必在喜悦你，降福与你，象从前喜悦你列祖一样。
And the Lord your God will make you fertile in all good things, blessing the work of your hands, and the fruit of your body, and the fruit of your cattle, and the fruit of your land: for the Lord will have joy in you, as he had in your fathers:


If you give ear to the voice of the Lord your God, keeping his orders and his laws which are recorded in this book of the law, and turning to the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul.

我今日所吩咐你的诫命不是你难行的，也不是离你远的。
For these orders which I have given you today are not strange and secret, and are not far away.

不是在天上，使你说，谁替我们上天取下来，使我们听见可以遵行呢？
They are not in heaven, for you to say, Who will go up to heaven for us and give us knowledge of them so that we may do them?

也不是在海外，使你说，谁替我们过海取了来，使我们听见可以遵行呢？
And they are not across the sea, for you to say, Who will go over the sea for us and give us news of them so that we may do them?

这话却离你甚近，就在你口中，在你心里，使你可以遵行。
But the word is very near you, in your mouth and in your heart, so that you may do it.

看哪，我今日将生与福，死与祸，陈明在你面前。
See, I have put before you today, life and good, and death and evil;

吩咐你爱耶和华你的神，遵行他的道，谨守他的诫命，律例，典章，使你可以存活，人数增多，耶和华你神就必在你所要进去得为业的地上赐福与你。
In giving you orders today to have love for the Lord your God, to go in his ways and keep his laws and his orders and his decisions, so that you may have life and be increased, and that the blessing of the Lord your God may be with you in the land where you are going, the land of your heritage.

倘若你心里偏离，不肯听从，却被勾引去敬拜事奉别神，
But if your heart is turned away and your ear is shut, and you go after those who would make you servants and worshippers of other gods:

我今日明明告诉你们，你们必要灭亡。在你过约旦河，进去得为业的地上，你的日子必不长久。
I give witness against you this day that destruction will certainly be your fate, and your days will be cut short in the land where you are going, the land of your heritage on the other side of Jordan.

我今日呼天唤地向你作见证。我将生死祸福陈明在你面前，所以你要拣选生命，使你和你的后裔都得存活。
Let heaven and earth be my witnesses against you this day that I have put before you life and death, a blessing and a curse: so take life for yourselves and for your seed:

且爱耶和华你的神，听从他的话，专靠他。因为他是你的生命，你的日子长久也在乎他。这样，你就可以在耶和华向你列祖亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓应许所赐的地上居住。
In loving the Lord your God, hearing his voice and being true to him: for he is your life and by him will your days be long: so that you may go on living in the land which the Lord gave by an oath to your fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

摩西去告诉以色列众人
So Moses said all these things to Israel.

说，我现在一百二十岁了，不能照常出入。耶和华也曾对我说，你必不得过这约旦河。
Then he said to them, I am now a hundred and twenty years old; I am no longer able to go out and come in: and the Lord has said to me, You are not to go over Jordan.

耶和华你们的神必引导你们过去，将这些国民在你们面前灭绝，你们就得他们的地。约书亚必引导你们过去，正如耶和华所说的。
The Lord your God, he will go over before you; he will send destruction on all those nations, and you will take their land as your heritage: and Joshua will go over at your head as the Lord has said.

耶和华必待他们，如同从前待他所灭绝的亚摩利二王西宏与噩以及他们的国一样。
The Lord will do to them as he did to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land, whom he put to destruction.

耶和华必将他们交给你们。你们要照我所吩咐的一切命令待他们。
The Lord will give them up into your hands, and you are to do to them as I have given you orders.

你们当刚强壮胆，不要害怕，也不要畏惧他们，因为耶和华你的神和你同去。他必不撇下你，也不丢弃你。
Be strong and take heart, and have no fear of them: for it is the Lord your God who is going with you; he will not take away his help from you.

摩西召了约书亚来，在以色列众人眼前对他说，你当刚强壮胆。因为，你要和这百姓一同进入耶和华向他们列祖起誓应许所赐之地。你也要使他们承受那地为业。
Then Moses sent for Joshua, and before the eyes of all Israel said to him, Be strong and take heart: for you are to go with this people into the land which the Lord, by his oath to their fathers, has given them; by your help they will take it for their heritage.

耶和华必在你前面行。他必与你同在，必不撇下你，也不丢弃你。不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。
It is the Lord who goes before you; he will be with you, he will not take away his help from you or give you up: so have no fear.

摩西将这律法写出来，交给抬耶和华约柜的祭司利未子孙和以色列的众长老。
Then Moses put all this law in writing, and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who take up the ark of the Lord's agreement, and to all the responsible men of Israel.

摩西吩咐他们说，每逢七年的末一年，就在豁免年的定期住棚节的时候，
And Moses said to them, At the end of every seven years, at the time fixed for the ending of debts, at the feast of tents,

以色列众人来到耶和华你神所选择的地方朝见他。那时，你要在以色列众人面前将这律法念给他们听。
When all Israel has come before the Lord your God in the place named by him, let a reading be given of this law in the hearing of all Israel.

要招聚他们男，女，孩子，并城里寄居的，使他们听，使他们学习，好敬畏耶和华你们的神，谨守，遵行这律法的一切话，
Make all the people come together, men and women and children, and anyone from another country who is with you, so that hearing they may become wise in the fear of the Lord your God, and take care to do all the words of this law;

也使他们未曾晓得这律法的儿女得以听见，学习敬畏耶和华你们的神，在你们过约旦河要得为业之地，存活的日子，常常这样行。
And so that your children, to whom it is new, may give ear and be trained in the fear of the Lord your God, while you are living in the land which you are going over Jordan to take for your heritage.

耶和华对摩西说，你的死期临近了。要召约书亚来，你们二人站在会幕里，我好嘱咐他。于是摩西和约书亚去站在会幕里。
At that time the Lord said to Moses, The day of your death is near: send for Joshua, and come to the Tent of meeting so that I may give him his orders. So Moses and Joshua went to the Tent of meeting.

耶和华在会幕里云柱中显现，云柱停在会幕门以上。
And the Lord was seen in the Tent in a pillar of cloud resting by the door of the Tent.

耶和华又对摩西说，你必和你列祖同睡。这百姓要起来，在他们所要去的地上，在那地的人中，随从外邦神行邪淫，离弃我，违背我与他们所立的约。
And the Lord said to Moses, Now you are going to rest with your fathers; and this people will be false to me, uniting themselves to the strange gods of the land where they are going; they will be turned away from me and will not keep the agreement I have made with them.

那时，我的怒气必向他们发作。我也必离弃他们，掩面不顾他们，以致他们被吞灭，并有许多的祸患灾难临到他们。那日他们必说，这些祸患临到我们，岂不是因我们的神不在我们中间吗？
In that day my wrath will be moved against them, and I will be turned away from them, veiling my face from them, and destruction will overtake them, and unnumbered evils and troubles will come on them; so that in that day they will say, Have not these evils come on us because our God is not with us?

那时，因他们偏向别神所行的一切恶，我必定掩面不顾他们。
Truly, my face will be turned away from them in that day, because of all the evil they have done in going after other gods.

现在你要写一篇歌，教导以色列人，传给他们，使这歌见证他们的不是。
Make then this song for yourselves, teaching it to the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, so that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

因为我将他们领进我向他们列祖起誓应许那流奶与蜜之地，他们在那里吃得饱足，身体肥胖，就必偏向别神，事奉他们，藐视我，背弃我的约。
For when I have taken them into the land named in my oath to their fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey, and they have made themselves full of food and are fat, then they will be turned to other gods and will give them worship, no longer honouring me or keeping my agreement.

那时，有许多祸患灾难临到他们，这歌必在他们面前作见证，他们后裔的口中必念诵不忘。我未领他们到我所起誓应许之地以先，他们所怀的意念我都知道了。
Then when evils and troubles without number have overtaken them, this song will be a witness to them, for the words of it will be clear in the memories of their children: for I see the thoughts which are moving in their hearts even now, before I have taken them into the land of my oath.

当日摩西就写了一篇歌，教导以色列人。
So that same day Moses made this song, teaching it to the children of Israel.

耶和华嘱咐嫩的儿子约书亚说，你当刚强壮胆，因为你必领以色列人进我所起誓应许他们的地。我必与你同在。
Then he gave orders to Joshua, the son of Nun, saying to him, Be strong and take heart: for you are to go at the head of the children of Israel into the land which I made an oath to give them; and I will be with you.

摩西将这律法的话写在书上，及至写完了，
Now after writing all the words of this law in a book till the record of them was complete,

就吩咐抬耶和华约柜的利未人说，
Moses said to the Levites who were responsible for taking up the ark of the Lord's agreement,

将这律法书放在耶和华你们神的约柜旁，可以在那里见证以色列人的不是。
Take this book of the law and put it by the ark of the Lord's agreement, so that it may be a witness against you.

因为我知道你们是悖逆的，是硬着颈项的。我今日还活着与你们同在，你们尚且悖逆耶和华，何况我死后呢？
For I have knowledge of your hard and uncontrolled hearts: even now, while I am still living, you will not be ruled by the Lord; how much less after my death?

你们要将你们支派的众长老和官长都招聚了来，我好将这些话说与他们听，并呼天唤地见证他们的不是。
Get together before me all those who are in authority in your tribes, and your overseers, so that I may say these things in their hearing, and make heaven and earth my witnesses against them.

我知道我死后，你们必全然败坏，偏离我所吩咐你们的道，行耶和华眼中看为恶的事，以手所作的惹他发怒。日后必有祸患临到你们。
For I am certain that after my death you will give yourselves up to sin, wandering from the way which I have given you; and evil will overtake you in the end, because you will do evil in the eyes of the Lord, moving him to wrath by the work of your hands.

摩西将这一篇歌的话都说与以色列全会众听。
Then in the hearing of all the meeting of Israel, Moses said the words of this song, to the end.

诸天哪，侧耳，我要说话。愿地也听我口中的言语。
Give ear, O heavens, to my voice; let the earth take note of the words of my mouth:

我的教训要淋漓如雨。我的言语要滴落如露，如细雨降在嫩草上，如甘霖降在菜蔬中。
My teaching is dropping like rain, coming down like dew on the fields; like rain on the young grass and showers on the garden plants:

我要宣告耶和华的名。你们要将大德归与我们的神。
For I will give honour to the name of the Lord: let our God be named great.

他是磐石，他的作为完全，他所行的无不公平，是诚实无伪的神。又公义，又正直。
He is the Rock, complete is his work; for all his ways are righteousness: a God without evil who keeps faith, true and upright is he.

这乖僻弯曲的世代向他行事邪僻。有这弊病就不是他的儿女。
They have become false, they are not his children, the mark of sin is on them; they are an evil and hard-hearted generation.

愚昧无知的民哪，你们这样报答耶和华吗？他岂不是你的父，将你买来的吗？他是制造你，建立你的。
Is this your answer to the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is he not your father who has given you life? He has made you and given you your place.

你当追想上古之日，思念历代之年。问你的父亲，他必指示你。问你的长者，他必告诉你。
Keep in mind the days of the past, give thought to the years of generations gone by: go to your father and he will make it clear to you, to the old men and they will give you the story.

至高者将地业赐给列邦，将世人分开，就照以色列人的数目立定万民的疆界。
When the Most High gave the nations their heritage, separating into groups the children of men, he had the limits of the peoples marked out, keeping in mind the number of the children of Israel.

耶和华的分本是他的百姓。他的产业本是雅各。
For the Lord's wealth is his people; Jacob is the land of his heritage.

耶和华遇见他在旷野荒凉野兽吼叫之地，就环绕他，看顾他，保护他，如同保护眼中的瞳人。
He came to him in the waste land, in the unpeopled waste of sand: putting his arms round him and caring for him, he kept him as the light of his eye.

又如鹰搅动巢窝，在雏鹰以上两翅扇展，接取雏鹰，背在两翼之上。
As an eagle, teaching her young to make their flight, with her wings outstretched over them, takes them up on her strong feathers:

这样，耶和华独自引导他，并无外邦神与他同在。
So the Lord only was his guide, no other god was with him.

耶和华使他乘驾地的高处，得吃田间的土产。又使他从磐石中咂蜜，从坚石中吸油。
He put him on the high places of the earth, his food was the increase of the field; honey he gave him out of the rock and oil out of the hard rock;

也吃牛的奶油，羊的奶，羊羔的脂油，巴珊所出的公绵羊和山羊，与上好的麦子，也喝葡萄汁酿的酒。
Butter from his cows and milk from his sheep, with fat of lambs and sheep of Bashan, and goats, and the heart of the grain; and for your drink, wine from the blood of the grape.

但耶书仑渐渐肥胖，粗壮，光润，踢跳奔跑，便离弃造他的神，轻看救他的磐石。
But Jeshurun became fat and would not be controlled: you have become fat, you are thick and full of food: then he was untrue to the God who made him, giving no honour to the Rock of his salvation.

敬拜别神，触动神的愤恨，行可憎恶的事，惹了他的怒气。
The honour which was his they gave to strange gods; by their disgusting ways he was moved to wrath.

所祭祀的鬼魔并非真神，乃是素不认识的神，是近来新兴的，是你列祖所不畏惧的
They made offerings to evil spirits which were not God, to gods who were strange to them, which had newly come up, not feared by your fathers.

你轻忽生你的磐石，忘记产你的神。
You have no thought for the Rock, your father, you have no memory of the God who gave you birth.

耶和华看见他的儿女惹动他，就厌恶他们，
And the Lord saw with disgust the evil-doing of his sons and daughters.

说，我要向他们掩面，看他们的结局如何。他们本是极乖僻的族类，心中无诚实的儿女。
And he said, My face will be veiled from them, I will see what their end will be: for they are an uncontrolled generation, children in whom is no faith.

他们以那不算为神的触动我的愤恨，以虚无的神惹了我的怒气。我也要以那不成子民的触动他们的愤恨，以愚昧的国民惹了他们的怒气。
They have given my honour to that which is not God, moving me to wrath with their false worship: I will give their honour to those who are not a people, moving them to wrath by a foolish nation,

因为在我怒中有火烧起，直烧到极深的阴间，把地和地的出产尽都焚烧，山的根基也烧着了。
For my wrath is a flaming fire, burning to the deep parts of the underworld, burning up the earth with her increase, and firing the deep roots of the mountains.

我要将祸患堆在他们身上，把我的箭向他们射尽。
I will send a rain of troubles on them, my arrows will be showered on them.

他们必因饥饿消瘦，被炎热苦毒吞灭。我要打发野兽用牙齿咬他们，并土中腹行的，用毒气害他们。
They will be wasted from need of food, and overcome by burning heat and bitter destruction; and the teeth of beasts I will send on them, with the poison of the worms of the dust.

外头有刀剑，内室有惊恐，使人丧亡，使少男，童女，吃奶的，白发的，尽都灭绝。
Outside they will be cut off by the sword, and in the inner rooms by fear; death will take the young man and the virgin, the baby at the breast and the grey-haired man.

我说，我必将他们分散远方，使他们的名号从人间除灭。
I said I would send them wandering far away, I would make all memory of them go from the minds of men:

惟恐仇敌惹动我，只怕敌人错看，说，是我们手的能力，并非耶和华所行的。
But for the fear that their haters, uplifted in their pride, might say, Our hand is strong, the Lord has not done all this.

因为以色列民毫无计谋，心中没有聪明。
For they are a nation without wisdom; there is no sense in them.

惟愿他们有智慧，能明白这事，肯思念他们的结局。
If only they were wise, if only this was clear to them, and they would give thought to their future!

若不是他们的磐石卖了他们，若不是耶和华交出他们，一人焉能追赶他们千人，二人焉能使万人逃跑呢？
How would it be possible for one to overcome a thousand, and two to send ten thousand in flight, if their rock had not let them go, if the Lord had not given them up?

据我们的仇敌自己断定，他们的磐石不如我们的磐石。
For their rock is not like our Rock, even our haters themselves being judges.

他们的葡萄树是所多玛的葡萄树，蛾摩拉田园所生的。他们的葡萄是毒葡萄，全挂都是苦的。
For their vine is the vine of Sodom, from the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are the grapes of evil, and the berries are bitter:

他们的酒是大蛇的毒气，是虺蛇残害的恶毒。
Their wine is the poison of dragons, the cruel poison of snakes.

这不都是积蓄在我这里，封锁在我府库中吗？
Is not this among my secrets, kept safe in my store-house?

他们失脚的时候，伸冤报应在我。因他们遭灾的日子近了。那要临在他们身上的必速速来到。
Punishment is mine and reward, at the time of the slipping of their feet: for the day of their downfall is near, sudden will be their fate.

耶和华见他百姓毫无能力，无论困住的，自由的都没有剩下，就必为他们伸冤，为他的仆人后悔。
For the Lord will be judge of his people, he will have pity for his servants; when he sees that their power is gone, there is no one, shut up or free.

他必说，他们的神，他们所投靠的磐石，
And he will say, Where are their gods, the rock in which they put their faith?

就是向来吃他们祭牲的脂油，喝他们奠祭之酒的，在哪里呢？他可以兴起帮助你们，护卫你们。
Who took the fat of their offerings, and the wine of their drink offering? Let them now come to your help, let them be your salvation.

你们如今要知道，我，惟有我是神。在我以外并无别神。我使人死，我使人活。我损伤，我也医治，并无人能从我手中救出来。
See now, I myself am he; there is no other god but me: giver of death and life, wounding and making well: and no one has power to make you free from my hand.

我向天举手说，我凭我的永生起誓，
For lifting up my hand to heaven I say, By my unending life,

我若磨我闪亮的刀，手掌审判之权，就必报复我的敌人，报应恨我的人。
If I make sharp my shining sword, and my hand is outstretched for judging, I will give punishment to those who are against me, and their right reward to my haters.

我要使我的箭饮血饮醉，就是被杀被掳之人的血。我的刀要吃肉，乃是仇敌中首领之头的肉。
I will make my arrows red with blood, my sword will be feasting on flesh, with the blood of the dead and the prisoners, of the long-haired heads of my haters.

你们外邦人当与主的百姓一同欢呼。因他要伸他仆人流血的冤，报应他的敌人，洁净他的地，救赎他的百姓。
Be glad, O you his people, over the nations; for he will take payment for the blood of his servants, and will give punishment to his haters, and take away the sin of his land, for his people.

摩西和嫩的儿子约书亚去将这歌的一切话说给百姓听。
So Moses said all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Hoshea, the son of Nun.

摩西向以色列众人说完了这一切的话，
And after saying all this to the people,

又说，我今日所警教你们的，你们都要放在心上。要吩咐你们的子孙谨守遵行这律法上的话。
Moses said to them, Let the words which I have said to you today go deep into your hearts, and give orders to your children to do every word of this law.

因为这不是虚空，与你们无关的事，乃是你们的生命。在你们过约旦河要得为业的地上必因这事日子得以长久。
And this is no small thing for you, but it is your life, and through this you may make your days long in the land which you are going over Jordan to take for your heritage.

当日，耶和华吩咐摩西说，
That same day the Lord said to Moses,

你上这亚巴琳山中的尼波山去，在摩押地与耶利哥相对，观看我所要赐给以色列人为业的迦南地。
Go up into this mountain of Abarim, to Mount Nebo in the land of Moab opposite Jericho; there you may see the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the children of Israel for their heritage:

你必死在你所登的山上，归你列祖（原文作本民）去，象你哥哥亚伦死在何珥山上，归他的列祖一样。
And let death come to you on the mountain where you are going, and be put to rest with your people; as death came to Aaron, your brother, on Mount Hor, where he was put to rest with his people:

因为你们在寻的旷野，加低斯的米利巴水，在以色列人中没有尊我为圣，得罪了我。
Because of your sin against me before the children of Israel at the waters of Meribath Kadesh in the waste land of Zin; because you did not keep my name holy among the children of Israel.

我所赐给以色列人的地，你可以远远地观看，却不得进去。
So you will see the land before you, but you will not go into the land which I am giving to the children of Israel.

以下是神人摩西在未死之先为以色列人所祝的福，
Now this is the blessing which Moses, the man of God, gave to the children of Israel before his death.

他说，耶和华从西乃而来，从西珥向他们显现，从巴兰山发出光辉，从万万圣者中来临，从他右手为百姓传出烈火的律法。
He said, The Lord came from Sinai, dawning on them from Seir; shining out from Mount Paran, coming from Meribath Kadesh: from his right hand went flames of fire: his wrath made waste the peoples.

他疼爱百姓。众圣徒都在他手中。他们坐在他的脚下，领受他的言语。
All his holy ones are at his hand; they go at his feet; they are lifted up on his wings.

摩西将律法传给我们，作为雅各会众的产业。
Moses gave us a law, a heritage for the people of Jacob.

百姓的众首领，以色列的各支派，一同聚会的时候，耶和华（原文作他）在耶书仑中为王。
And there was a king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel came together.

愿流便存活，不至死亡。愿他人数不至稀少。
Let life not death be Reuben's, let not the number of his men be small.

为犹大祝福说，求耶和华俯听犹大的声音，引导他归于本族。他曾用手为自己争战，你必帮助他攻击敌人。
And this is the blessing of Judah: he said, Give ear, O Lord, to the voice of Judah and make him one with his people: let your hands take up his cause, and be his help against his attackers.

论利未说，耶和华阿，你的土明和乌陵都在你的虔诚人那里。你在玛撒曾试验他，在米利巴水与他争论。
And of Levi he said, Give your Thummim to Levi and let the Urim be with your loved one, whom you put to the test at Massah, with whom you were angry at the waters of Meribah;

他论自己的父母说，我未曾看见。他也不承认弟兄，也不认识自己的儿女。这是因利未人遵行你的话，谨守你的约。
Who said of his father, Who is he? and of his mother, I have not seen her; he kept himself separate from his brothers and had no knowledge of his children: for they have given ear to your word and kept your agreement.

他们要将你的典章教训雅各，将你的律法教训以色列。他们要把香焚在你面前，把全牲的燔祭献在你的坛上。
They will be the teachers of your decisions to Jacob and of your law to Israel: the burning of perfumes before you will be their right, and the ordering of burned offerings on your altar.

求耶和华降福在他的财物上，悦纳他手里所办的事。那些起来攻击他和恨恶他的人，愿你刺透他们的腰，使他们不得再起来。
Let your blessing, O Lord, be on his substance, may the work of his hands be pleasing to you: may those who take up arms against him and all who have hate for him, be wounded through the heart, never to be lifted up again.

论便雅悯说，耶和华所亲爱的必同耶和华安然居住。耶和华终日遮蔽他，也住在他两肩之中。
And of Benjamin he said, Benjamin is the loved one of the Lord, he will be kept safe at all times; he will be covered by the Most High, resting between his arms.

论约瑟说，愿他的地蒙耶和华赐福，得天上的宝物，甘露，以及地里所藏的泉水。
And of Joseph he said, Let the blessing of the Lord be on his land; for the good things of heaven on high, and the deep waters flowing under the earth,

得太阳所晒熟的美果，月亮所养成的宝物。
And the good things of the fruits of the sun, and the good things of the growth of the moons,

得上古之山的至宝，永世之岭的宝物。
And the chief things of the oldest mountains, and the good things of the eternal hills,

得地和其中所充满的宝物，并住荆棘中上主的喜悦。愿这些福都归于约瑟的头上，归于那与弟兄迥别之人的顶上。
The good things of the earth and all its wealth, the good pleasure of him who was seen in the burning tree: may they come on the head of Joseph, on the head of him who was prince among his brothers.

他为牛群中头生的，有威严。他的角是野牛的角，用以抵触万邦，直到地极。这角是以法莲的万万，玛拿西的千千。
He is a young ox, glory is his; his horns are the horns of the mountain ox, with which all peoples will be wounded, even to the ends of the earth: they are the ten thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh.

论西布伦说，西布伦哪，你出外可以欢喜。以萨迦阿，在你帐棚里可以快乐。
And of Zebulun he said, Be glad, Zebulun, in your going out; and, Issachar, in your tents.

他们要将列邦召到山上，在那里献公义的祭。因为他们要吸取海里的丰富，并沙中所藏的珍宝。
They will send out the word for the people to come to the mountain, taking there the offerings of righteousness: for the store of the seas will be theirs, and the secret wealth of the sand.

论迦得说，使迦得扩张的应当称颂。迦得住如母狮。他撕裂膀臂，连头顶也撕裂。
Of Gad he said, A blessing be on him who makes wide the limits of Gad: he takes his rest like a she-lion, taking for himself the arm and the crown of the head.

他为自己选择头一段地，因在那里有设立律法者的分存留。他与百姓的首领同来。他施行耶和华的公义和耶和华与以色列所立的典章。
He kept for himself the first part, for his was the ruler's right: he put in force the righteousness of the Lord, and his decisions for Israel.

论但说，但为小狮子，从巴珊跳出来。
And of Dan he said, Dan is a young lion, springing out from Bashan.

论拿弗他利说，拿弗他利阿，你足沾恩惠，满得耶和华的福，可以得西方和南方为业。
And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, made glad with grace and full of the blessing of the Lord: the sea and its fishes will be his.

论亚设说，愿亚设享受多子的福乐，得他弟兄的喜悦，可以把脚蘸在油中。
And of Asher he said, Let Asher have the blessing of children; may he be pleasing to his brothers, and let his foot be wet with oil.

你的门闩（门闩或作鞋）是铜的，铁的。你的日子如何，你的力量也必如何。
Your shoes will be iron and brass; and as your days, so may your work be.

耶书仑哪，没有能比神的。他为帮助你，乘在天空，显其威荣，驾行穹苍。
No other is like the God of Jeshurun, coming on the heavens to your help, and letting his glory be seen in the skies.

永生的神是你的居所。他永久的膀臂在你以下。他在你前面撵出仇敌，说，毁灭吧。
The God of your fathers is your safe resting-place, and under you are his eternal arms: driving out the forces of your haters from before you, he said, Let destruction overtake them.

以色列安然居住。雅各的本源独居五谷新酒之地。他的天也滴甘露。
And Israel is living in peace, the fountain of Jacob by himself, in a land of grain and wine, with dew dropping from the heavens.

以色列阿，你是有福的。谁象你这蒙耶和华所拯救的百姓呢？他是你的盾牌，帮助你，是你威荣的刀剑。你的仇敌必投降你。你必踏在他们的高处。
Happy are you, O Israel: who is like you, a people whose saviour is the Lord, whose help is your cover, whose sword is your strength! All those who are against you will put themselves under your rule, and your feet will be planted on their high places.

摩西从摩押平原登尼波山，上了那与耶利哥相对的毗斯迦山顶。耶和华把基列全地直到但，
And Moses went up from the table-lands of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah which is facing Jericho. And the Lord let him see all the land, the land of Gilead as far as Dan;

拿弗他利全地，以法莲，玛拿西的地，犹大全地直到西海，
And all Naphtali and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, as far as the Great Sea of the west;

南地和棕树城耶利哥的平原，直到琐珥，都指给他看。
And the South, and the circle of the valley of Jericho, the town of palm-trees, as far as Zoar.

耶和华对他说，这就是我向亚伯拉罕，以撒，雅各起誓应许之地。说，我必将这地赐给你的后裔。现在我使你眼睛看见了，你却不得过到那里去。
And the Lord said to him, This is the land about which I made an oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, I will give it to your seed: now I have let you see it with your eyes, but you will not go in there.

于是，耶和华的仆人摩西死在摩押地，正如耶和华所说的。
So death came to Moses, the servant of the Lord, there in the land of Moab, as the Lord had said.

耶和华将他埋葬在摩押地，伯毗珥对面的谷中，只是到今日没有人知道他的坟墓。
And the Lord put him to rest in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor: but no man has knowledge of his resting-place to this day.

摩西死的时候年一百二十岁。眼目没有昏花，精神没有衰败。
And Moses at his death was a hundred and twenty years old: his eye had not become clouded, or his natural force become feeble.

以色列人在摩押平原为摩西哀哭了三十日，为摩西居丧哀哭的日子就满了。
For thirty days the children of Israel were weeping for Moses in the table-lands of Moab, till the days of weeping and sorrow for Moses were ended.

嫩的儿子约书亚。因为摩西曾按手在他头上，就被智慧的灵充满，以色列人便听从他，照着耶和华吩咐摩西的行了。
And Joshua, the son of Nun, was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had put his hands on him: and the children of Israel gave ear to him, and did as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

以后以色列中再没有兴起先知像摩西的。他是耶和华面对面所认识的。
There has never been another prophet in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord had knowledge of face to face;

耶和华打发他在埃及地向法老和他的一切臣仆，并他的全地，行各样神迹奇事，
In all the signs and wonders which the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his servants and all his land;

又在以色列众人眼前显大能的手，行一切大而可畏的事。
And in all the acts of power and fear which Moses did before the eyes of all Israel.

