箴言 Proverbs

以色列王大卫儿子所罗门的箴言。
The wise sayings of Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel.

要使人晓得智慧和训诲。分辨通达的言语。
To have knowledge of wise teaching; to be clear about the words of reason:

使人处事，领受智慧，仁义，公平，正直的训诲。
To be trained in the ways of wisdom, in righteousness and judging truly and straight behaviour:

使愚人灵明，使少年人有知识和谋略。
To make the simple-minded sharp, and to give the young man knowledge, and serious purpose:

使智慧人听见，增长学问。使聪明人得着智谋。
(The wise man, hearing, will get greater learning, and the acts of the man of good sense will be wisely guided:)

使人明白箴言和譬喻，懂得智慧人的言词和谜语。
To get the sense of wise sayings and secrets, and of the words of the wise and their dark sayings.

敬畏耶和华是知识的开端。愚妄人藐视智慧和训诲。
The fear of the Lord is the start of knowledge: but the foolish have no use for wisdom and teaching.

我儿，要听你父亲的训诲，不可离弃你母亲的法则。（或作指教）
My son, give ear to the training of your father, and do not give up the teaching of your mother:

因为这要作你头上的华冠，你项上的金链。
For they will be a crown of grace for your head, and chain-ornaments about your neck.

我儿，恶人若引诱你，你不可随从。
My son, if sinners would take you out of the right way, do not go with them.

他们若说，你与我们同去，我们要埋伏流人之血，要蹲伏害无罪之人。
If they say, Come with us; let us make designs against the good, waiting secretly for the upright, without cause;

我们好像阴间，把他们活活吞下。他们如同下坑的人，被我们囫囵吞了。
Let us overcome them living, like the underworld, and in their strength, as those who go down to death;

我们必得各样宝物，将所掳来的装满房屋。
Goods of great price will be ours, our houses will be full of wealth;

你与我们大家同分。我们共用一个囊袋。
Take your chance with us, and we will all have one money-bag:

我儿，不要与他们同行一道。禁止你脚走他们的路。
My son, do not go with them; keep your feet from their ways:

因为他们的脚奔跑行恶，他们急速流人的血。
For their feet are running after evil, and they are quick to take a man's life.

好像飞鸟，网罗设在眼前仍不躲避。
Truly, to no purpose is the net stretched out before the eyes of the bird:

这些人埋伏，是为自流己血。蹲伏是为自害己命。
And they are secretly waiting for their blood and making ready destruction for themselves.

凡贪恋财利的，所行之路，都是如此。这贪恋之心，乃夺去得财者之命。
Such is the fate of everyone who goes in search of profit; it takes away the life of its owners.

智慧在街市上呼喊，在宽阔处发声。
Wisdom is crying out in the street; her voice is loud in the open places;

在热闹街头喊叫，在城门口，在城中发出言语。
Her words are sounding in the meeting-places, and in the doorways of the town:

说你们愚昧人喜爱愚昧，亵慢人喜欢亵慢，愚顽人恨恶知识，要到几时呢？
How long, you simple ones, will foolish things be dear to you? and pride a delight to the haters of authority? how long will the foolish go on hating knowledge?

你们当因我的责备回转。我要将我的灵浇灌你们，将我的话指示你们。
Be turned again by my sharp words: see, I will send the flow of my spirit on you, and make my words clear to you.

我呼唤你们不肯听从。我伸手，无人理会。
Because your ears were shut to my voice; no one gave attention to my out-stretched hand;

反轻弃我一切的劝戒，不肯受我的责备。
You were not controlled by my guiding, and would have nothing to do with my sharp words:

你们遭灾难，我就发笑惊恐临到你们，我必嗤笑。
So in the day of your trouble I will be laughing; I will make sport of your fear;

惊恐临到你们，好像狂风，灾难来到，如同暴风。急难痛苦临到你们身上。
When your fear comes on you like a storm, and your trouble like a rushing wind; when pain and sorrow come on you.

那时，你们必呼求我，我却不答应，恳切的寻找我，却寻不见。
Then I will give no answer to their cries; searching for me early, they will not see me:

因为你们恨恶知识，不喜爱敬畏耶和华，
For they were haters of knowledge, and did not give their hearts to the fear of the Lord:

不听我的劝戒，藐视我一切的责备，
They had no desire for my teaching, and my words of protest were as nothing to them.

所以必吃自结的果子，充满自设的计谋。
So the fruit of their way will be their food, and with the designs of their hearts they will be made full.

愚昧人背道，必杀己身，愚顽人安逸，必害己命。
For the turning back of the simple from teaching will be the cause of their death, and the peace of the foolish will be their destruction.

惟有听从我的，必安然居住，得享安静，不怕灾祸。
But whoever gives ear to me will take his rest safely, living in peace without fear of evil.

我儿， 你若领受我的言语， 存记我的命令，
My son, if you will take my words to your heart, storing up my laws in your mind;

侧耳听智慧， 专心求聪明。
So that your ear gives attention to wisdom, and your heart is turned to knowledge;

呼求明哲， 扬声求聪明，
Truly, if you are crying out for good sense, and your request is for knowledge;

寻找他如寻找银子， 搜求他如搜求隐藏的珍宝，
If you are looking for her as for silver, and searching for her as for stored-up wealth;

你就明白敬畏耶和华， 得以认识神。
Then the fear of the Lord will be clear to you, and knowledge of God will be yours.

因为耶和华赐人智慧。 知识和聪明， 都由他口而出。
For the Lord gives wisdom; out of his mouth come knowledge and reason:

他给正直人存留真智慧， 给行为纯正的人作盾牌。
He has salvation stored up for the upright, he is a breastplate to those in whom there is no evil;

为要保守公平人的路， 护庇虔敬人的道。
He keeps watch on the ways which are right, and takes care of those who have the fear of him.

你也必明白仁义， 公平， 正直， 一切的善道。
Then you will have knowledge of righteousness and right acting, and upright behaviour, even of every good way.

智慧必入你心。 你的灵要以知识为美。
For wisdom will come into your heart, and knowledge will be pleasing to your soul;

谋略必护卫你。 聪明必保守你。
Wise purposes will be watching over you, and knowledge will keep you;

要救你脱离恶道， （ 恶道或作恶人的道 ） 脱离说乖谬话的人。
Giving you salvation from the evil man, from those whose words are false;

那等人舍弃正直的路， 行走黑暗的道，
Who give up the way of righteousness, to go by dark roads;

欢喜作恶， 喜爱恶人的乖僻。
Who take pleasure in wrongdoing, and have joy in the evil designs of the sinner;

在他们的道中弯曲， 在他们的路上偏僻。
Whose ways are not straight, and whose footsteps are turned to evil:

智慧要救你脱离淫妇， 就是那油嘴滑舌的外女。
To take you out of the power of the strange woman, who says smooth words with her tongue;

她离弃幼年的配偶， 忘了神的盟约。
Who is false to the husband of her early years, and does not keep the agreement of her God in mind:

她的家陷入死地， 她的路偏向阴间。
For her house is on the way down to death; her footsteps go down to the shades:

凡到她那里去的不得转回， 也得不着生命的路。
Those who go to her do not come back again; their feet do not keep in the ways of life:

智慧必使你行善人的道， 守义人的路。
So that you may go in the way of good men, and keep in the footsteps of the upright.

正直人必在世上居住。 完全人必在地上存留。
For the upright will be living in the land, and the good will have it for their heritage.

惟有恶人必然剪除。 奸诈的必然拔出。
But sinners will be cut off from the land, and those whose acts are false will be uprooted.

我儿，不要忘记我的法则。（或作指教）你心要谨守我的诫命。
My son, keep my teaching in your memory, and my rules in your heart:

因为他必将长久的日子，生命的年数，与平安，加给你。
For they will give you increase of days, years of life, and peace.

不可使慈爱诚实离开你。要系在你颈项上，刻在你心版上。
Let not mercy and good faith go from you; let them be hanging round your neck, recorded on your heart;

这样，你必在神和世人眼前蒙恩宠，有聪明。
So you will have grace and a good name in the eyes of God and men.

你要专心仰赖耶和华，不可倚靠自己的聪明。
Put all your hope in God, not looking to your reason for support.

在你一切所行的事上，都要认定他，他必指引你的路。
In all your ways give ear to him, and he will make straight your footsteps.

不要自以为有智慧。要敬畏耶和华，远离恶事。
Put no high value on your wisdom: let the fear of the Lord be before you, and keep yourself from evil:

这便医治你的肚脐，滋润你的百骨。
This will give strength to your flesh, and new life to your bones.

你要以财物，和一切初熟的土产，尊荣耶和华。
Give honour to the Lord with your wealth, and with the first-fruits of all your increase:

这样，你的仓房，必充满有余，你的酒榨，有新酒盈溢。
So your store-houses will be full of grain, and your vessels overflowing with new wine.

我儿，你不可轻看耶和华的管教，（或作惩治）也不可厌烦他的责备。
My son, do not make your heart hard against the Lord's teaching; do not be made angry by his training:

因为耶和华所爱的，他必责备。正如父亲责备所喜爱的儿子。
For to those who are dear to him the Lord says sharp words, and makes the son in whom he has delight undergo pain.

得智慧，得聪明的，这人便为有福。
Happy is the man who makes discovery of wisdom, and he who gets knowledge.

因为得智慧胜过得银子，其利益强如精金。
For trading in it is better than trading in silver, and its profit greater than bright gold.

比珍珠（或作红宝石）宝贵。你一切所喜爱的，都不足与比较。
She is of more value than jewels, and nothing for which you may have a desire is fair in comparison with her.

他右手有长寿。左手有富贵。
Long life is in her right hand, and in her left are wealth and honour.

他的道是安乐，他的路全是平安。
Her ways are ways of delight, and all her goings are peace.

他与持守他的作生命树。持定他的俱各有福。
She is a tree of life to all who take her in their hands, and happy is everyone who keeps her.

耶和华以智慧立地。以聪明定天。
The Lord by wisdom put in position the bases of the earth; by reason he put the heavens in their place.

以知识使深渊裂开，使天空滴下甘露。
By his knowledge the deep was parted, and dew came dropping from the skies.

我儿，要谨守真智慧和谋略。不可使他离开你的眼目。
My son, keep good sense, and do not let wise purpose go from your eyes.

这样，他必作你的生命，颈项的美饰。
So they will be life for your soul, and grace for your neck.

你就坦然行路，不至碰脚。
Then you will go safely on your way, and your feet will have no cause for slipping.

你躺下，必不惧怕。你躺卧，睡得香甜。
When you take your rest you will have no fear, and on your bed sleep will be sweet to you.

忽然来的惊恐，不要害怕。恶人遭毁灭，也不要恐惧。
Have no fear of sudden danger, or of the storm which will come on evil-doers:

因为耶和华是你所倚靠的。他必保守你的脚不陷入网罗。
For the Lord will be your hope, and will keep your foot from being taken in the net.

你手若有行善的力量，不可推辞，就当向那应得的人施行。
Do not keep back good from those who have a right to it, when it is in the power of your hand to do it.

你那里若有现成的，不可对邻舍说，去吧，明天再来，我必给你。
Say not to your neighbour, Go, and come again, and tomorrow I will give; when you have it by you at the time.

你的邻舍，既在你附近安居，你不可设计害他。
Do not make evil designs against your neighbour, when he is living with you without fear.

人未曾加害与你，不可无故与他相争。
Do not take up a cause at law against a man for nothing, if he has done you no wrong.

不可嫉妒强暴的人，也不可选择他所行的路。
Have no envy of the violent man, or take any of his ways as an example.

因为乖僻人为耶和华所憎恶。正直人为他所亲密。
For the wrong-hearted man is hated by the Lord, but he is a friend to the upright.

耶和华咒诅恶人的家庭，赐福与义人的居所。
The curse of the Lord is on the house of the evil-doer, but his blessing is on the tent of the upright.

他讥诮那好讥诮的人，赐恩给谦卑的人。
He makes sport of the men of pride, but he gives grace to the gentle-hearted.

智慧人必承受尊荣。愚昧人高升也成为羞辱。
The wise will have glory for their heritage, but shame will be the reward of the foolish.

众子阿，要听父亲的教训，留心得知聪明。
Give ear, my sons, to the teaching of a father; give attention so that you may have knowledge:

因我所给你们的，是好教训。不可离弃我的法则。（或作指教）
For I give you good teaching; do not give up the knowledge you are getting from me.

我在父亲面前为孝子，在母亲眼中为独一的娇儿。
For I was a son to my father, a gentle and an only one to my mother.

父亲教训我说，你心要存记我的言语，遵守我的命令，便得存活。
And he gave me teaching, saying to me, Keep my words in your heart; keep my rules so that you may have life:

要得智慧，要得聪明。不可忘记，也不可偏离我口中的言语。
Get wisdom, get true knowledge; keep it in memory, do not be turned away from the words of my mouth.

不可离弃智慧，智慧就护卫你。要爱他，他就保守你。
Do not give her up, and she will keep you; give her your love, and she will make you safe.

智慧为首。所以要得智慧。在你一切所得之内，必得聪明。（或作用你一切所得的去换聪明）
The first sign of wisdom is to get wisdom; go, give all you have to get true knowledge.

高举智慧，他就使你高升。怀抱智慧，他就使你尊荣。
Put her in a high place, and you will be lifted up by her; she will give you honour, when you give her your love.

他必将华冠加在你头上，把荣冕交给你。
She will put a crown of grace on your head, giving you a head-dress of glory.

我儿，你要听受我的言语，就必延年益寿。
Give ear, O my son, and let your heart be open to my sayings; and long life will be yours.

我已指教你走智慧的道，引导你行正直的路。
I have given you teaching in the way of wisdom, guiding your steps in the straight way.

你行走，脚步必不致狭窄。你奔跑，也不致跌倒。
When you go, your way will not be narrow, and in running you will not have a fall.

要持定训诲，不可放松。必当谨守，因为他是你的生命。
Take learning in your hands, do not let her go: keep her, for she is your life.

不可行恶人的路。不要走坏人的道。
Do not go in the road of sinners, or be walking in the way of evil men.

要躲避，不可经过。要转身而去。
Keep far from it, do not go near; be turned from it, and go on your way.

这等人若不行恶，不得睡觉。不使人跌倒，睡卧不安。
For they take no rest till they have done evil; their sleep is taken away if they have not been the cause of someone's fall.

因为他们以奸恶吃饼，以强暴喝酒。
The bread of evil-doing is their food, the wine of violent acts their drink.

但义人的路，好像黎明的光，越照越明，直到日午。
But the way of the upright is like the light of early morning, getting brighter and brighter till the full day.

恶人的道好像幽暗。自己不知因什么跌倒。
The way of sinners is dark; they see not the cause of their fall.

我儿，要留心听我的言词，侧耳听我的话语。
My son, give attention to my words; let your ear be turned to my sayings.

都不可离你的眼目。要存记在你心中。
Let them not go from your eyes; keep them deep in your heart.

因为得着他的，就得了生命，又得了医全体的良药。
For they are life to him who gets them, and strength to all his flesh.

你要保守你心，胜过保守一切。（或作你要切切保守你心）因为一生的果效，是由心发出。
And keep watch over your heart with all care; so you will have life.

你要除掉邪僻的口，弃绝乖谬的嘴。
Put away from you an evil tongue, and let false lips be far from you.

你的眼目，要向前正看，你的眼睛，（原文作皮）当向前直观。
Keep your eyes on what is in front of you, looking straight before you.

要修平你脚下的路，坚定你一切的道。
Keep a watch on your behaviour; let all your ways be rightly ordered.

不可偏向左右。要使你的脚离开邪恶。
Let there be no turning to the right or to the left, keep your feet from evil.

我儿，要留心我智慧的话语，侧耳听我聪明的言词。
My son, give attention to my wisdom; let your ear be turned to my teaching:

为要使你谨守谋略，嘴唇保存知识。
So that you may be ruled by a wise purpose, and your lips may keep knowledge.

因为淫妇的嘴滴下蜂蜜，她的口比油更滑。
For honey is dropping from the lips of the strange woman, and her mouth is smoother than oil;

至终却苦似茵陈，快如两刃的刀。
But her end is bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two-edged sword;

她的脚，下入死地。她脚步，踏住阴间。
Her feet go down to death, and her steps to the underworld;

以致她找不着生命平坦的道。她的路变迁不定，自己还不知道。
She never keeps her mind on the road of life; her ways are uncertain, she has no knowledge.

众子阿，现在要听从我，不可离弃我口中的话。
Give ear to me then, my sons, and do not put away my words from you.

你所行的道要离她远，不可就近她的房门。
Go far away from her, do not come near the door of her house;

恐怕将你的尊荣给别人，将你的岁月给残忍的人。
For fear that you may give your honour to others, and your wealth to strange men:

恐怕外人满得你的力量，你劳碌得来的，归入外人的家。
And strange men may be full of your wealth, and the fruit of your work go to the house of others;

终久你皮肉和身体消毁，你就悲叹，
And you will be full of grief at the end of your life, when your flesh and your body are wasted;

说，我怎么恨恶训诲，心中藐视责备，
And you will say, How was teaching hated by me, and my heart put no value on training;

也不听从我师傅的话，又不侧耳听那教训我的人。
I did not give attention to the voice of my teachers, my ear was not turned to those who were guiding me!
我在圣会里，几乎落在诸般恶中。
I was in almost all evil in the company of the people.

你要喝自己池中的水，饮自己井里的活水。
Let water from your store and not that of others be your drink, and running water from your fountain.

你的泉源岂可涨溢在外。你的河水岂可流在街上。
Let not your springs be flowing in the streets, or your streams of water in the open places.

惟独归你一人，不可与外人同用。
Let them be for yourself only, not for other men with you.

要使你的泉源蒙福。要喜悦你幼年所娶的妻。
Let blessing be on your fountain; have joy in the wife of your early years.

她如可爱的 ？ ？ 鹿，可喜的母鹿。愿她的胸怀，使你时时知足。她的爱情，使你常常恋慕。
As a loving hind and a gentle doe, let her breasts ever give you rapture; let your passion at all times be moved by her love.

我儿，你为何恋慕淫妇，为何抱外女的胸怀。
Why let yourself, my son, go out of the way with a strange woman, and take another woman in your arms?
因为人所行的道，都在耶和华眼前。他也修平人一切的路。
For a man's ways are before the eyes of the Lord, and he puts all his goings in the scales.

恶人必被自己的罪孽捉住。他必被自己的罪恶如绳索缠绕。
The evil-doer will be taken in the net of his crimes, and prisoned in the cords of his sin.

他因不受训诲，就必死亡。又因愚昧过甚，必走差了路。
He will come to his end for need of teaching; he is so foolish that he will go wandering from the right way.

我儿，你若为朋友作保，替外人击掌，
My son, if you have made yourself responsible for your neighbour, or given your word for another,

你就被口中的话语缠住，被嘴里的言语捉住。
You are taken as in a net by the words of your mouth, the sayings of your lips have overcome you.

我儿，你既落在朋友手中，就当这样行，才可救自己。你要自卑，去恳求你的朋友。
Do this, my son, and make yourself free, because you have come into the power of your neighbour; go without waiting, and make a strong request to your neighbour.

不要容你的眼睛睡觉，不要容你的眼皮打盹。
Give no sleep to your eyes, or rest to them;

要救自己，如鹿脱离猎户的手，如鸟脱离捕鸟人的手。
Make yourself free, like the roe from the hand of the archer, and the bird from him who puts a net for her.

懒惰人哪，你去察看蚂蚁的动作，就可得智慧。
Go to the ant, you hater of work; give thought to her ways and be wise:

蚂蚁没有元帅，没有官长，没有君王，
Having no chief, overseer, or ruler,

尚且在夏天预备食物，在收割时聚敛粮食。
She gets her meat in the summer, storing up food at the time of the grain-cutting.

懒惰人哪，你要睡到几时呢？你何时睡醒呢？
How long will you be sleeping, O hater of work? when will you get up from your sleep?

再睡片时，打盹片时，抱着手躺卧片时，
A little sleep, a little rest, a little folding of the hands in sleep:

你的贫穷就必如强盗速来，你的缺乏仿佛拿兵器的人来到。
Then loss will come on you like an outlaw, and your need like an armed man

无赖的恶徒，行动就用乖僻的口。
A good-for-nothing man is an evil-doer; he goes on his way causing trouble with false words;

用眼传神，用脚示意，用指点划。
Making signs with his eyes, rubbing with his feet, and giving news with his fingers;

心中乖僻，常设恶谋，布散分争。
His mind is ever designing evil: he lets loose violent acts.

所以灾难必忽然临到他身。他必顷刻败坏无法可治。
For this cause his downfall will be sudden; quickly he will be broken, and there will be no help for him.

耶和华所恨恶的有六样，连他心所憎恶的共有七样。
Six things are hated by the Lord; seven things are disgusting to him:

就是高傲的眼，撒谎的舌，流无辜人血的手，
Eyes of pride, a false tongue, hands which take life without cause;

图谋恶计的心，飞跑行恶的脚，
A heart full of evil designs, feet which are quick in running after sin;

吐谎言的假见证，并弟兄中布散分争的人。
A false witness, breathing out untrue words, and one who lets loose violent acts among brothers.

我儿，要谨守你父亲的诫命，不可离弃你母亲的法则。（或作指教）
My son, keep the rule of your father, and have in memory the teaching of your mother:

要常系在你心上，挂在你项上。
Keep them ever folded in your heart, and have them hanging round your neck.

你行走，他必引导你。你躺卧，他必保守你。你睡醒，他必与你谈论。
In your walking, it will be your guide; when you are sleeping, it will keep watch over you; when you are awake, it will have talk with you.

因为诫命是灯，法则（或作指教）是光。训诲的责备是生命的道。
For the rule is a light, and the teaching a shining light; and the guiding words of training are the way of life.

能保你远离恶妇，远离外女谄媚的舌头。
They will keep you from the evil woman, from the smooth tongue of the strange woman.

你心中不要恋慕她的美色，也不要被她眼皮勾引。
Let not your heart's desire go after her fair body; let not her eyes take you prisoner.

因为妓女能使人只剩一块饼，淫妇猎取人宝贵的生命。
For a loose woman is looking for a cake of bread, but another man's wife goes after one's very life.

人若怀里搋火，衣服岂能不烧呢？
May a man take fire to his breast without burning his clothing?

人若在火炭上走，脚岂能不烫呢？
Or may one go on lighted coals, and his feet not be burned?

亲近邻舍之妻的，也是如此。凡挨近她的，不免受罚。
So it is with him who goes in to his neighbour's wife; he who has anything to do with her will not go free from punishment.

贼因饥饿偷窃充饥，人不藐视他。
Men do not have a low opinion of a thief who takes food when he is in need of it:

若被找着，他必赔还七倍。必将家中所有的，尽都偿还。
But if he is taken in the act he will have to give back seven times as much, giving up all his property which is in his house.

与妇人行淫的，便是无知，行这事的，必丧掉生命。
He who takes another man's wife is without all sense: he who does it is the cause of destruction to his soul.

他必受伤损，必被凌辱。他的羞耻不得涂抹。
Wounds will be his and loss of honour, and his shame may not be washed away.

因为人的嫉恨，成了烈怒。报仇的时候，决不留情。
For bitter is the wrath of an angry husband; in the day of punishment he will have no mercy.

什么赎价，他都不顾。你虽送许多礼物，他也不肯干休。
He will not take any payment; and he will not make peace with you though your money offerings are increased.

我儿，你要遵守我的言语，将我的命令存记在心。
My son, keep my sayings, and let my rules be stored up with you.

遵守我的命令，就得存活。保守我的法则，（或作指教）好像保守眼中的瞳人。
Keep my rules and you will have life; let my teaching be to you as the light of your eyes;

系在你指头上，刻在你心版上。
Let them be fixed to your fingers, and recorded in your heart.

对智慧说，你是我的姊妹。称呼聪明为你的亲人。
Say to wisdom, You are my sister; let knowledge be named your special friend:

他就保你远离淫妇，远离说谄媚话的外女。
So that they may keep you from the strange woman, even from her whose words are smooth.

我曾在我房屋的窗户内，从我窗棂之间，往外观看。
Looking out from my house, and watching through the window,

见愚蒙人内，少年人中，分明有一个无知的少年人，
I saw among the young men one without sense,

从街上经过，走近淫妇的巷口，直往通她家的路去，
Walking in the street near the turn of her road, going on the way to her house,

在黄昏，或晚上，或半夜，或黑暗之中，
At nightfall, in the evening of the day, in the black dark of the night.

看哪，有一个妇人来迎接他，是妓女的打扮，有诡诈的心思。
And the woman came out to him, in the dress of a loose woman, with a designing heart;

这妇人喧嚷不守约束，在家里停不住脚。
She is full of noise and uncontrolled; her feet keep not in her house.

有时在街市上，有时在宽阔处，或在各巷口蹲伏。
Now she is in the street, now in the open spaces, waiting at every turning of the road.

拉住那少年人，与他亲嘴，脸无羞耻对他说，
So she took him by his hand, kissing him, and without a sign of shame she said to him:

平安祭在我这里。今日才还了我所许的愿。
I have a feast of peace-offerings, for today my oaths have been effected.

因此，我出来迎接你，恳切求见你的面，恰巧遇见了你。
So I came out in the hope of meeting you, looking for you with care, and now I have you.

我已经用绣花毯子，和埃及线织的花纹布，铺了我的床。
My bed is covered with cushions of needlework, with coloured cloths of the cotton thread of Egypt;

我又用没药，沉香，桂皮，薰了我的榻。
I have made my bed sweet with perfumes and spices.

你来，我们可以饱享爱情，直到早晨。我们可以彼此亲爱欢乐。
Come, let us take our pleasure in love till the morning, having joy in love's delights.

因为我丈夫不在家，出门行远路。
For the master of the house is away on a long journey:

他手拿银囊。必到月望才回家。
He has taken a bag of money with him; he is coming back at the full moon.

淫妇用许多巧言诱他随从，用谄媚的嘴逼他同行。
With her fair words she overcame him, forcing him with her smooth lips.

少年人立刻跟随她，好像牛往宰杀之地，又像愚昧人带锁链，去受刑罚。
The simple man goes after her, like an ox going to its death, like a roe pulled by a cord;

直等箭穿他的肝，如同雀鸟急入网罗，却不知是自丧己命。
Like a bird falling into a net; with no thought that his life is in danger, till an arrow goes into his side.

众子阿，现在要听从我，留心听我口中的话。
So now, my sons, give ear to me; give attention to the sayings of my mouth;

你的心，不可偏向淫妇的道。不要入她的迷途。
Let not your heart be turned to her ways, do not go wandering in her footsteps.

因为被她伤害仆倒的不少。被她杀戮的而且甚多。
For those wounded and made low by her are great in number; and all those who have come to their death through her are a great army.

她的家是在阴间之路，下到死亡之宫。
Her house is the way to the underworld, going down to the rooms of death.

智慧岂不呼叫，聪明岂不发声。
Is not wisdom crying out, and the voice of knowledge sounding?

他在道旁高处的顶上，在十字路口站立。
At the top of the highways, at the meeting of the roads, she takes her place;

在城门旁，在城门口，在城门洞，大声说，
Where the roads go into the town her cry goes out, at the doorways her voice is loud:

众人哪，我呼叫你们。我向世人发声，
I am crying out to you, O men; my voice comes to the sons of men.

说，愚蒙人哪，你们要会悟灵明。愚昧人哪，你们当心里明白。
Become expert in reason, O you simple ones; you foolish ones, take training to heart.

你们当听，因我要说极美的话。我张嘴要论正直的事。
Give ear, for my words are true, and my lips are open to give out what is upright.

我的口要发出真理。我的嘴憎恶邪恶。
For good faith goes out of my mouth, and false lips are disgusting to me.

我口中的言语，都是公义，并无弯曲乖僻。
All the words of my mouth are righteousness; there is nothing false or twisted in them.

有聪明的以为明显，得知识的以为正直。
They are all true to him whose mind is awake, and straightforward to those who get knowledge.

你们当受我的教训，不受白银。宁得知识，胜过黄金。
Take my teaching, and not silver; get knowledge in place of the best gold.

因为智慧比珍珠（或作红宝石）更美。一切可喜爱的，都不足与比较。
For wisdom is better than jewels, and all things which may be desired are nothing in comparison with her.

我智慧以灵明为居所，又寻得知识和谋略。
I, wisdom, have made wise behaviour my near relation; I am seen to be the special friend of wise purposes.

敬畏耶和华，在乎恨恶邪恶。那骄傲，狂妄，并恶道，以及乖谬的口，都为我所恨恶。
The fear of the Lord is seen in hating evil: pride, a high opinion of oneself, the evil way, and the false tongue, are unpleasing to me.

我有谋略，和真知识。我乃聪明。我有能力。
Wise design and good sense are mine; reason and strength are mine.

帝王借我坐国位。君王借我定公平。
Through me kings have their power, and rulers give right decisions.

王子和首领，世上一切的审判官，都是借我掌权。
Through me chiefs have authority, and the noble ones are judging in righteousness.

爱我的，我也爱他。恳切寻求我的，必寻得见。
Those who have given me their love are loved by me, and those who make search for me with care will get me.

丰富尊荣在我。恒久的财并公义也在我。
Wealth and honour are in my hands, even wealth without equal and righteousness.

我的果实胜过黄金。强如精金，我的出产超乎高银。
My fruit is better than gold, even than the best gold; and my increase is more to be desired than silver.

我在公义的道上走，在公平的路中行。
I go in the road of righteousness, in the way of right judging:

使爱我的承受货财，并充满他们的府库。
So that I may give my lovers wealth for their heritage, making their store-houses full.

在耶和华造化的起头，在太初创造万物之先，就有了我。
The Lord made me as the start of his way, the first of his works in the past.

从亘古，从太初，未有世界以前，我已被立。
From eternal days I was given my place, from the birth of time, before the earth was.

没有深渊，没有大水的泉源，我已生出。
When there was no deep I was given birth, when there were no fountains flowing with water.

大山未曾奠定，小山未有之先，我已生出。
Before the mountains were put in their places, before the hills was my birth:

耶和华还没有创造大地，和田野，并世上的土质，我已生出。
When he had not made the earth or the fields or the dust of the world.

他立高天，我在那里。他在渊面的周围，划出圆圈，
When he made ready the heavens I was there: when he put an arch over the face of the deep:

上使穹苍坚硬，下使渊源稳固，
When he made strong the skies overhead: when the fountains of the deep were fixed:

为沧海定出界限，使水不越过他的命令，立定大地的根基。
When he put a limit to the sea, so that the waters might not go against his word: when he put in position the bases of the earth:

那时，我在他那里为工师，日日为他所喜爱，常常在他面前踊跃，
Then I was by his side, as a master workman: and I was his delight from day to day, playing before him at all times;

踊跃在他为人预备可住之地，也喜悦住在世人之间。
Playing in his earth; and my delight was with the sons of men.

众子阿，现在要听从我。因为谨守我道的，便为有福。
Give ear to me then, my sons: for happy are those who keep my ways.

要听教训，就得智慧，不可弃绝。
Take my teaching and be wise; do not let it go.

听从我，日日在我门口仰望，在我门框旁边等候的，那人便为有福。
Happy is the man who gives ear to me, watching at my doors day by day, keeping his place by the pillars of my house.

因为寻得我的，就寻得生命，也必蒙耶和华的恩惠。
For whoever gets me gets life, and grace from the Lord will come to him.

得罪我的，却害了自己的性命。恨恶我的，都喜爱死亡。
But he who does evil to me, does wrong to his soul: all my haters are in love with death.

智慧建造房屋，凿成七根柱子，
Wisdom has made her house, putting up her seven pillars.

宰杀牲畜，调和旨酒，设摆筵席。
She has put her fat beasts to death; her wine is mixed, her table is ready.

打发使女出去，自己在城中至高处呼叫，
She has sent out her women-servants; her voice goes out to the highest places of the town, saying,

说，谁是愚蒙人，可以转到这里来。又对那无知的人说，
Whoever is simple, let him come in here; and to him who has no sense, she says:

你们来，吃我的饼，喝我调和的酒。
Come, take of my bread, and of my wine which is mixed.

你们愚蒙人，要舍弃愚蒙，就得存活。并要走光明的道。
Give up the simple ones and have life, and go in the way of knowledge.

指斥亵慢人的，必受辱骂。责备恶人的，必被玷污。
He who gives teaching to a man of pride gets shame for himself; he who says sharp words to a sinner gets a bad name.

不要责备亵慢人，恐怕他恨你。要责备智慧人，他必爱你。
Do not say sharp words to a man of pride, or he will have hate for you; make them clear to a wise man, and you will be dear to him.

教导智慧人，他就越发有智慧。指示义人，他就增长学问。
Give teaching to a wise man, and he will become wiser; give training to an upright man, and his learning will be increased.

敬畏耶和华，是智慧的开端。认识至圣者，便是聪明。
The fear of the Lord is the start of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One gives a wise mind

你借着我，日子必增多，年岁也必加添。
For by me your days will be increased, and the years of your life will be long.

你若有智慧，是与自己有益。你若亵慢，就必独自担当。
If you are wise, you are wise for yourself; if your heart is full of pride, you only will have the pain of it.

愚昧的妇人喧嚷。她是愚蒙，一无所知。
The foolish woman is full of noise; she has no sense at all.

她坐在自己的家门口，坐在城中高处的座位上，
Seated at the door of her house, in the high places of the town,

呼叫过路的，就是直行其道的人，
Crying out to those who go by, going straight on their way, she says:

说，谁是愚蒙人，可以转到这里来。又对那无知的人说，
Whoever is simple, let him come in here: and to him who is without sense, she says:

偷来的水是甜的，暗吃的饼是好的。
Drink taken without right is sweet, and food in secret is pleasing.

人却不知有阴魂在她那里。她的客在阴间的深处。
But he does not see that the dead are there, that her guests are in the deep places of the underworld.

所罗门的箴言。智慧之子，使父亲欢乐。愚昧之子，叫母亲担忧。
A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is a sorrow to his mother.

不义之财，毫无益处。惟有公义，能救人脱离死亡。
Wealth which comes from sin is of no profit, but righteousness gives salvation from death.

耶和华不使义人受饥饿。恶人所欲的他必推开。
The Lord will not let the upright be in need of food, but he puts far from him the desire of the evil-doers.

手懒的要受贫穷。手勤的却要富足。
He who is slow in his work becomes poor, but the hand of the ready worker gets in wealth.

夏天聚敛的，是智慧之子。收割时沉睡的，是贻羞之子。
He who in summer gets together his store is a son who does wisely; but he who takes his rest when the grain is being cut is a son causing shame.

福祉临到义人的头。强暴蒙蔽恶人的口。
Blessings are on the head of the upright, but the face of sinners will be covered with sorrow.

义人的纪念被称赞。恶人的名字必朽烂。
The memory of the upright is a blessing, but the name of the evil-doer will be turned to dust.

心中智慧的，必受命令。口里愚妄的，必致倾倒。
The wise-hearted man will let himself be ruled, but the man whose talk is foolish will have a fall.

行正直路的，步步安稳。走弯曲道的，必致败露。
He whose ways are upright will go safely, but he whose ways are twisted will be made low.

以眼传神的，使人忧患。口里愚妄的，必致倾倒。
He who makes signs with his eyes is a cause of trouble, but he who makes a man see his errors is a cause of peace.

义人的口是生命的泉源。强暴蒙蔽恶人的口。
The mouth of the upright man is a fountain of life, but the mouth of the evil-doer is a bitter cup.

恨能挑启争端。爱能遮掩一切过错。
Hate is a cause of violent acts, but all errors are covered up by love.

明哲人嘴里有智慧。无知人背上受刑杖。
In the lips of him who has knowledge wisdom is seen; but a rod is ready for the back of him who is without sense.

智慧人积存知识。愚妄人的口速致败坏。
Knowledge is stored up by the wise, but the mouth of the foolish man is a destruction which is near.

富户的财物，是他的坚城。穷人的贫乏，是他的败坏。
The property of the man of wealth is his strong town: the poor man's need is his destruction.

义人的勤劳致生。恶人的进项致死。（死原文作罪）
The work of the upright gives life: the increase of the evil-doer is a cause of sin.

谨守训诲的，乃在生命的道上。违弃责备的，便失迷了路。
He who takes note of teaching is a way of life, but he who gives up training is a cause of error.

隐藏怨恨的，有说谎的嘴。口出谗谤的，是愚妄的人。
Hate is covered up by the lips of the upright man, but he who lets out evil about another is foolish.

多言多语难免有过。禁止嘴唇是有智慧。
Where there is much talk there will be no end to sin, but he who keeps his mouth shut does wisely.

义人的舌，乃似高银。恶人的心，所值无几。
The tongue of the upright man is like tested silver: the heart of the evil-doer is of little value.

义人的口教养多人。愚昧人因无知而死亡。
The lips of the upright man give food to men, but the foolish come to death for need of sense.

耶和华所赐的福，使人富足。并不加上忧虑。
The blessing of the Lord gives wealth: hard work makes it no greater.

愚妄人以行恶为戏耍。明哲人却以智慧为乐。
It is sport to the foolish man to do evil, but the man of good sense takes delight in wisdom.

恶人所怕的必临到他。义人所愿的必蒙应允。
The thing feared by the evil-doer will come to him, but the upright man will get his desire.

暴风一过，恶人归于无有。义人的根基却是永久。
When the storm-wind is past, the sinner is seen no longer, but the upright man is safe for ever.

懒惰人叫差他的人，如醋倒牙，如烟薰目。
Like acid drink to the teeth and as smoke to the eyes, so is the hater of work to those who send him.

敬畏耶和华，使人日子加多。但恶人的年岁必被减少。
The fear of the Lord gives long life, but the years of the evil-doer will be cut short.

义人的盼望，必得喜乐。恶人的指望，必至灭没。
The hope of the upright man will give joy, but the waiting of the evil-doer will have its end in sorrow.

耶和华的道，是正直人的保障。却成了作孽人的败坏。
The way of the Lord is a strong tower for the upright man, but destruction to the workers of evil.

义人永不挪移。恶人不得住在地上。
The upright man will never be moved, but evil-doers will not have a safe resting-place in the land.

义人的口，滋生智慧。乖谬的舌，必被割断。
The mouth of the upright man is budding with wisdom, but the twisted tongue will be cut off.

义人的嘴，能令人喜悦。恶人的口，说乖谬的话。
The lips of the upright man have knowledge of what is pleasing, but twisted are the mouths of evil-doers.

诡诈的天平，为耶和华所憎恶。公平的法码，为他所喜悦。
Scales of deceit are hated by the Lord, but a true weight is his delight.

骄傲来，羞耻也来。谦逊人却有智慧。
When pride comes, there comes shame, but wisdom is with the quiet in spirit.

正直人的纯正，必引导自己。奸诈人的乖僻，必毁灭自己。
The righteousness of the upright will be their guide, but the twisted ways of the false will be their destruction.

发怒的日子，赀财无益。惟有公义能救人脱离死亡。
Wealth is of no profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness keeps a man safe from death.

完全人的义，必指引他的路。但恶人必因自己的恶跌倒。
The righteousness of the good man will make his way straight, but the sin of the evil-doer will be the cause of his fall.

正直人的义，必拯救自己。奸诈人必陷在自己的罪孽中。
The righteousness of the upright will be their salvation, but the false will themselves be taken in their evil designs.

恶人一死，他的指望必灭绝。罪人的盼望，也必灭没。
At the death of an upright man his hope does not come to an end, but the hope of the evil-doer comes to destruction.

义人得脱离患难，有恶人来代替他。
The upright man is taken out of trouble, and in his place comes the sinner.

不虔敬的人用口败坏邻舍。义人却因知识得救。
With his mouth the evil man sends destruction on his neighbour; but through knowledge the upright are taken out of trouble.

义人享福合城喜乐。恶人灭亡，人都欢呼。
When things go well for the upright man, all the town is glad; at the death of sinners, there are cries of joy.

城因正直人祝福便高举。却因邪恶人的口就倾覆。
By the blessing of the upright man the town is made great, but it is overturned by the mouth of the evil-doer.

藐视邻舍的，毫无智慧。明哲人却静默不言。
He who has a poor opinion of his neighbour has no sense, but a wise man keeps quiet.

往来传舌的，泄漏密事。心中诚实的，遮隐事情。
He who goes about talking of others makes secrets public, but the true-hearted man keeps things covered.

无智谋，民就败落。谋士多，人便安居。
When there is no helping suggestion the people will have a fall, but with a number of wise guides they will be safe.

为外人作保的，必受亏损。恨恶击掌的，却得安稳。
He who makes himself responsible for a strange man will undergo much loss; but the hater of such undertakings will be safe.

恩德的妇女得尊荣。强暴的男子得赀财。
A woman who is full of grace is honoured, but a woman hating righteousness is a seat of shame: those hating work will undergo loss, but the strong keep their wealth.

仁慈的人，善待自己。残忍的人，扰害己身。
The man who has mercy will be rewarded, but the cruel man is the cause of trouble to himself.

恶人经营，得虚浮的工价。撒义种的，得实在的果效。
The sinner gets the payment of deceit; but his reward is certain who puts in the seed of righteousness.

恒心为义的，必得生命。追求邪恶的，必致死亡。
So righteousness gives life; but he who goes after evil gets death for himself.

心中乖僻的，为耶和华所憎恶。行事完全的，为他所喜悦。
The uncontrolled are hated by the Lord, but those whose ways are without error are his delight

恶人虽然连手，必不免受罚。义人的后裔，必得拯救。
Certainly the evil-doer will not go free from punishment, but the seed of the upright man will be safe.

妇女美貌而无见识，如同金环带在猪鼻上。
Like a ring of gold in the nose of a pig, is a beautiful woman who has no sense.

义人的心愿，尽得好处。恶人的指望，致干忿怒。
The desire of the upright man is only for good, but wrath is waiting for the evil-doer.

有施散的，却更增添。有吝惜过度的，反致穷乏。
A man may give freely, and still his wealth will be increased; and another may keep back more than is right, but only comes to be in need.

好施舍的，必得丰裕。滋润人的，必得滋润。
He who gives blessing will be made fat, but the curser will himself be cursed.

屯粮不卖的，民必咒诅他。情愿出卖的，人必为他祝福。
He who keeps back grain will be cursed by the people; but a blessing will be on the head of him who lets them have it for a price.

恳切求善的，就求得恩惠。惟独求恶的，恶必临到他身。
He who, with all his heart, goes after what is good is searching for grace; but he who is looking for trouble will get it.

倚仗自己财物的，必跌倒。义人必发旺如青叶。
He who puts his faith in wealth will come to nothing; but the upright man will be full of growth like the green leaf.

扰害己家的，必承受清风。愚昧人必作慧心人的仆人。
The troubler of his house will have the wind for his heritage, and the foolish will be servant to the wise-hearted.

义人所结的果子，就是生命树。有智慧的必能得人。
The fruit of righteousness is a tree of life, but violent behaviour takes away souls.

看哪，义人在世尚且受报，何况恶人和罪人呢？
If the upright man is rewarded on earth, how much more the evil-doer and the sinner!

喜爱管教的，就是喜爱知识。恨恶责备的，却是畜类。
A lover of training is a lover of knowledge; but a hater of teaching is like a beast.

善人必蒙耶和华的恩惠。设诡计的人，耶和华必定他的罪。
A good man has grace in the eyes of the Lord; but the man of evil designs gets punishment from him.

人靠恶行不能坚立。义人的根，必不动摇。
No man will make himself safe through evil-doing; but the root of upright men will never be moved.

才德的妇人，是丈夫的冠冕。贻羞的妇人，如同朽烂在她丈夫的骨中。
A woman of virtue is a crown to her husband; but she whose behaviour is a cause of shame is like a wasting disease in his bones.

义人的思念是公平。恶人的计谋是诡诈。
The purposes of upright men are right, but the designs of evil-doers are deceit.

恶人的言论，是埋伏流人的血。正直人的口，必拯救人。
The words of sinners are destruction for the upright; but the mouth of upright men is their salvation.

恶人倾覆，归于无有。义人的家，必站得住。
Evil-doers are overturned and never seen again, but the house of upright men will keep its place.

人必按自己的智慧被称赞。心中乖谬的，必被藐视。
A man will be praised in the measure of his wisdom, but a wrong-minded man will be looked down on.

被人轻贱，却有仆人，强如自尊，缺少食物。
He who is of low position and has a servant, is better than one who has a high opinion of himself and is in need of bread.

义人顾惜他牲畜的命。恶人的怜悯，也是残忍。
An upright man has thought for the life of his beast, but the hearts of evil-doers are cruel.

耕种自己田地的，必得饱食。追随虚浮的，却是无知。
He who does work on his land will not be short of bread; but he who goes after foolish men is without sense.

恶人想得坏人的网罗。义人的根，得以结实。
The resting-place of the sinner will come to destruction, but the root of upright men is for ever.

恶人嘴中的过错，是自己的网罗。但义人必脱离患难。
In the sin of the lips is a net which takes the sinner, but the upright man will come out of trouble.

人因口所结的果子，必饱得美福。人手所作的，必为自己的报应。
From the fruit of his mouth will a man have good food in full measure, and the work of a man's hands will be rewarded.

愚妄人所行的，在自己眼中看为正直。惟智慧人，肯听人的劝教。
The way of the foolish man seems right to him? but the wise man gives ear to suggestions.

愚妄人的恼怒，立时显露。通达人能忍辱藏羞。
A foolish man lets his trouble be openly seen, but a sharp man keeps shame secret.

说出真话的，显明公义。作假见证的，显出诡诈。
The breathing out of true words gives knowledge of righteousness; but a false witness gives out deceit.

说话浮躁的，如刀刺人。智慧人的舌头，却为医人的良药。
There are some whose uncontrolled talk is like the wounds of a sword, but the tongue of the wise makes one well again.

口吐真言，永远坚立。舌说谎话，只存片时。
True lips are certain for ever, but a false tongue is only for a minute.

图谋恶事的，心存诡诈。劝人和睦的，便得喜乐。
Deceit is in the heart of those whose designs are evil, but for those purposing peace there is joy.

义人不遭灾害恶人满受祸患。
No trouble will come to upright men, but sinners will be full of evil.

说谎言的嘴，为耶和华所憎恶。行事诚实的，为他所喜悦。
False lips are hated by the Lord, but those whose acts are true are his delight.

通达人隐藏知识。愚昧人的心，彰显愚昧。
A sharp man keeps back his knowledge; but the heart of foolish men makes clear their foolish thoughts.

殷勤人的手必掌权。懒惰的人必服苦。
The hand of the ready worker will have authority, but he who is slow in his work will be put to forced work.

人心忧虑，屈而不伸。一句良言，使心欢乐。
Care in the heart of a man makes it weighted down, but a good word makes it glad.

义人引导他的邻舍。恶人的道，叫人失迷。
The upright man is a guide to his neighbour, but the way of evil-doers is a cause of error to them.

懒惰的人，不烤打猎所得的。殷勤的人，却得宝贵的财物。
He who is slow in his work does not go in search of food; but the ready worker gets much wealth.

在公义的道上有生命。其路之中，并无死亡。
In the road of righteousness is life, but the way of the evil-doer goes to death.

智慧子听父亲的教训。亵慢人不听责备。
A wise son is a lover of teaching, but the ears of the haters of authority are shut to sharp words.

人因口所结的果子，必享美福。奸诈人必遭强暴。
A man will get good from the fruit of his lips, but the desire of the false is for violent acts.

谨守口的，得保生命。大张嘴的，必致败亡。
He who keeps a watch on his mouth keeps his life; but he whose lips are open wide will have destruction.

懒惰人羡慕，却无所得。殷勤人必得丰裕。
The hater of work does not get his desires, but the soul of the hard workers will be made fat.

义人恨恶谎言。恶人有臭名，且致惭愧。
The upright man is a hater of false words: the evil-doer gets a bad name and is put to shame.

行为正直的，有公义保守。犯罪的被邪恶倾覆。
Righteousness keeps safe him whose way is without error, but evil-doers are overturned by sin.

假作富足的，却一无所有。装作穷乏的，却广有财物。
A man may be acting as if he had wealth, but have nothing; another may seem poor, but have great wealth.

人的赀财，是他生命的赎价。穷乏人却听不见威吓的话。
A man will give his wealth in exchange for his life; but the poor will not give ear to sharp words.

义人的光明亮。（明亮原文作欢喜）恶人的灯要熄灭。
There is a glad dawn for the upright man, but the light of the sinner will be put out.

骄傲只启争竞。听劝言的，却有智慧。
The only effect of pride is fighting; but wisdom is with the quiet in spirit.

不劳而得之财，必然消耗。勤劳积蓄的，必见加增。
Wealth quickly got will become less; but he who gets a store by the work of his hands will have it increased.

所盼望的迟延未得，令人心忧。所愿意的临到，却是生命树。
Hope put off is a weariness to the heart; but when what is desired comes, it is a tree of life.

藐视训言的，自取灭亡。敬畏诫命的，必得善报。
He who makes sport of the word will come to destruction, but the respecter of the law will be rewarded.

智慧人的法则，（或作指教）是生命的泉源，可以使人离开死亡的网罗。
The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life, turning men away from the nets of death.

美好的聪明，使人蒙恩。奸诈人的道路，崎岖难行。
Wise behaviour gets approval, but the way of the false is their destruction.

凡通达人都凭知识行事。愚昧人张扬自己的愚昧。
A sharp man does everything with knowledge, but a foolish man makes clear his foolish thoughts.

奸恶的使者，必陷在祸患里。忠信的使臣，乃医人的良药。
A man taking false news is a cause of trouble, but he who gives news rightly makes things well.

弃绝管教的，必致贫受辱。领受责备的，必得尊荣。
Need and shame will be the fate of him who is uncontrolled by training; but he who takes note of teaching will be honoured.

所欲的成就，心觉甘甜。远离恶事，为愚昧人所憎恶。
To get one's desire is sweet to the soul, but to give up evil is disgusting to the foolish.

与智慧人同行的，必得智慧。和愚昧人作伴的，必受亏损。
Go with wise men and be wise: but he who keeps company with the foolish will be broken.

祸患追赶罪人。义人必得善报。
Evil will overtake sinners, but the upright will be rewarded with good.

善人给子孙遗留产业。罪人为义人积存赀财。
The heritage of the good man is handed down to his children's children; and the wealth of the sinner is stored up for the upright man.

穷人耕种多得粮食，但因不义有消灭的。
There is much food in the ploughed land of the poor; but it is taken away by wrongdoing.

不忍用杖打儿子的，是恨恶他。疼爱儿子的，随时管教。
He who keeps back his rod is unkind to his son: the loving father gives punishment with care.

义人吃得饱足。恶人肚腹缺粮。
The upright man has food to the full measure of his desire, but there will be no food for the stomach of evil-doers.

智慧妇人，建立家室。愚妄妇人，亲手拆毁。
Wisdom is building her house, but the foolish woman is pulling it down with her hands.

行动正直的，敬畏耶和华。行事乖僻的，却藐视他。
He who goes on his way in righteousness has before him the fear of the Lord; but he whose ways are twisted gives him no honour.

愚妄人口中骄傲，如杖责打己身。智慧人的嘴，必保守自己。
In the mouth of the foolish man is a rod for his back, but the lips of the wise will keep them safe.

家里无牛，槽头干净。土产加多，乃凭牛力。
Where there are no oxen, their food-place is clean; but much increase comes through the strength of the ox.

诚实见证人，不说谎话。假见证人，吐出谎言。
A true witness does not say what is false, but a false witness is breathing out deceit.

亵慢人寻智慧，却寻不着。聪明人易得知识。
The hater of authority, searching for wisdom, does not get it; but knowledge comes readily to the open-minded man.

到愚昧人面前，不见他嘴中有知识。
Go away from the foolish man, for you will not see the lips of knowledge.

通达人的智慧，在乎明白己道。愚昧人的愚妄，乃是诡诈。（或作自欺）
The wisdom of the man of good sense makes his way clear; but the unwise behaviour of the foolish is deceit.

愚妄人犯罪，以为戏耍。（或作赎愆祭愚弄愚妄人）正直人互相喜悦。
In the tents of those hating authority there is error, but in the house of the upright man there is grace.

心中的苦楚，自己知道。心里的喜乐，外人无干。
No one has knowledge of a man's grief but himself; and a strange person has no part in his joy.

奸恶人的房屋必倾倒。正直人的帐棚必兴盛。
The house of the sinner will be overturned, but the tent of the upright man will do well.

有一条路人以为正。至终成为死亡之路。
There is a way which seems straight before a man, but its end is the ways of death.

人在喜笑中，心也忧愁。快乐至极，就生愁苦。
Even while laughing the heart may be sad; and after joy comes sorrow.

心中背道的，必满得自己的结果。善人必从自己的行为，得以知足。
He whose heart is turned away will have the reward of his ways in full measure; but a good man will have the reward of his doings.

愚蒙人是话都信。通达人步步谨慎。
The simple man has faith in every word, but the man of good sense gives thought to his footsteps.

智慧人惧怕，就远离恶事。愚妄人却狂傲自恃。
The wise man, fearing, keeps himself from evil; but the foolish man goes on in his pride, with no thought of danger.

轻易发怒的，行事愚妄。设立诡计的，被人恨恶。
He who is quickly angry will do what is foolish, but the man of good sense will have quiet.

愚蒙人得愚昧为产业。通达人得知识为冠冕。
Foolish behaviour is the heritage of the simple, but men of good sense are crowned with knowledge.

坏人俯伏在善人面前。恶人俯伏在义人门口。
The knees of the evil are bent before the good; and sinners go down in the dust at the doors of the upright.

贫穷人连邻舍也恨他。富足人朋友最多。
The poor man is hated even by his neighbour, but the man of wealth has numbers of friends.

藐视邻舍的，这人有罪。怜悯贫穷的，这人有福。
He who has no respect for his neighbour is a sinner, but he who has pity for the poor is happy.

谋恶的岂非走入迷途吗？谋善的必得慈爱和诚实。
Will not the designers of evil come into error? But mercy and good faith are for the designers of good.

诸般勤劳，都有益处。嘴上多言，乃致穷乏。
In all hard work there is profit, but talk only makes a man poor.

智慧人的财，为自己的冠冕。愚妄人的愚昧，终是愚昧。
Their wisdom is a crown to the wise, but their foolish behaviour is round the head of the unwise.

作真见证的，救人性命。吐出谎言的，施行诡诈。
A true witness is the saviour of lives; but he who says false things is a cause of deceit.

敬畏耶和华的，大有倚靠。他的儿女，也有避难所。
For him in whose heart is the fear of the Lord there is strong hope: and his children will have a safe place.

敬畏耶和华，就是生命的泉源，可以使人离开死亡的网罗。
The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, by which one may be turned from the nets of death.

帝王荣耀在乎民多。君王衰败在乎民少。
A king's glory is in the number of his people: and for need of people a ruler may come to destruction.

不轻易发怒的，大有聪明。性情暴躁的，大显愚妄。
He who is slow to be angry has great good sense; but he whose spirit is over-quick gives support to what is foolish.

心中安静，是肉体的生命。嫉妒是骨中的朽烂。
A quiet mind is the life of the body, but envy is a disease in the bones.

欺压贫寒的，是辱没造他的主。怜悯穷乏的，乃是尊敬主
He who is hard on the poor puts shame on his Maker; but he who has mercy on those who are in need gives him honour.

恶人在所行的恶上，必被推倒。义人临死，有所投靠。
The sinner is overturned in his evil-doing, but the upright man has hope in his righteousness.

智慧存在聪明人心中。愚昧人心里所存的，显而易见。
Wisdom has her resting-place in the mind of the wise, but she is not seen among the foolish.

公义使邦国高举。罪恶是人民的羞辱。
By righteousness a nation is lifted up, but sin is a cause of shame to the peoples.

智慧的臣子，蒙王恩惠。贻羞的仆人，遭其震怒。
The king has pleasure in a servant who does wisely, but his wrath is against him who is a cause of shame.

回答柔和，使怒消退。言语暴戾，触动怒气。
By a soft answer wrath is turned away, but a bitter word is a cause of angry feelings.

智慧人的舌，善发知识。愚昧人的口，吐出愚昧。
Knowledge is dropping from the tongue of the wise; but from the mouth of the foolish comes a stream of foolish words.

耶和华的眼目，无处不在。恶人善人，他都鉴察。
The eyes of the Lord are in every place, keeping watch on the evil and the good.

温良的舌，是生命树。乖谬的嘴，使人心碎。
A comforting tongue is a tree of life, but a twisted tongue is a crushing of the spirit.

愚妄人藐视父亲的管教。领受责备的，得着见识。
A foolish man puts no value on his father's training; but he who has respect for teaching has good sense.

义人家中，多有财宝。恶人得利，反受扰害。
In the house of the upright man there is a great store of wealth; but in the profits of the sinner there is trouble.

智慧人的嘴，播扬知识。愚昧人的心，并不如此。
The lips of the wise keep knowledge, but the heart of the foolish man is not right.

恶人献祭，为耶和华所憎恶。正直人祈祷，为他所喜悦。
The offering of the evil-doer is disgusting to the Lord, but the prayer of the upright man is his delight.

恶人的道路，为耶和华所憎恶。追求公义的，为他所喜爱。
The way of the evil-doer is disgusting to the Lord, but he who goes after righteousness is dear to him.

舍弃正路的，必受严刑。恨恶责备的，必致死亡。
There is bitter punishment for him who is turned from the way; and death will be the fate of the hater of teaching.

阴间和灭亡，尚在耶和华眼前，何况世人的心呢？
Before the Lord are the underworld and destruction: how much more, then, the hearts of the children of men!

亵慢人不爱受责备。他也不就近智慧人。
The hater of authority has no love for teaching: he will not go to the wise.

心中喜乐，面带笑容。心里忧愁，灵被损伤。
A glad heart makes a shining face, but by the sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.

聪明人心求知识。愚昧人口吃愚昧。
The heart of the man of good sense goes in search of knowledge, but foolish things are the food of the unwise.

困苦人的日子，都是愁苦。心中欢畅的，常享丰筵。
All the days of the troubled are evil; but he whose heart is glad has an unending feast.

少有财宝，敬畏耶和华，强如多有财宝，烦乱不安。
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great wealth together with trouble.

吃素菜，彼此相爱，强如吃肥牛，彼此相恨。
Better is a simple meal where love is, than a fat ox and hate with it.

暴怒的人，挑启争端。忍怒的人，止息分争。
An angry man makes men come to blows, but he who is slow to get angry puts an end to fighting.

懒惰人的道，像荆棘的篱笆。正直人的路，是平坦的大道。
Thorns are round the way of the hater of work; but the road of the hard worker becomes a highway.

智慧子使父亲喜乐。愚昧人藐视母亲。
A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish man has no respect for his mother.

无知的人，以愚妄为乐。聪明的人，按正直而行。
Foolish behaviour is joy to the unwise; but a man of good sense makes his way straight.

不先商议，所谋无效。谋士众多，所谋乃成。
Where there are no wise suggestions, purposes come to nothing; but by a number of wise guides they are made certain.

口善应对，自觉喜乐。话合其时，何等美好。
A man has joy in the answer of his mouth: and a word at the right time, how good it is!

智慧人从生命的道上升，使他远离在下的阴间。
Acting wisely is the way of life, guiding a man away from the underworld.

耶和华必拆毁骄傲人的家。却要立定寡妇的地界。
The house of the man of pride will be uprooted by the Lord, but he will make safe the heritage of the widow.

恶谋为耶和华所憎恶。良言乃为纯净。
Evil designs are disgusting to the Lord, but the words of the clean-hearted are pleasing.

贪恋财利的，扰害己家。恨恶贿赂的，必得存活。
He whose desires are fixed on profit is a cause of trouble to his family; but he who has no desire for offerings will have life.

义人的心，思量如何回答。恶人的口，吐出恶言。
The heart of the upright gives thought to his answer; but from the mouth of the evil-doer comes a stream of evil things.

耶和华远离恶人。却听义人的祷告。
The Lord is far from sinners, but his ear is open to the prayer of the upright.

眼有光使心喜乐。好信息使骨滋润。
The light of the eyes is a joy to the heart, and good news makes the bones fat.

听从生命责备的，必常在智慧人中。
The man whose ear is open to the teaching of life will have his place among the wise.

弃绝管教的，轻看自己的生命。听从责备的，却得智慧。
He who will not be controlled by training has no respect for his soul, but he who gives ear to teaching will get wisdom.

敬畏耶和华，是智慧的训诲。尊荣以前，必有谦卑。
The fear of the Lord is the teaching of wisdom; and a low opinion of oneself goes before honour.

心中的谋算在乎人。舌头的应对，由于耶和华。
The designs of the heart are man's, but the answer of the tongue comes from the Lord.

人一切所行的，在自己眼中看为清洁。惟有耶和华衡量人心。
All a man's ways are clean to himself; but the Lord puts men's spirits into his scales.

你所作的，要交托耶和华，你所谋的，就必成立。
Put your works into the hands of the Lord, and your purposes will be made certain.

耶和华所造的，各适其用。就是恶人，也为祸患的日子所造。
The Lord has made everything for his purpose, even the sinner for the day of evil.

凡心里骄傲的，为耶和华所憎恶。虽然连手，他必不免受罚。
Everyone who has pride in his heart is disgusting to the Lord: he will certainly not go free from punishment.

因怜悯诚实，罪孽得赎。敬畏耶和华的，远离恶事。
By mercy and good faith evil-doing is taken away: and by the fear of the Lord men are turned away from evil.

人所行的若蒙耶和华喜悦，耶和华也使他的仇敌与他和好。
When a man's ways are pleasing to the Lord, he makes even his haters be at peace with him.

多有财利，行事不义，不如少有财利，行事公义。
Better is a little with righteousness, than great wealth with wrongdoing.

人心筹算自己的道路。惟耶和华指引他的脚步。
A man may make designs for his way, but the Lord is the guide of his steps.

王的嘴中有神语。审判之时，他的口，必不差错。
Decision is in the lips of the king: his mouth will not go wrong in judging.

公道的天平和秤，都属耶和华。囊中一切法码，都为他所定。
True measures and scales are the Lord's: all the weights of the bag are his work.

作恶为王所憎恶。因国位是靠公义坚立。
Evil-doing is disgusting to kings: for the seat of the ruler is based on righteousness.

公义的嘴，为王所喜悦。说正直话的，为王所喜爱。
Lips of righteousness are the delight of kings; and he who says what is upright is dear to him.

王的震怒，如杀人的使者。但智慧人能止息王怒。
The wrath of the king is like those who give news of death, but a wise man will put peace in place of it.

王的脸光，使人有生命。王的恩典，好像春云时雨。
In the light of the king's face there is life; and his approval is like a cloud of spring rain.

得智慧胜似得金子。选聪明强如选银子。
How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! and to get knowledge is more to be desired than silver.

正直人的道，是远离恶事。谨守己路的，是保全性命。
The highway of the upright is to be turned away from evil: he who takes care of his way will keep his soul.

骄傲在败坏以先，狂心在跌倒之前。
Pride goes before destruction, and a stiff spirit before a fall.

心里谦卑与穷乏人来往，强如将掳物与骄傲人同分。
Better it is to have a gentle spirit with the poor, than to take part in the rewards of war with men of pride.

谨守训言的，必得好处。倚靠耶和华的，便为有福。
He who gives attention to the law of right will get good; and whoever puts his faith in the Lord is happy.

心中有智慧，必称为通达人。嘴中的甜言，加增人的学问。
The wise-hearted will be named men of good sense: and by pleasing words learning is increased.

人有智慧就有生命的泉源。愚昧人必被愚昧惩治。
Wisdom is a fountain of life to him who has it; but the punishment of the foolish is their foolish behaviour.

智慧人的心，教训他的口，又使他的嘴，增长学问。
The heart of the wise man is the teacher of his mouth, and gives increased learning to his lips.

良言如同蜂房，使心觉甘甜，使骨得医治。
Pleasing words are like honey, sweet to the soul and new life to the bones.

有一条路，人以为正，至终成为死亡之路。
There is a way which seems straight before a man, but its end is the ways of death.

劳力人的胃口，使他劳力，因为他的口腹催逼他。
The desire of the working man is working for him, for his need of food is driving him on.

匪徒图谋奸恶，嘴上仿佛有烧焦的火。
A good-for-nothing man is a designer of evil, and in his lips there is a burning fire.

乖僻人播散分争。传舌的离间密友。
A man of twisted purposes is a cause of fighting everywhere: and he who says evil secretly makes trouble between friends.

强暴人诱惑邻舍，领他走不善之道。
A violent man puts desire of evil into his neighbour's mind, and makes him go in a way which is not good.

眼目紧合的，图谋乖僻，嘴唇紧闭的，成就邪恶。
He whose eyes are shut is a man of twisted purposes, and he who keeps his lips shut tight makes evil come about.

白发是荣耀的冠冕。在公义的道上，必能得着。
The grey head is a crown of glory, if it is seen in the way of righteousness.

不轻易发怒的，胜过勇士。治服己心的，强如取城。
He who is slow to be angry is better than a man of war, and he who has control over his spirit than he who takes a town.

签放在怀里。定事由耶和华。
A thing may be put to the decision of chance, but it comes about through the Lord.

设筵满屋，大家相争，不如有块干饼，大家相安。
Better a bit of dry bread in peace, than a house full of feasting and violent behaviour.

仆人办事聪明，必管辖贻羞之子，又在众子中，同分产业。
A servant who does wisely will have rule over a son causing shame, and will have his part in the heritage among brothers.

鼎为炼银，炉为炼金。惟有耶和华熬炼人心。
The heating-pot is for silver and the oven-fire for gold, but the Lord is the tester of hearts.

行恶的留心听奸诈之言。说谎的侧耳听邪恶之语。
A wrongdoer gives attention to evil lips, and a man of deceit gives ear to a damaging tongue.

戏笑穷人的，是辱没造他的主。幸灾乐祸的，必不免受罚。
Whoever makes sport of the poor puts shame on his Maker; and he who is glad because of trouble will not go free from punishment.

子孙为老人的冠冕。父亲是儿女的荣耀。
Children's children are the crown of old men, and the glory of children is their fathers.

愚顽人说美言本不相宜，何况君王说谎话呢？
Fair words are not to be looked for from a foolish man, much less are false lips in a ruler.

贿赂在馈送的人眼中，看为宝玉。随处运动，都得顺利。
An offering of money is like a stone of great price in the eyes of him who has it: wherever he goes, he does well.

遮掩人过的，寻求人爱。屡次挑错的，离间密友。
He who keeps a sin covered is looking for love; but he who keeps on talking of a thing makes division between friends.

一句责备话，深入聪明人的心，强如责打愚昧人一百下。
A word of protest goes deeper into one who has sense than a hundred blows into a foolish man.

恶人只寻背叛，所以必有严厉的使者，奉差攻击他。
An uncontrolled man is only looking for trouble, so a cruel servant will be sent against him.

宁可遇见丢崽子的母熊，不可遇见正行愚妄的愚昧人。
It is better to come face to face with a bear whose young ones have been taken away than with a foolish man acting foolishly.

以恶报善的，祸患必不离他的家。
If anyone gives back evil for good, evil will never go away from his house.

分争的起头，如水放开。所以在争闹之先，必当止息争竞。
The start of fighting is like the letting out of water: so give up before it comes to blows.

定恶人为义的，定义人为恶的，这都为耶和华所憎恶。
He who gives a decision for the evil-doer and he who gives a decision against the upright, are equally disgusting to the Lord.

愚昧人既无聪明，为何手拿价银买智慧呢？
How will money in the hand of the foolish get him wisdom, seeing that he has no sense?

朋友乃时常亲爱。弟兄为患难而生。
A friend is loving at all times, and becomes a brother in times of trouble.

在邻舍面前击掌作保，乃是无知的人。
A man without sense gives his hand in an agreement, and makes himself responsible before his neighbour.

喜爱争竞的，是喜爱过犯。高立家门的，乃自取败坏。
The lover of fighting is a lover of sin: he who makes high his doorway is looking for destruction.

心存邪僻的，寻不着好处。舌弄是非的，陷在祸患中。
Nothing good comes to him whose heart is fixed on evil purposes: and he who has an evil tongue will come to trouble.

生愚昧子的，必自愁苦。愚顽人的父，毫无喜乐。
He who has an unwise son gets sorrow for himself, and the father of a foolish son has no joy.

喜乐的心，乃是良药。忧伤的灵，使骨枯干。
A glad heart makes a healthy body, but a crushed spirit makes the bones dry.

恶人暗中受贿赂，为要颠倒判断。
A sinner takes an offering out of his robe, to get a decision for himself in a cause.

明哲人眼前有智慧。愚昧人眼望地极。
Wisdom is before the face of him who has sense; but the eyes of the foolish are on the ends of the earth.

愚昧子使父亲愁烦，使母亲忧苦。
A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitter pain to her who gave him birth.

刑罚义人为不善。责打君子为不义。
To give punishment to the upright is not good, or to give blows to the noble for their righteousness.

寡少言语的有知识。性情温良的有聪明。
He who has knowledge says little: and he who has a calm spirit is a man of good sense.

愚昧人若静默不言，也可算为智慧。闭口不说，也可算为聪明。
Even the foolish man, when he keeps quiet, is taken to be wise: when his lips are shut he is credited with good sense.

与众寡合的，独自寻求心愿，并恼恨一切真智慧。
He who keeps himself separate for his private purpose goes against all good sense.

愚昧人不喜爱明哲，只喜爱显露心意。
A foolish man has no pleasure in good sense, but only to let what is in his heart come to light.

恶人来，藐视随来。羞耻到，辱骂同到。
When the evil-doer comes, a low opinion comes with him, and with the loss of honour comes shame.

人口中的言语，如同深水。智慧的泉源，好像涌流的河水。
The words of a man's mouth are like deep waters: the fountain of wisdom is like a flowing stream.

瞻徇恶人的情面，偏断义人的案件，都为不善。
To have respect for the person of the evil-doer is not good, or to give a wrong decision against the upright.

愚昧人张嘴启争端，开口招鞭打。
A foolish man's lips are a cause of fighting, and his mouth makes him open to blows.

愚昧人的口，自取败坏。他的嘴，是他生命的网罗。
The mouth of a foolish man is his destruction, and his lips are a net for his soul.

传舌人的言语，如同美食，深入人的心腹。
The words of one who says evil of his neighbour secretly are like sweet food, and go down into the inner parts of the stomach.

作工懈怠的，与浪费人为弟兄。
He who does not give his mind to his work is brother to him who makes destruction.

耶和华的名，是坚固台。义人奔入，便得安稳。
The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the upright man running into it is safe.

富足人的财物，是他的坚城，在他心想，犹如高墙。
The property of a man of wealth is his strong town, and it is as a high wall in the thoughts of his heart.

败坏之先，人心骄傲。尊荣以前，必有谦卑。
Before destruction the heart of man is full of pride, and before honour goes a gentle spirit.

未曾听完先回答的，便是他的愚昧，和羞辱。
To give an answer before hearing is a foolish thing and a cause of shame.

人有疾病，心能忍耐。心灵忧伤，谁能承当呢？
The spirit of a man will be his support when he is ill; but how may a broken spirit be lifted up?

聪明人的心得知识。智慧人的耳求知识。
The heart of the man of good sense gets knowledge; the ear of the wise is searching for knowledge.

人的礼物，为他开路，引他到高位的人面前。
A man's offering makes room for him, letting him come before great men.

先诉情由的，似乎有理。但邻舍来到，就察出实情。
The man who first puts his cause before the judge seems to be in the right; but then his neighbour comes and puts his cause in its true light.

掣签能止息争竞，也能解散强胜的人。
The decision of chance puts an end to argument, parting the strong.

弟兄结怨，劝他和好，比取坚固城还难。这样的争竞，如同坚寨的门闩。
A brother wounded is like a strong town, and violent acts are like a locked tower.

人口中所结的果子，必充满肚腹。他嘴所出的，必使他饱足。
With the fruit of a man's mouth his stomach will be full; the produce of his lips will be his in full measure.

生死在舌头的权下。喜爱他的，必吃他所结的果子。
Death and life are in the power of the tongue; and those to whom it is dear will have its fruit for their food.

得着贤妻的，是得着好处，也是蒙了耶和华的恩惠。
Whoever gets a wife gets a good thing, and has the approval of the Lord.

贫穷人说哀求的话。富足人用威吓的话回答。
The poor man makes requests for grace, but the man of wealth gives a rough answer.

滥交朋友的，自取败坏。但有一朋友，比弟兄更亲密。
There are friends who may be a man's destruction, but there is a lover who keeps nearer than a brother.

行为纯正的贫穷人，胜过乖谬愚妄的富足人。
Better is the poor man whose ways are upright, than the man of wealth whose ways are twisted.

心无知识的，乃为不善。脚步急快的难免犯罪。
Further, without knowledge desire is not good; and he who is over-quick in acting goes out of the right way.

人的愚昧，倾败他的道。他的心也抱怨耶和华。
By his foolish behaviour a man's ways are turned upside down, and his heart is bitter against the Lord.

财物使朋友增多。但穷人朋友远离。
Wealth makes a great number of friends; but the poor man is parted from his friend.

作假见证的，必不免受罚。吐出谎言的，终不能逃脱。
A false witness will not go without punishment, and the breather out of deceit will not go free.

好施散的，有多人求他的恩情。爱送礼的，人都为他的朋友。
Great numbers will make attempts to get the approval of a ruler: and every man is the special friend of him who has something to give.

贫穷人弟兄都恨他，何况他的朋友，更远离他。他用言语追随，他们却走了。
All the brothers of the poor man are against him: how much more do his friends go far from him! ...

得着智慧的，爱惜生命，保守聪明的，必得好处。
He who gets wisdom has love for his soul: he who keeps good sense will get what is truly good.

作假见证的，不免受罚。吐出谎言的，也必灭亡。
A false witness will not go without punishment, and the breather out of deceit will be cut off.

愚昧人宴乐度日，是不合宜的，何况仆人管辖王子呢？
Material comfort is not good for the foolish; much less for a servant to be put over rulers.

人有见识，就不轻易发怒。宽恕人的过失，便是自己的荣耀。
A man's good sense makes him slow to wrath, and the overlooking of wrongdoing is his glory.

王的忿怒，好像狮子吼叫。他的恩典，却如草上的甘露。
The king's wrath is like the loud cry of a lion, but his approval is like dew on the grass.

愚昧的儿子，是父亲的祸患。妻子的争吵，如雨连连滴漏。
A foolish son is the destruction of his father; and the bitter arguments of a wife are like drops of rain falling without end.

房屋钱财。是祖宗所遗留的。惟有贤慧的妻，是耶和华所赐的。
House and wealth are a heritage from fathers, but a wife with good sense is from the Lord.

懒惰使人沉睡。懈怠的人，必受饥饿。
Hate of work sends deep sleep on a man: and he who has no industry will go without food.

谨守诫命的，保全生命。轻忽己路的，必致死亡。
He who keeps the law keeps his soul; but death will be the fate of him who takes no note of the word.

怜悯贫穷的，就是借给耶和华。他的善行，耶和华必偿还。
He who has pity on the poor gives to the Lord, and the Lord will give him his reward.

趁有指望，管教你的儿子。你的心不可任他死亡。
Give your son training while there is hope; let not your heart be purposing his death.

暴怒的人，必受刑罚。你若救他，必须再救。
A man of great wrath will have to take his punishment: for if you get him out of trouble you will have to do it again.

你要听劝教，受训诲，使你终久有智慧。
Let your ear be open to suggestion and take teaching, so that at the end you may be wise.

人心多有计谋。惟有耶和华的筹算，才能立定。
A man's heart may be full of designs, but the purpose of the Lord is unchanging.

施行仁慈的，令人爱慕。穷人强如说谎言的。
The ornament of a man is his mercy, and a poor man is better than one who is false.

敬畏耶和华的，得着生命。他必恒久知足，不遭祸患。
The fear of the Lord gives life: and he who has it will have need of nothing; no evil will come his way.

懒惰人放手在盘子里。就是向口撤回，他也不肯。
The hater of work puts his hand deep into the basin, and will not even take it to his mouth again.

鞭打亵慢人，愚蒙人必长见识。责备明哲人，他就明白知识。
When blows overtake the man of pride, the simple will get sense; say sharp words to the wise, and knowledge will be made clear to him.

虐待父亲，撵出母亲的，是贻羞致辱之子。
He who is violent to his father, driving away his mother, is a son causing shame and a bad name.

我儿，不可听了教训，而又偏离知识的言语。
A son who no longer gives attention to teaching is turned away from the words of knowledge.

匪徒作见证戏笑公平。恶人的口吞下罪孽。
A good-for-nothing witness makes sport of the judge's decision: and the mouth of evil-doers sends out evil like a stream.

刑罚是为亵慢人预备的。鞭打是为愚昧人的背预备的。
Rods are being made ready for the man of pride, and blows for the back of the foolish.

酒能使人亵慢，浓酒使人喧嚷。凡因酒错误的，就无智慧。
Wine makes men foolish, and strong drink makes men come to blows; and whoever comes into error through these is not wise.

王的威吓，如同狮子吼叫。惹动他怒的，是自害己命。
The wrath of a king is like the loud cry of a lion: he who makes him angry does wrong against himself.

远离分争，是人的尊荣。愚妄人都爱争闹。
It is an honour for a man to keep from fighting, but the foolish are ever at war.

懒惰人因冬寒不肯耕种。到收割的时候，他必讨饭，而无所得。
The hater of work will not do his ploughing because of the winter; so at the time of grain-cutting he will be requesting food and will get nothing.

人心怀藏谋略，好像深水。惟明哲人，才能汲引出来。
The purpose in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of good sense will get it out.

人多述说自己的仁慈。但忠信人谁能遇着呢？
Most men make no secret of their kind acts: but where is a man of good faith to be seen?

行为纯正的义人，他的子孙，是有福的。
An upright man goes on in his righteousness: happy are his children after him!

王坐在审判的位上，以眼目驱散诸恶。
A king on the seat of judging puts to flight all evil with his eyes.

谁能说，我洁净了我的心。我脱净了我的罪。
Who is able to say, I have made my heart clean, I am free from my sin?

两样的法码，两样的升斗，都为耶和华所憎恶。
Unequal weights and unequal measures, they are all disgusting to the Lord.

孩童的动作，是清洁，是正直，都显明他的本性。
Even a child may be judged by his doings, if his work is free from sin and if it is right.

能听的耳，能看的眼，都是耶和华所造的。
The hearing ear and the seeing eye are equally the Lord's work.

不要贪睡，免致贫穷。眼要睁开，你就吃饱。
Do not be a lover of sleep, or you will become poor: keep your eyes open, and you will have bread enough.

买物的说，不好，不好。及至买去，他便自夸。
A poor thing, a poor thing, says he who is giving money for goods: but when he has gone on his way, then he makes clear his pride in what he has got.

有金子，和许多珍珠。（或作红宝石）惟有知识的嘴，乃为贵重的珍宝。
There is gold and a store of corals: but the lips of knowledge are a jewel of great price.

谁为生人作保，就拿谁的衣服。谁为外人作保，谁就要承当。
Take a man's clothing if he makes himself responsible for a strange man, and get an undertaking from him who gives his word for strange men.

以虚谎而得的食物，人觉甘甜。但后来他的口，必充满尘沙。
Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but after, his mouth will be full of sand.

计谋都凭筹算立定。打仗要凭智谋。
Every purpose is put into effect by wise help: and by wise guiding make war.

往来传舌的，泄漏密事。大张嘴的不可与他结交。
He who goes about talking of the business of others gives away secrets: so have nothing to do with him whose lips are open wide.

咒骂父母的，他的灯必灭，变为漆黑的黑暗。
If anyone puts a curse on his father or his mother, his light will be put out in the blackest night.

起初速得的产业，终久却不为福。
A heritage may be got quickly at first, but the end of it will not be a blessing.

你不要说，我要以恶报恶。要等候耶和华，他必拯救你。
Do not say, I will give punishment for evil: go on waiting for the Lord, and he will be your saviour.

两样的法码，为耶和华所憎恶。诡诈的天平，也为不善。
Unequal weights are disgusting to the Lord, and false scales are not good.

人的脚步，为耶和华所定。人岂能明白自己的路呢？
A man's steps are of the Lord; how then may a man have knowledge of his way?

人冒失说，这是圣物，许愿之后才查问，就是自陷网罗。
It is a danger to a man to say without thought, It is holy, and, after taking his oaths, to be questioning if it is necessary to keep them.

智慧的王，簸散恶人，用碌碡滚轧他们。
A wise king puts evil-doers to flight, and makes their evil-doing come back on them.

人的灵是耶和华的灯，鉴察人的心腹。
The Lord keeps watch over the spirit of man, searching all the deepest parts of the body.

王因仁慈和诚实，得以保全他的国位，也因仁慈立稳。
Mercy and good faith keep the king safe, and the seat of his power is based on upright acts.

强壮乃少年人的荣耀。白发为老年人的尊荣。
The glory of young men is their strength, and the honour of old men is their grey hairs.

鞭伤除净人的罪恶。责打能入人的心腹。
By the wounds of the rod evil is taken away, and blows make clean the deepest parts of the body.

王的心在耶和华手中，好像陇沟的水，随意流转。
The king's heart in the hands of the Lord is like the water streams, and by him it is turned in any direction at his pleasure.

人所行的，在自己眼中都看为正，惟有耶和华衡量人心。
Every way of a man seems right to himself, but the Lord is the tester of hearts.

行仁义公平，比献祭更蒙耶和华悦纳。
To do what is right and true is more pleasing to the Lord than an offering.

恶人发达，眼高心傲，这乃是罪。（发达原文作灯）
A high look and a heart of pride, *** of the evil-doer is sin.

殷勤筹划的，足致丰裕。行事急躁的，都必缺乏。
The purposes of the man of industry have their outcome only in wealth; but one who is over-quick in acting will only come to be in need.

用诡诈之舌求财的，就是自己取死。所得之财，乃是吹来吹去的浮云。
He who gets stores of wealth by a false tongue, is going after what is only breath, and searching for death.

恶人的强暴，必将自己扫除。因他们不肯按公平行事。
By their violent acts the evil-doers will be pulled away, because they have no desire to do what is right.

负罪之人的路，甚是弯曲。至于清洁的人，他所行的乃是正直。
Twisted is the way of him who is full of crime; but as for him whose heart is clean, his work is upright.

宁可住在房顶的角上，不在宽阔的房屋，与争吵的妇人同住。
It is better to be living in an angle of the house-top, than with a bitter-tongued woman in a wide house.

恶人的心，乐人受祸。他眼并不怜恤邻舍。
The desire of the evil-doer is fixed on evil: he has no kind feeling for his neighbour.

亵慢的人受刑罚，愚蒙的人就得智慧。智慧人受训诲，便得知识。
When the man of pride undergoes punishment, the simple man gets wisdom; and by watching the wise he gets knowledge.

义人思想恶人的家，知道恶人倾倒，必至灭亡。
The Upright One, looking on the house of the evil-doer, lets sinners be overturned to their destruction.

塞耳不听穷人哀求的，他将来呼吁也不蒙应允。
He whose ears are stopped at the cry of the poor, will himself get no answer to his cry for help.

暗中送的礼物，挽回怒气。怀中搋的贿赂，止息暴怒。
By a secret offering wrath is turned away, and the heat of angry feelings by money in the folds of the robe.

秉公行义，使义人喜乐，使作孽的人败坏。
It is a joy to the good man to do right, but it is destruction to the workers of evil.

迷离通达道路的，必住在阴魂的会中。
The wanderer from the way of knowledge will have his resting-place among the shades.

爱宴乐的，必致穷乏。好酒爱膏油的，必不富足。
The lover of pleasure will be a poor man: the lover of wine and oil will not get wealth.

恶人作了义人的赎价。奸诈人代替正直人。
The evil-doer will be given as a price for the life of the good man, and the worker of deceit in the place of the upright.

宁可住在旷野，不与争吵使气的妇人同住。
It is better to be living in a waste land, than with a bitter-tongued and angry woman.

智慧人家中积蓄宝物膏油。愚昧人随得来随吞下。
There is a store of great value in the house of the wise, but it is wasted by the foolish man.

追求公义仁慈的，就寻得生命，公义，和尊荣。
He who goes after righteousness and mercy will get life, righteousness, and honour.

智慧人爬上勇士的城墙，倾覆他所倚靠的坚垒。
A wise man goes up into the town of the strong ones, and overcomes its strength in which they put their faith.

谨守口与舌的，就保守自己免受灾难。
He who keeps watch over his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles.

心骄气傲的人，名叫亵慢。他行事狂妄，都出于骄傲。
The man of pride, lifted up in soul, is named high-hearted; he is acting in an outburst of pride.

懒惰人的心愿，将他杀害，因为他手不肯作工。
The desire of the hater of work is death to him, for his hands will do no work.

有终日贪得无餍的，义人施舍而不吝惜。
All the day the sinner goes after his desire: but the upright man gives freely, keeping nothing back.

恶人的祭物是可憎的，何况他存恶意来献呢？
The offering of evil-doers is disgusting: how much more when they give it with an evil purpose!

作假见证的必灭亡，惟有听真情而言的，其言长存。
A false witness will be cut off, ...

恶人脸无羞耻，正直人行事坚定。
The evil-doer makes his face hard, but as for the upright, he gives thought to his way.

没有人能以智慧，聪明，谋略，敌挡耶和华。
Wisdom and knowledge and wise suggestions are of no use against the Lord.

马是为打仗之日预备的。得胜乃在乎耶和华。
The horse is made ready for the day of war, but power to overcome is from the Lord.

美名胜过大财，恩宠强如金银。
A good name is more to be desired than great wealth, and to be respected is better than silver and gold.

富户穷人，在世相遇，都为耶和华所造。
The man of wealth and the poor man come face to face: the Lord is the maker of them all.

通达人见祸藏躲。愚蒙人前往受害。
The sharp man sees the evil and takes cover: the simple go straight on and get into trouble.

敬畏耶和华心存谦卑，就得富有，尊荣，生命，为赏赐。
The reward of a gentle spirit and the fear of the Lord is wealth and honour and life.

乖僻人的路上，有荆棘和网罗。保守自己生命的。必要远离。
Thorns and nets are in the way of the twisted: he who keeps watch over his soul will be far from them.

教养孩童，使他走当行的道，就是到老他也不偏离。
If a child is trained up in the right way, even when he is old he will not be turned away from it.

富户管辖穷人，欠债的是债主的仆人。
The man of wealth has rule over the poor, and he who gets into debt is a servant to his creditor.

撒罪孽的，必收灾祸。他逞怒的杖，也必废掉。
By planting the seed of evil a man will get in the grain of sorrow, and the rod of his wrath will be broken.

眼目慈善的，就必蒙福。因他将食物分给穷人。
He who is kind will have a blessing, for he gives of his bread to the poor.

赶出亵慢人，争端就消除，分争和羞辱，也必止息。
Send away the man of pride, and argument will go out; truly fighting and shame will come to an end.

喜爱清心的人，因他嘴上的恩言，王必与他为友。
He whose heart is clean is dear to the Lord; for the grace of his lips the king will be his friend.

耶和华的眼目，眷顾聪明人。却倾败奸诈人的言语。
The eyes of the Lord keep knowledge, but by him the acts of the false man will be overturned.

懒惰人说，外头有狮子，我在街上，就必被杀。
The hater of work says, There is a lion outside: I will be put to death in the streets.

淫妇的口为深坑，耶和华所憎恶的，必陷在其中。
The mouth of strange women is a deep hole: he with whom the Lord is angry will go down into it.

愚蒙迷住孩童的心，用管教的杖可以远远赶除。
Foolish ways are deep-seated in the heart of a child, but the rod of punishment will send them far from him.

欺压贫穷为要利己的，并送礼与富户的，都必缺乏。
He who is cruel to the poor for the purpose of increasing his profit, and he who gives to the man of wealth, will only come to be in need.

你须侧耳听受智慧人的言语，留心领会我的知识，
Let your ear be bent down for hearing my words, and let your heart give thought to knowledge.

你若心中存记，嘴上咬定，这便为美。
For it is a delight to keep them in your heart, to have them ready on your lips.

我今日以此特特指教你，为要使你倚靠耶和华。
So that your faith may be in the Lord, I have made them clear to you this day, even to you.

谋略和知识的美事，我岂没有写给你吗？
Have I not put in writing for you thirty sayings, with wise suggestions and knowledge,

要使你知道真言的实理，你好将真言回覆那打发你来的人。
To make you see how certain are true words, so that you may give a true answer to those who put questions to you?

贫穷人，你不可因他贫穷，就抢夺他的物。也不可在城门口欺压困苦人。
Do not take away the property of the poor man because he is poor, or be cruel to the crushed ones when they come before the judge:

因耶和华必为他辨屈。抢夺他的，耶和华必夺取那人的命。
For the Lord will give support to their cause, and take the life of those who take their goods.

好生气的人，不可与他结交。暴怒的人，不可与他来往。
Do not be friends with a man who is given to wrath; do not go in the company of an angry man:

恐怕你效法他的行为，自己就陷在网罗里。
For fear of learning his ways and making a net ready for your soul.

不要与人击掌，不要为欠债的作保。
Be not one of those who give their hands in an agreement, or of those who make themselves responsible for debts:

你若没有什么偿还，何必使人夺去你睡卧的床呢？
If you have nothing with which to make payment, he will take away your bed from under you.

你先祖所立的地界，你不可挪移。
Let not the old landmark be moved which your fathers have put in place.

你看见办事殷勤的人吗？他必站在君王面前，必不站在下贱人面前。
Have you seen a man who is expert in his business? he will take his place before kings; his place will not be among low persons.

你若与官长坐席，要留意在你面前的是谁。
When you take your seat at the feast with a ruler, give thought with care to what is before you;

你若是贪食的，就当拿刀放在喉咙上。
And put a knife to your throat, if you have a strong desire for food.

不可贪恋他的美食，因为是哄人的食物。
Have no desire for his delicate food, for it is the bread of deceit.

不要劳碌求富。休仗自己的聪明。
Take no care to get wealth; let there be an end to your desire for money.

你岂要定睛在虚无的钱财上吗？因钱财必长翅膀，如鹰向天飞去。
Are your eyes lifted up to it? it is gone: for wealth takes to itself wings, like an eagle in flight up to heaven.

不要吃恶眼人的饭。也不要贪他的美味。
Do not take the food of him who has an evil eye, or have any desire for his delicate meat:

因为他心怎样思量，他为人就是怎样。他虽对你说，请吃，请喝。他的心却与你相背。
For as the thoughts of his heart are, so is he: Take food and drink, he says to you; but his heart is not with you.

你所吃的那点食物，必吐出来。你所说的甘美言语，也必落空。
The food which you have taken will come up again, and your pleasing words will be wasted.

你不要说话给愚昧人听。因他必藐视你智慧的言语。
Say nothing in the hearing of a foolish man, for he will put no value on the wisdom of your words.

不可挪移古时的地界。也不可侵入孤儿的田地。
Do not let the landmark of the widow be moved, and do not go into the fields of those who have no father;

因他们的救赎主，大有能力。他必向你为他们辨屈。
For their saviour is strong, and he will take up their cause against you.

你要留心领受训诲。侧耳听从知识的言语。
Give your heart to teaching, and your ears to the words of knowledge.

不可不管教孩童，你用杖打他，他必不至于死。
Do not keep back training from the child: for even if you give him blows with the rod, it will not be death to him.

你要用杖打他，就可以救他的灵魂免下阴间。
Give him blows with the rod, and keep his soul safe from the underworld.

我儿你心若存智慧，我的心也甚欢喜。
My son, if your heart becomes wise, I, even I, will be glad in heart;

你的嘴若说正直话，我的心肠也必快乐。
And my thoughts in me will be full of joy when your lips say right things.

你心中不要嫉妒罪人。只要终日敬畏耶和华。
Have no envy of sinners in your heart, but keep in the fear of the Lord all through the day;

因为至终必有善报。你的指望也不至断绝。
For without doubt there is a future, and your hope will not be cut off.

我儿，你当听，当存智慧，好在正道上引导你的心。
Give ear, my son, and be wise, guiding your heart in the right way.

好饮酒的，好吃肉的，不要与他们来往。
Do not be among those who give themselves to wine-drinking, or among those who make themselves full with meat:

因为好酒贪食的，必致贫穷。好睡觉的，必穿破烂衣服。
For those who take delight in drink and feasting will come to be in need; and through love of sleep a man will be poorly clothed.

你要听从生你的父亲。你母亲老了，也不可藐视她。
Give ear to your father whose child you are, and do not keep honour from your mother when she is old.

你当买真理。就是智慧，训诲，和聪明，也都不可卖。
Get for yourself that which is true, and do not let it go for money; get wisdom and teaching and good sense.

义人的父亲，必大得快乐。人生智慧的儿子，必因他欢喜。
The father of the upright man will be glad, and he who has a wise child will have joy because of him.

你要使父母欢喜。使生你的快乐。
Let your father and your mother be glad, let her who gave you birth have joy.

我儿，要将你的心归我。你的眼目，也要喜悦我的道路。
My son, give me your heart, and let your eyes take delight in my ways.

妓女是深坑。外女是窄阱。
For a loose woman is a deep hollow, and a strange woman is a narrow water-hole.

她埋伏好像强盗，她使人中多有奸诈的。
Yes, she is waiting secretly like a beast for its food, and deceit by her is increased among men.

谁有祸患，谁有忧愁，谁有争斗，谁有哀叹，（或作怨言）谁无故受伤，谁眼目红赤。
Who says, Oh! who says, Ah! who has violent arguments, who has grief, who has wounds without cause, whose eyes are dark?

就是那流连饮酒，常去寻找调和酒的人。
Those who are seated late over the wine: those who go looking for mixed wine.

酒发红，在杯中闪烁，你不可观看，虽然下咽舒畅，终久是咬你如蛇，刺你如毒蛇。
Keep your eyes from looking on the wine when it is red, when its colour is bright in the cup, when it goes smoothly down:


In the end, its bite is like that of a snake, its wound like the wound of a poison-snake.

你眼必看见异怪的事。（异怪的事或作淫妇）你心必发出乖谬的话。
Your eyes will see strange things, and you will say twisted things.

你必像躺在海中，或像卧在桅杆上。
Yes, you will be like him who takes his rest on the sea, or on the top of a sail-support.

你必说，人打我，我却未受伤，人鞭打我，我竟不觉得，我几时清醒，我仍去寻酒。
They have overcome me, you will say, and I have no pain; they gave me blows without my feeling them: when will I be awake from my wine? I will go after it again.

你不要嫉妒恶人，也不要起意与他们相处。
Have no envy for evil men, or any desire to be with them:

因为他们的心，图谋强暴。他们的口谈论奸恶。
For the purposes of their hearts are destruction, and their lips are talking of trouble.

房屋因智慧建造，又因聪明立稳。
The building of a house is by wisdom, and by reason it is made strong:

其中因知识充满各样美好宝贵的财物。
And by knowledge its rooms are full of all dear and pleasing things.

智慧人大有能力。有知识的人，力上加力。
A wise man is strong; and a man of knowledge makes strength greater.

你去打仗，要凭智谋。谋士众多，人便得胜。
For by wise guiding you will overcome in war: and in a number of wise guides there is salvation.

智慧极高，非愚昧人所能及，所以在城门内，不敢开口。
Wisdom is outside the power of the foolish: he keeps his mouth shut in the public place.

设计作恶的，必称为奸人。
He whose purposes are bad will be named a man of evil designs.

愚妄人的思念，乃是罪恶。亵慢者为人所憎恶。
The purpose of the foolish is sin: and the hater of authority is disgusting to others.

你在患难之日若胆怯，你的力量就微小。
If you give way in the day of trouble, your strength is small.

人被拉到死地，你要解救。人将被杀，你须拦阻。
Be the saviour of those who are given up to death, and do not keep back help from those who are slipping to destruction.

你若说，这事我未曾知道。那衡量人心的，岂不明白吗？保守你命的，岂不知道吗？他岂不按各人所行的，报应各人吗？
If you say, See, we had no knowledge of this: does not the tester of hearts give thought to it? and he who keeps your soul, has he no knowledge of it? and will he not give to every man the reward of his work?

我儿，你要吃蜜，因为是好的。吃蜂房下滴的蜜，便觉甘甜。
My son, take honey, for it is good; and the flowing honey, which is sweet to your taste:

你心得了智慧，也必觉得如此。你若找着，至终必有善报。你的指望，也不至断绝。
So let your desire be for wisdom: if you have it, there will be a future, and your hope will not be cut off.

你这恶人，不要埋伏攻击义人的家。不要毁坏他安居之所。
Do not keep a secret watch, O evil-doer, against the fields of the upright man, or send destruction on his resting-place:

因为义人虽七次跌倒，仍必兴起。恶人却被祸患倾倒。
For an upright man, after falling seven times, will get up again: but trouble is the downfall of the evil.

你仇敌跌倒，你不要欢喜。他倾倒，你心不要快乐。
Do not be glad at the fall of your hater, and let not your heart have joy at his downfall:

恐怕耶和华看见就不喜悦，将怒气从仇敌身上转过来。
For fear that the Lord may see it, and it may be evil in his eyes, and his wrath may be turned away from him.

不要为作恶的心怀不平。也不要嫉妒恶人。
Do not be troubled because of evil-doers, or have envy of sinners:

因为恶人终不得善报。恶人的灯也必熄灭。
For there will be no future for the evil man; the light of sinners will be put out.

我儿，你要敬畏耶和华与君王。不要与反覆无常的人结交。
My son, go in fear of the Lord and the king: have nothing to do with those who are in high positions:

因为他们的灾难，必忽然而起。耶和华与君王所施行的毁灭，谁能知道呢？
For their downfall will come suddenly; and who has knowledge of the destruction of those in high positions?

以下也是智慧人的箴言。审判时看人情面，是不好的。
These are more sayings of the wise: To have respect for a person's position when judging is not good.

对恶人说，你是义人的，这人万民必咒诅，列邦必憎恶。
He who says to the evil-doer, You are upright, will be cursed by peoples and hated by nations.

责备恶人的，必得喜悦。美好的福，也必临到他。
But those who say sharp words to him will have delight, and a blessing of good will come on them.

应对正直的，犹如与人亲嘴。
He gives a kiss with his lips who gives a right answer.

你要在外头预备工料，在田间办理整齐，然后建造房屋。
Put your work in order outside, and make it ready in the field; and after that, see to the building of your house.

不可无故作见证，陷害邻舍。也不可用嘴欺骗人。
Do not be a violent witness against your neighbour, or let your lips say what is false.

不可说，人怎样待我，我也怎样待他，我必照他所行的报复他。
Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me; I will give the man the reward of his work.

我经过懒惰人的田地，无知人的葡萄园。
I went by the field of the hater of work, and by the vine-garden of the man without sense;

荆棘长满了地皮，刺草遮盖了田面，石墙也坍塌了。
And it was all full of thorns, and covered with waste plants, and its stone wall was broken down.

我看见就留心思想，我看着就领了训诲。
Then looking at it, I gave thought: I saw, and I got teaching from it.

再睡片时，打盹片时，抱着手躺卧片时，
A little sleep, a little rest, a little folding of the hands in sleep:

你的贫穷，就必如强盗速来，你的缺乏，仿佛拿兵器的人来到。
So loss will come on you like an outlaw, and your need like an armed man.

以下也是所罗门的箴言。是犹大王希西家的人所誊录的。
These are more wise sayings of Solomon, copied out by the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah.

将事隐秘，乃神的荣耀。将事察清，乃君王的荣耀。
It is the glory of God to keep a thing secret: but the glory of kings is to have it searched out.

天之高，地之厚，君王之心也测不透。
The heaven is high and the earth is deep, and the hearts of kings may not be searched out.

除去银子的渣滓，就有银子出来，银匠能以作器皿。
Take away the waste from silver, and a vessel will come out for the silver-worker.

除去王面前的恶人，国位就靠公义坚立。
Take away evil-doers from before the king, and the seat of his power will be made strong in righteousness.

不要在王面前妄自尊大。不要在大人的位上站立。
Do not take glory for yourself before the king, and do not put yourself in the place of the great:

宁可有人说，请你上来，强如在你觐见的王子面前，叫你退下。
For it is better to have it said to you, Come up here; than for you to be put down in a lower place before the ruler.

不要冒失出去与人争竞，免得至终被他羞辱，你就不知道怎样行了。
Do not be quick to go to law about what you have seen, for what will you do in the end, when your neighbour has put you to shame?

你与邻舍争讼，要与他一人辩论。不可泄漏人的密事。
Have a talk with your neighbour himself about your cause, but do not give away the secret of another:

恐怕听见的人骂你，你的臭名就难以脱离。
Or your hearer may say evil of you, and your shame will not be turned away.

一句话说得合宜，就如金苹果在银网子里。
A word at the right time is like apples of gold in a network of silver.

智慧人的劝戒，在顺从的人耳中，好像金耳环，和精金的妆饰。
Like a nose-ring of gold and an ornament of the best gold, is a wise man who says sharp words to an ear ready to give attention.

忠信的使者，叫差他的人心里舒畅，就如在收割时，有冰雪的凉气。
As the cold of snow in the time of grain-cutting, so is a true servant to those who send him; for he gives new life to the soul of his master.

空夸赠送礼物的，好像无雨的风云。
As clouds and wind without rain, so is one who takes credit for an offering he has not given.

恒常忍耐，可以劝动君王。柔和的舌头，能折断骨头。
A judge is moved by one who for a long time undergoes wrongs without protest, and by a soft tongue even bone is broken.

你得了蜜吗？只可吃够而已。恐怕你过饱就呕吐出来。
If you have honey, take only as much as is enough for you; for fear that, being full of it, you may not be able to keep it down.

你的脚要少进邻舍的家，恐怕他厌烦你，恨恶你。
Let not your foot be frequently in your neighbour's house, or he may get tired of you, and his feeling be turned to hate.

作假见证陷害邻舍的，就是大槌，是利刀，是快箭。
One who gives false witness against his neighbour is a hammer and a sword and a sharp arrow.

患难时倚靠不忠诚的人，好像破坏的牙，错骨缝的脚。
Putting one's faith in a false man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth and a shaking foot.

对伤心的人唱歌，就如冷天脱衣服，又如碱上倒醋。
Like one who takes off clothing in cold weather and like acid on a wound, is he who makes melody to a sad heart.

你的仇敌，若饿了就给他饭吃。若渴了就给他水喝。
If your hater is in need of food, give him bread; and if he is in need of drink, give him water:

因为你这样行，就是把炭火堆在他的头上。耶和华也必赏赐你。
For so you will put coals of fire on his head, and the Lord will give you your reward.

北风生雨，谗谤人的舌头也生怒容。
As the north wind gives birth to rain, so is an angry face caused by a tongue saying evil secretly.

宁可住在房顶的角上，不在宽阔的房屋与争吵的妇人同住。
It is better to be living in an angle of the house-top, than with a bitter-tongued woman in a wide house.

有好消息从远方来，就如拿凉水给口渴的人喝。
As cold water to a tired soul, so is good news from a far country.

义人在恶人面前退缩，好像？？浑之泉，弄浊之井。
Like a troubled fountain and a dirty spring, is an upright man who has to give way before evil-doers.

吃蜜过多，是不好的。考究自己的荣耀，也是可厌的。
It is not good to take much honey: so he who is not looking for honour will be honoured.

人不制伏自己的心，好像毁坏的城邑，没有墙垣。
He whose spirit is uncontrolled is like an unwalled town which has been broken into.

夏天落雪，收割时下雨，都不相宜。愚昧人得尊荣，也是如此。
Like snow in summer and rain when the grain is being cut, so honour is not natural for the foolish.

麻雀往来，燕子翻飞，这样，无故地咒诅，也必不临到。
As the sparrow in her wandering and the swallow in her flight, so the curse does not come without a cause.

鞭子是为打马。辔头是为勒驴。刑杖是为打愚昧人的背。
A whip for the horse, a mouth-bit for the ass, and a rod for the back of the foolish.

不要照愚昧人的愚妄话回答他，恐怕你与他一样。
Do not give to the foolish man a foolish answer, or you will be like him.

要照愚昧人的愚妄话回答他，免得他自以为有智慧。
Give a foolish man a foolish answer, or he will seem wise to himself.

借愚昧人手寄信的，是砍断自己的脚，自受损害。（自受原文作喝）
He who sends news by the hand of a foolish man is cutting off his feet and drinking in damage.

瘸子的脚，空存无用。箴言在愚昧人的口中，也是如此。
The legs of one who has no power of walking are hanging loose; so is a wise saying in the mouth of the foolish.

将尊荣给愚昧人的，好像人把石子包在机弦里。
Giving honour to a foolish man is like attempting to keep a stone fixed in a cord.

箴言在愚昧人的口中，好像荆棘刺入醉汉的手。
Like a thorn which goes up into the hand of a man overcome by drink, so is a wise saying in the mouth of a foolish man.

雇愚昧人的，与雇过路人的，就像射伤众人的弓箭手。
Like an archer wounding all who go by, is a foolish man overcome by drink.

愚昧人行愚妄事，行了又行，就如狗转过来吃它所吐的。
Like a dog going back to the food which he has not been able to keep down, is the foolish man doing his foolish acts over again.

你见自以为有智慧的人吗？愚昧人比他更有指望。
Have you seen a man who seems to himself to be wise? There is more hope for the foolish than for him.

懒惰人说，道上有猛狮，街上有壮狮。
The hater of work says, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets.

门在枢纽转动，懒惰人在床上也是如此。
A door is turned on its pillar, and the hater of work on his bed.

懒惰人放手在盘子里，就是向口撤回，也以为劳乏。
The hater of work puts his hand deep into the basin: lifting it again to his mouth is a weariness to him.

懒惰人看自己，比七个善于应对的人更有智慧。
The hater of work seems to himself wiser than seven men who are able to give an answer with good sense.

过路被事激动，管理不干己的争竞，好像人揪住狗耳。
He who gets mixed up in a fight which is not his business, is like one who takes a dog by the ears while it is going by.

人欺凌邻舍，却说，我岂不是戏耍吗？他就像疯狂的人，抛掷火把，利箭，与杀人的兵器。（杀人的兵器原文作死亡）
As one who is off his head sends about flaming sticks and arrows of death,


So is the man who gets the better of his neighbour by deceit, and says, Am I not doing so in sport?

火缺了柴，就必熄灭。无人传舌，争竞便止息。
Without wood, the fire goes out; and where there is no secret talk, argument is ended.

好争竞的人煽惑争端，就如余火加炭，火上加柴一样。
Like breath on coals and wood on fire, so a man given to argument gets a fight started.

传舌人的言语，如同美食，深入人的心腹。
The words of one who says evil of his neighbour secretly are like sweet food, they go down into the inner parts of the stomach.

火热的嘴，奸恶的心，好像银渣包的瓦器。
Smooth lips and an evil heart are like a vessel of earth plated with silver waste.

怨恨人的用嘴粉饰，心里却藏着诡诈。
With his lips the hater makes things seem what they are not, but deceit is stored up inside him;

他用甜言蜜语，你不可信他，因为他心中有七样可憎恶的。
When he says fair words, have no belief in him; for in his heart are seven evils:

他虽用诡诈遮掩自己的怨恨，他的邪恶必在会中显露。
Though his hate is covered with deceit, his sin will be seen openly before the meeting of the people.

挖陷坑的，自己必掉在其中。滚石头的，石头必反滚在他身上。
He who makes a hole in the earth will himself go falling into it: and on him by whom a stone is rolled the stone will come back again.

虚谎的舌，恨他所压伤的人。谄媚的口，败坏人的事。
A false tongue has hate for those who have clean hearts, and a smooth mouth is a cause of falling.

不要为明日自夸，因为一日要生何事，你尚且不能知道。
Do not make a noise about tomorrow, for you are not certain what a day's outcome may be.

要别人夸奖你，不可用口自夸。等外人称赞你，不可用嘴自称。
Let another man give you praise, and not your mouth; one who is strange to you, and not your lips.

石头重，沙土沉，愚妄人的恼怒，比这两样更重。
A stone has great weight, and sand is crushing; but the wrath of the foolish is of greater weight than these.

忿怒为残忍，怒气为狂澜，惟有嫉妒，谁能敌得住呢？
Wrath is cruel, and angry feeling an overflowing stream; but who does not give way before envy?

当面的责备，强如背地的爱情。
Better is open protest than love kept secret.

朋友加的伤痕，出于忠诚，仇敌连连亲嘴，却是多余。
The wounds of a friend are given in good faith, but the kisses of a hater are false.

人吃饱了，厌恶蜂房的蜜。人饥饿了，一切苦物都觉甘甜。
The full man has no use for honey, but to the man in need of food every bitter thing is sweet.

人离本处飘流，好像雀鸟离窝游飞。
Like a bird wandering from the place of her eggs is a man wandering from his station.

膏油与香料，使人心喜悦。朋友诚实的劝教，也是如此甘美。
Oil and perfume make glad the heart, and the wise suggestion of a friend is sweet to the soul.

你的朋友，和父亲的朋友，你都不可离弃。你遭难的日子，不要上弟兄的家去。相近的邻舍，强如远方的弟兄。
Do not give up your friend and your father's friend; and do not go into your brother's house in the day of your trouble: better is a neighbour who is near than a brother far off.

我儿，你要作智慧人，好叫我的心欢喜，使我可以回答那讥诮我的人。
My son, be wise and make my heart glad, so that I may give back an answer to him who puts me to shame.

通达人见祸藏躲。愚蒙人前往受害。
The sharp man sees the evil and takes cover: the simple go straight on and get into trouble.

谁为生人作保，就拿谁的衣服。谁为外女作保，谁就承当。
Take a man's clothing if he makes himself responsible for a strange man, and get an undertaking from him who gives his word for strange men.

清晨起来，大声给朋友祝福的，就算是咒诅他。
He who gives a blessing to his friend with a loud voice, getting up early in the morning, will have it put to his account as a curse.

大雨之日连连滴漏，和争吵的妇人一样。
Like an unending dropping on a day of rain is a bitter-tongued woman.

想拦阻她的，便是拦阻风，也是右手抓油。
He who keeps secret the secret of his friend, will get himself a name for good faith.

铁磨铁，磨出刃来。朋友相感，（原文作磨朋友的脸）也是如此。
Iron makes iron sharp; so a man makes sharp his friend.

看守无花果树的，必吃树上的果子。敬奉主人的，必得尊荣。
Whoever keeps a fig-tree will have its fruit; and the servant waiting on his master will be honoured.

水中照脸，彼此相符。人与人，心也相对。
Like face looking at face in water, so are the hearts of men to one another.

阴间和灭亡，永不满足。人的眼目，也是如此。
The underworld and Abaddon are never full, and the eyes of man have never enough.

鼎为炼银，炉为炼金，人的称赞也试炼人。
The heating-pot is for silver and the oven-fire for gold, and a man is measured by what he is praised for.

你虽用杵，将愚妄人与打碎的麦子一同捣在臼中，他的愚妄还是离不了他。
Even if a foolish man is crushed with a hammer in a vessel among crushed grain, still his foolish ways will not go from him.

你要详细知道你羊群的景况。留心料理你的牛群。
Take care to have knowledge about the condition of your flocks, looking well after your herds;

因为赀财不能永有。冠冕岂能存到万代。
For wealth is not for ever, and money does not go on for all generations.

干草割去，嫩草发现，山上的菜蔬，也被收敛。
The grass comes up and the young grass is seen, and the mountain plants are got in.

羊羔之毛，是为你作衣服。山羊是为作田地的价值。
The lambs are for your clothing, and the he-goats make the value of a field:

并有母山羊奶够你吃，也够你的家眷吃，且够养你的婢女。
There will be goats' milk enough for your food, and for the support of your servant-girls.

恶人虽无人追赶也逃跑，义人却胆壮像狮子。
The evil man goes running away when no man is after him, but the upright are without fear, like the lion.

邦国因有罪过，君王就多更换。因有聪明知识的人，国必长存。
Because of the sin of the land, its troubles are increased; but by a man of wisdom and knowledge they will be put out like a fire.

穷人欺压贫民，好像暴雨冲没粮食。
A man of wealth who is cruel to the poor is like a violent rain causing destruction of food.

违弃律法的，夸奖恶人。遵守律法的，却与恶人相争。
Those who have no respect for the law give praise to the evil-doer; but such as keep the law are against him.

坏人不明白公义。惟有寻求耶和华的，无不明白。
Evil men have no knowledge of what is right; but those who go after the Lord have knowledge of all things.

行为纯正的穷乏人，胜过行事乖僻的富足人。
Better is the poor man whose ways are upright, than the man of wealth whose ways are not straight.

谨守律法的是智慧之子。与贪食人作伴的，却羞辱其父。
He who keeps the law is a wise son, but he who keeps company with feasters puts shame on his father.

人以厚利加增财物，是给那怜悯穷人者积蓄的。
He who makes his wealth greater by taking interest, only gets it together for him who has pity on the poor.

转耳不听律法的，他的祈祷也为可憎。
As for the man whose ear is turned away from hearing the law, even his prayer is disgusting.

诱惑正直人行恶道的，必掉在自己的坑里。惟有完全人，必承受福分。
Anyone causing the upright to go wandering in an evil way, will himself go down into the hole he has made; but the upright will have good things for their heritage.

富足人自以为有智慧。但聪明的贫穷人，能将他查透。
The man of wealth seems to himself to be wise, but the poor man who has sense has a low opinion of him.

义人得志有大荣耀。恶人兴起人就躲藏。
When the upright do well, there is great glory; but when evil-doers are lifted up, men do not let themselves be seen.

遮掩自己罪过的，必不亨通。承认离弃罪过的，必蒙怜恤。
He who keeps his sins secret will not do well; but one who is open about them, and gives them up, will get mercy.

常存敬畏的，便为有福。心存刚硬的，必陷在祸患里。
Happy is the man in whom is the fear of the Lord at all times; but he whose heart is hard will come into trouble.

暴虐的君王辖制贫民。好像吼叫的狮子，觅食的熊。
Like a loud-voiced lion and a wandering bear, is an evil ruler over a poor people.

无知的君多行暴虐。以贪财为可恨的，必年长日久。
The prince who has no sense is a cruel ruler; but he who has no desire to get profit for himself will have long life.

背负流人血之罪的，必往坑里奔跑，谁也不可拦阻他。
One who has been the cause of a man's death will go in flight to the underworld: let no man give him help.

行动正直的，必蒙拯救。行事弯曲的，立时跌倒。
He whose ways are upright will be safe, but sudden will be the fall of him whose ways are twisted.

耕种自己田地的，必得饱食。追随虚浮的，足受穷乏。
By ploughing his land a man will have bread in full measure; but he who goes after good-for-nothing persons will be poor enough.

诚实人必多得福，想要急速发财的，不免受罚。
A man of good faith will have great blessing, but one attempting to get wealth quickly will not go free from punishment.

看人的情面，乃为不好。人因一块饼枉法，也为不好。
It is not good to have respect for a man's position: for a man will do wrong for a bit of bread.

人有恶眼想要急速发财，却不知穷乏必临到他身。
He who is ever desiring wealth goes running after money, and does not see that need will come on him.

责备人的，后来蒙人喜悦，多于那用舌头谄媚人的。
He who says words of protest to a man will later have more approval than one who says smooth words with his tongue.

偷窃父母的，说，这不是罪。此人就是与强盗同类。
He who takes from his father or his mother what is theirs by right, and says, It is no sin; is the same as a taker of life.

心中贪婪的，挑起争端。倚靠耶和华的，必得丰裕。
He who is ever desiring profit is a cause of fighting; but he who puts his faith in the Lord will be made fat.

心中自是的，便是愚昧人。凭智慧行事的，必蒙拯救。
He whose faith is in himself is foolish; but everyone walking wisely will be kept safe.

周济贫穷的，不致缺乏。佯为不见的，必多受咒诅。
He who gives to the poor will never be in need, but great curses will be on him who gives no attention to them.

恶人兴起，人就躲藏。恶人败亡，义人增多。
When evil-doers are lifted up, men take cover; but when destruction overtakes them, the upright are increased.

人屡次受责罚，仍然硬着颈项，他必顷刻败坏，无法可治。
A man hating sharp words and making his heart hard, will suddenly be broken and will not be made well again.

义人增多，民就喜乐。恶人掌权，民就叹息。
When the upright have power, the people are glad; when an evil man is ruler, grief comes on the people.

爱慕智慧的，使父亲喜乐。与妓女结交的，却浪费钱财。
A man who is a lover of wisdom is a joy to his father: but he who goes in the company of loose women is a waster of wealth.

王借公平，使国坚定。索要贿赂，使国倾败。
A king, by right rule, makes the land safe; but one full of desires makes it a waste.

谄媚邻舍的，就是设网罗绊他的脚。
A man who says smooth things to his neighbour is stretching out a net for his steps.

恶人犯罪，自陷网罗。惟独义人，欢呼喜乐。
In the steps of an evil man there is a net for him, but the upright man gets away quickly and is glad.

义人知道查明穷人的案。恶人没有聪明，就不得而知。
The upright man gives attention to the cause of the poor: the evil-doer gives no thought to it.

亵慢人煽惑通城。智慧人止息众怒。
Men of pride are the cause of violent acts in a town, but by wise men wrath is turned away.

智慧人与愚妄人相争，或怒，或笑，总不能使他止息。
If a wise man goes to law with a foolish man, he may be angry or laughing, but there will be no rest.

好流人血的，恨恶完全人。索取正直人的性命。
Men of blood are haters of the good man, and evil-doers go after his soul.

愚妄人怒气全发。智慧人忍气含怒。
A foolish man lets out all his wrath, but a wise man keeps it back quietly.

君王若听谎言，他一切臣仆都是奸恶。
If a ruler gives attention to false words, all his servants are evil-doers.

贫穷人，强暴人，在世相遇，他们的眼目，都蒙耶和华光照。
The poor man and his creditor come face to face: the Lord gives light to their eyes equally.

君王凭诚实判断穷人，他的国位，必永远坚立。
The king who is a true judge in the cause of the poor, will be safe for ever on the seat of his power.

杖打和责备，能加增智慧。放纵的儿子，使母亲羞愧。
The rod and sharp words give wisdom: but a child who is not guided is a cause of shame to his mother.

恶人加多，过犯也加多。义人必看见他们跌倒。
When evil men are in power, wrongdoing is increased; but the upright will have pleasure when they see their downfall.

管教你的儿子，他就使你得安息，也必使你心里喜乐。
Give your son training, and he will give you rest; he will give delight to your soul.

没有异象，（或作默示）民就放肆。惟遵守律法的，便为有福。
Where there is no vision, the people are uncontrolled; but he who keeps the law will be happy.

只用言语，仆人不肯受管教，他虽然明白，也不留意。
A servant will not be trained by words; for though the sense of the words is clear to him, he will not give attention.

你见言语急躁的人吗？愚昧人比他更有指望。
Have you seen a man who is quick with his tongue? There is more hope for a foolish man than for him.

人将仆人从小娇养，这仆人终久必成了他的儿子。
If a servant is gently cared for from his early years, he will become a cause of sorrow in the end.

好气的人，挑启争端。暴怒的人，多多犯罪。
An angry man is the cause of fighting, and a man given to wrath does much wrong.

人的高傲，必使他卑下。心里谦逊的，必得尊荣。
A man's pride will be the cause of his fall, but he who has a gentle spirit will get honour.

人与盗贼分赃，是恨恶自己的性命。他听见叫人发誓的声音，却不言语。
A man who takes part with a thief has hate for his soul; he is put under oath, but says nothing.

惧怕人的陷入网罗。惟有倚靠耶和华的，必得安稳。
The fear of man is a cause of danger: but whoever puts his faith in the Lord will have a safe place on high.

求王恩的人多。定人事乃在耶和华。
The approval of a ruler is desired by great numbers: but the decision in a man's cause comes from the Lord.

为非作歹的，被义人憎嫌。行事正直的，被恶人憎恶。
An evil man is disgusting to the upright, and he who is upright is disgusting to evil-doers.

雅基的儿子亚古珥的言语，就是真言。这人对以铁和乌甲说，
The words of Agur, the son of Jakeh, from Massa. The man says: I am full of weariness, O God, I am full of weariness; O God, I have come to an end:

我比众人更蠢笨，也没有人的聪明。
For I am more like a beast than any man, I have no power of reasoning like a man:

我没有学好智慧。也不认识至圣者。
I have not got wisdom by teaching, so that I might have the knowledge of the Holy One.

谁升天又降下来？谁聚风在掌握中？谁包水在衣服里？谁立定地的四极？他名叫什么？他儿子名叫什么？你知道吗？
Who has gone up to heaven and come down? who has taken the winds in his hands, prisoning the waters in his robe? by whom have all the ends of the earth been fixed? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if you are able to say?

神的言语，句句都是炼净的，投靠他的，他便作他们的盾牌。
Every word of God is tested: he is a breastplate to those who put their faith in him.

他的言语，你不可加添。恐怕他责备你，你就显为说谎言的。
Make no addition to his words, or he will make clear your error, and you will be seen to be false.

我求你两件事，在我未死之先，不要不赐给我。
I have made request to you for two things; do not keep them from me before my death:

求你使虚假和谎言远离我。使我也不贫穷，也不富足，赐给我需用的饮食。
Put far from me all false and foolish things: do not give me great wealth or let me be in need, but give me only enough food:

恐怕我饱足不认你，说，耶和华是谁呢？又恐怕我贫穷就偷窃，以致亵渎我神的名。
For fear that if I am full, I may be false to you and say, Who is the Lord? or if I am poor, I may become a thief, using the name of my God wrongly.

你不要向主人谗谤仆人。恐怕他咒诅你，你便算为有罪。
Do not say evil of a servant to his master, or he will put a curse on you, and you will get into trouble.

有一宗人，（宗原文作代下同）咒诅父亲，不给母亲祝福。
There is a generation who put a curse on their father, and do not give a blessing to their mother.

有一宗人，自以为清洁，却没有洗去自己的污秽。
There is a generation who seem to themselves to be free from sin, but are not washed from their unclean ways.

有一宗人，眼目何其高傲，眼皮也是高举。
There is a generation, O how full of pride are their eyes! O how their brows are lifted up!

有一宗人，牙如剑，齿如刀，要吞灭地上的困苦人，和世间的穷乏人。
There is a generation whose teeth are like swords, their strong teeth like knives, for the destruction of the poor from the earth, and of those who are in need from among men.

蚂蟥有两个女儿，常说，给呀给呀。有三样不知足的，连不说够的共有四样。
The night-spirit has two daughters, Give, give. There are three things which are never full, even four which never say, Enough:

就是阴间，和石胎，浸水不足的地，并火。
The underworld, and the woman without a child; the earth which never has enough water, and the fire which never says, Enough.

戏笑父亲，藐视而不听从母亲的，他的眼睛，必为谷中的乌鸦啄出来，为鹰雏所吃。
The eye which makes sport of a father, and sees no value in a mother when she is old will be rooted out by the ravens of the valley, and be food for the young eagles.

我所测不透的奇妙有三样，连我所不知道的共有四样。
There are three things, the wonder of which overcomes me, even four things outside my knowledge:

就是鹰在空中飞的道，蛇在磐石上爬的道，船在海中行的道，男与女交合的道。
The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a snake on a rock; the way of a ship in the heart of the sea; and the way of a man with a girl.

淫妇的道，也是这样，她吃了把嘴一擦，就说，我没有行恶。
This is the way of a false wife; she takes food, and, cleaning her mouth, says, I have done no wrong.

使地震动的有三样，连地担不起的共有四样。
For three things the earth is moved, and there are four which it will not put up with:

就是仆人作王。愚顽人吃饱。
A servant when he becomes a king; a man without sense when his wealth is increased;

丑恶的女子出嫁。婢女接续主母。
A hated woman when she is married; and a servant-girl who takes the place of her master's wife.

地上有四样小物，却甚聪明。
There are four things which are little on the earth, but they are very wise:

蚂蚁是无力之类，却在夏天预备粮食。
The ants are a people not strong, but they put by a store of food in the summer;

沙番是软弱之类，却在磐石中造房。
The conies are only a feeble people, but they make their houses in the rocks;

蝗虫没有君王，却分队而出。
The locusts have no king, but they all go out in bands;

守宫用爪抓墙，却住在王宫。
You may take the lizard in your hands, but it is in kings' houses.

步行威武的有三样，连行走威武的共有四样。
There are three things whose steps are good to see, even four whose goings are fair:

就是狮子乃百兽中最为猛烈，无所躲避的。
The lion, which is strongest among beasts, not turning from his way for any;

猎狗，公山羊，和无人能敌的君王。
The war-horse, and the he-goat, and the king when his army is with him.

你若行事愚顽，自高自傲，或是怀了恶念，就当用手捂口。
If you have done foolishly in lifting yourself up, or if you have had evil designs, put your hand over your mouth.

摇牛奶必成奶油。扭鼻子必出血。照样，激动怒气必起争端。
The shaking of milk makes butter, and the twisting of the nose makes blood come: so the forcing of wrath is a cause of fighting.

利慕伊勒王的言语，是他母亲教训他的真言。
The words of Lemuel, king of Massa: the teaching which he had from his mother.

我的儿阿，我腹中生的儿阿，我许愿得的儿阿，我当怎样教训你呢？
What am I to say to you, O Lemuel, my oldest son? and what, O son of my body? and what, O son of my oaths?

不要将你的精力给妇女，也不要有败坏君王的行为。
Do not give your strength to women, or your ways to that which is the destruction of kings.

利慕伊勒阿，君王喝酒，君王喝酒不相宜。王子说，浓酒在那里也不相宜。
It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to take wine, or for rulers to say, Where is strong drink?

恐怕喝了就忘记律例，颠倒一切困苦人的是非。
For fear that through drinking they may come to have no respect for the law, wrongly judging the cause of those who are in trouble.

可以把浓酒给将亡的人喝。把清酒给苦心的人喝。
Give strong drink to him who is near to destruction, and wine to him whose soul is bitter:

让他喝了，就忘记他的贫穷，不再记念他的苦楚。
Let him have drink, and his need will go from his mind, and the memory of his trouble will be gone.

你当为哑吧（或作不能自辨的）开口，为一切孤独的伸冤。
Let your mouth be open for those who have no voice, in the cause of those who are ready for death.

你当开口按公义判断，为困苦和穷乏的辨屈。
Let your mouth be open, judging rightly, and give right decisions in the cause of the poor and those in need.

才德的妇人，谁能得着呢？她的价值远胜过珍珠。
Who may make discovery of a woman of virtue? For her price is much higher than jewels.

她丈夫心里倚靠她，必不缺少利益。
The heart of her husband has faith in her, and he will have profit in full measure.

她一生使丈夫有益无损。
She does him good and not evil all the days of her life.

她寻找羊绒和麻，甘心用手作工。
She gets wool and linen, working at the business of her hands.

她好像商船从远方运粮来。
She is like the trading-ships, getting food from far away.

未到黎明她就起来，把食物分给家中的人。将当作的工分派婢女。
She gets up while it is still night, and gives meat to her family, and their food to her servant-girls.

她想得田地，就买来。用手所得之利，栽种葡萄园。
After looking at a field with care, she gets it for a price, planting a vine-garden with the profit of her work.

她以能力束腰，使膀臂有力。
She puts a band of strength round her, and makes her arms strong.

她觉得所经营的有利，她的灯终夜不灭。
She sees that her marketing is of profit to her: her light does not go out by night.

她手拿捻线竿。手把纺线车。
She puts her hands to the cloth-working rod, and her fingers take the wheel.

她张手周济困苦人，伸手帮补穷乏人。
Her hands are stretched out to the poor; yes, she is open-handed to those who are in need.

她不因下雪为家里的人担心，因为全家都穿着朱红衣服。
She has no fear of the snow for her family, for all those in her house are clothed in red.

她为自己制作绣花毯子，她的衣服，是细麻和紫色布作的。
She makes for herself cushions of needlework; her clothing is fair linen and purple.

她丈夫在城门口与本地的长老同坐，为众人所认识。
Her husband is a man of note in the public place, when he takes his seat among the responsible men of the land.

她作细麻布衣裳出卖。又将腰带卖与商家。
She makes linen robes and gets a price for them, and traders take her cloth bands for a price.

能力和威仪，是她的衣服。她想到日后的景况就喜笑。
Strength and self-respect are her clothing; she is facing the future with a smile.

她开口就发智慧。她舌上有仁慈的法则。
Her mouth is open to give out wisdom, and the law of mercy is on her tongue.

她观察家务，并不吃闲饭。
She gives attention to the ways of her family, she does not take her food without working for it.

她的儿女起来称她有福。她的丈夫也称赞她，
Her children get up and give her honour, and her husband gives her praise, saying,

说，才德的女子很多，惟独你超过一切。
Unnumbered women have done well, but you are better than all of them.

艳丽是虚假的。美容是虚浮的。惟敬畏耶和华的妇女，必得称赞。
Fair looks are a deceit, and a beautiful form is of no value; but a woman who has the fear of the Lord is to be praised.

愿她享受操作所得的。愿她的工作，在城门口荣耀她。
Give her credit for what her hands have made: let her be praised by her works in the public place.g-ships, getting food from far away.

未到黎明她就起来，把食物分给家中的人。将当作的工分派婢女。
She gets up while it is still night, and gives meat to her family, and their food to her servant-girls.

她想得田地，就买来。用手所得之利，栽种葡萄园。
After looking at a field with care, she gets it for a price, planting a vine-garden with the profit of her work.

她以能力束腰，使膀臂有力。
She puts a band of strength round her, and makes her arms strong.

她觉得所经营的有利，她的灯终夜不灭。
She sees that her marketing is of profit to her: her light does not go out by night.

她手拿捻线竿。手把纺线车。
She puts her hands to the cloth-working rod, and her fingers take the wheel.

她张手周济困苦人，伸手帮补穷乏人。
Her hands are stretched out to the poor; yes, she is open-handed to those who are in need.

她不因下雪为家里的人担心，因为全家都穿着朱红衣服。
She has no fear of the snow for her family, for all those in her house are clothed in red.

她为自己制作绣花毯子，她的衣服，是细麻和紫色布作的。
She makes for herself cushions of needlework; her clothing is fair linen and purple.

她丈夫在城门口与本地的长老同坐，为众人所认识。
Her husband is a man of note in the public place, when he takes his seat among the responsible men of the land.

她作细麻布衣裳出卖。又将腰带卖与商家。
She makes linen robes and gets a price for them, and traders take her cloth bands for a price.

能力和威仪，是她的衣服。她想到日后的景况就喜笑。
Strength and self-respect are her clothing; she is facing the future with a smile.

她开口就发智慧。她舌上有仁慈的法则。
Her mouth is open to give out wisdom, and the law of mercy is on her tongue.

她观察家务，并不吃闲饭。
She gives attention to the ways of her family, she does not take her food without working for it.

她的儿女起来称她有福。她的丈夫也称赞她，
Her children get up and give her honour, and her husband gives her praise, saying,

说，才德的女子很多，惟独你超过一切。
Unnumbered women have done well, but you are better than all of them.

艳丽是虚假的。美容是虚浮的。惟敬畏耶和华的妇女，必得称赞。
Fair looks are a deceit, and a beautiful form is of no value; but a woman who has the fear of the Lord is to be praised.

愿她享受操作所得的。愿她的工作，在城门口荣耀她。
Give her credit for what her hands have made: let her be praised by her works in the public place.