约伯记 Job

乌斯地有一个人名叫约伯。那人完全正直，敬畏神，远离恶事。
There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job. He was without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping himself far from evil.

他生了七个儿子，三个女儿。
And he had seven sons and three daughters.

他的家产有七千羊，三千骆驼，五百对牛，五百母驴，并有许多仆婢。这人在东方人中就为至大。
And of cattle he had seven thousand sheep and goats, and three thousand camels, and a thousand oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great number of servants. And the man was greater than any of the sons of the east.

他的儿子，按着日子，各在自己家里设摆筵宴，就打发人去，请了他们的三个姐妹来，与他们一同吃喝，
His sons regularly went to one another's houses, and every one on his day gave a feast: and at these times they sent for their three sisters to take part in their feasts with them.

筵宴的日子过了，约伯打发人去叫他们自洁。他清早起来，按着他们众人的数目献燔祭。因为他说，恐怕我儿子犯了罪，心中弃掉神。约伯常常这样行。
And at the end of their days of feasting, Job sent and made them clean, getting up early in the morning and offering burned offerings for them all. For, Job said, It may be that my sons have done wrong and said evil of God in their hearts. And Job did this whenever the feasts came round.

有一天，神的众子，来侍立在耶和华面前，撒但也来在其中。
And there was a day when the sons of the gods came together before the Lord, and the Satan came with them.

耶和华问撒但说，你从哪里来？撒但回答说，我从地上走来走去，往返而来。
And the Lord said to the Satan, Where do you come from? And the Satan said in answer, From wandering this way and that on the earth, and walking about on it.

耶和华问撒但说，你曾用心察看我的仆人约伯没有。地上再没有人像他完全正直，敬畏神，远离恶事。
And the Lord said to the Satan, Have you taken note of my servant Job, for there is no one like him on the earth, a man without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping himself far from evil?

撒但回答耶和华说，约伯敬畏神，岂是无故呢？
And the Satan said in answer to the Lord, Is it for nothing that Job is a god-fearing man?

你岂不是四面圈上篱笆，围护他和他的家，并他一切所有的吗？他手所做的都蒙你赐福。他的家产也在地上增多。
Have you yourself not put a wall round him and his house and all he has on every side, blessing the work of his hands, and increasing his cattle in the land?

你且伸手毁他一切所有的。他必当面弃掉你。
But now, put out your hand against all he has, and he will be cursing you to your face.

耶和华对撒但说，凡他所有的都在你手中。只是不可伸手加害于他。于是撒但从耶和华面前退去。
And the Lord said to the Satan, See, I give all he has into your hands, only do not put a finger on the man himself. And the Satan went out from before the Lord.

有一天，约伯的儿女正在他们长兄的家里，吃饭喝酒，
And there was a day when his sons and daughters were feasting in the house of their oldest brother,

有报信的来见约伯，说，牛正耕地，驴在旁边吃草。
And a man came to Job, and said, The oxen were ploughing, and the asses were taking their food by their side:

示巴人忽然闯来，把牲畜掳去，并用刀杀了仆人。惟有我一人逃脱，来报信给你。
And the men of Sheba came against them and took them away, putting the young men to the sword, and I was the only one who got away safe to give you the news.

他还说话的时候，又有人来说，神从天上降下火来，将群羊和仆人都烧灭了。惟有我一人逃脱，来报信给你。
And this one was still talking when another came, and said, The fire of God came down from heaven, burning up the sheep and the goats and the young men completely, and I was the only one who got away safe to give you the news.

他还说话的时候，又有人来说，迦勒底人分作三队忽然闯来，把骆驼掳去，并用刀杀了仆人。惟有我一人逃脱，来报信给你。
And this one was still talking when another came, and said, The Chaldaeans made themselves into three bands, and came down on the camels and took them away, putting the young men to the sword, and I was the only one who got away safe to give you the news.

他还说话的时候，又有人来说，你的儿女正在他们长兄的家里吃饭喝酒。
And this one was still talking when another came, and said, Your sons and your daughters were feasting together in their oldest brother's house,

不料，有狂风从旷野刮来，击打房屋的四角，房屋倒塌在少年人身上，他们就都死了。惟有我一人逃脱，来报信给你。
When a great wind came rushing from the waste land against the four sides of the house, and it came down on the young men, and they are dead; and I was the only one who got away safe to give you the news.

约伯便起来，撕裂外袍，剃了头，伏在地上下拜。
Then Job got up, and after parting his clothing and cutting off his hair, he went down on his face to the earth, and gave worship, and said,

说，我赤身出于母胎，也必赤身归回。赏赐的是耶和华，收取的也是耶和华。耶和华的名是应当称颂的。
With nothing I came out of my mother's body, and with nothing I will go back there; the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away; let the Lord's name be praised.

在这一切的事上约伯并不犯罪，也不以神为愚妄（或作也不妄评神）。
In all this Job did no sin, and did not say that God's acts were foolish.

又有一天，神的众子来侍立在耶和华面前，撒但也来在其中。
And there was a day when the sons of the gods came together before the Lord, and the Satan came with them.

耶和华问撒但说，你从哪里来？撒但回答说，我从地上走来走去，往返而来。
And the Lord said to the Satan, Where do you come from? And the Satan said in answer, From wandering this way and that on the earth, and walking about on it.

耶和华问撒但说，你曾用心察看我的仆人约伯没有。地上再没有人像他完全正直，敬畏神，远离恶事。你虽激动我攻击他，无故地毁灭他，他仍然持守他的纯正。
And the Lord said to the Satan, Have you taken note of my servant Job, for there is no one like him on the earth, a man without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping himself far from evil? and he still keeps his righteousness, though you have been moving me to send destruction on him without cause.

撒但回答耶和华说，人以皮代皮，情愿舍去一切所有的，保全性命。
And the Satan said in answer to the Lord, Skin for skin, all a man has he will give for his life.

你且伸手伤他的骨头和他的肉，他必当面弃掉你。
But now, if you only put your hand on his bone and his flesh, he will certainly be cursing you to your face.

耶和华对撒但说，他在你手中，只要存留他的性命。
And the Lord said to the Satan, See, he is in your hands, only do not take his life.

于是撒但从耶和华面前退去，击打约伯，使他从脚掌到头顶长毒疮。
And the Satan went out from before the Lord, and sent on Job an evil disease covering his skin from his feet to the top of his head.

约伯就坐在炉灰中，拿瓦片刮身体。
And he took a broken bit of a pot, and, seated in the dust, was rubbing himself with the sharp edge of it.

他的妻子对他说，你仍然持守你的纯正吗？你弃掉神，死了吧。
And his wife said to him, Are you still keeping your righteousness? Say a curse against God, and put an end to yourself.

约伯却对她说，你说话像愚顽的妇人一样。嗳，难道我们从神手里得福，不也受祸吗？在这一切的事上约伯并不以口犯罪。
And he said to her, You are talking like one of the foolish women. If we take the good God sends us, are we not to take the evil when it comes? In all this Job kept his lips from sin.

约伯的三个朋友提幔人以利法，书亚人比勒达，拿玛人琐法，听说有这一切的灾祸临到他身上，各人就从本处约会同来，为他悲伤，安慰他。
And Job's three friends had word of all this evil which had come on him. And they came every one from his place, Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. So they came together to a meeting-place, in order that they might go and make clear to Job their grief for him, and give him comfort.

他们远远地举目观看，认不出他来，就放声大哭。各人撕裂外袍，把尘土向天扬起来，落在自己的头上。
And lifting up their eyes when they were still far off, it did not seem that the man they saw was Job because of the change in him. And they gave way to bitter weeping, with signs of grief, and put dust on their heads.

他们就同他七天七夜坐在地上，一个人也不向他说句话，因为他极其痛苦。
And they took their seats on the earth by his side for seven days and seven nights: but no one said a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.

此后，约伯开口咒诅自己的生日，
Then, opening his mouth, and cursing the day of his birth,

说，愿我生的那日，和说怀了男胎的那夜都灭没。
Job made answer and said,


Let destruction take the day of my birth, and the night on which it was said, A man child has come into the world.

愿那日变为黑暗。愿神不从上面寻找它。愿亮光不照于其上。
That day--let it be dark; let not God take note of it from on high, and let not the light be shining on it;

愿黑暗和死荫索取那日。愿密云停在其上。愿日蚀恐吓它。
Let the dark and the black night take it for themselves; let it be covered with a cloud; let the dark shades of day send fear on it.

愿那夜被幽暗夺取，不在年中的日子同乐，也不入月中的数目。
That night--let the thick dark take it; let it not have joy among the days of the year; let it not come into the number of the months.

愿那夜没有生育，其间也没有欢乐的声音。
As for that night, let it have no fruit; let no voice of joy be sounded in it;

愿那咒诅日子且能惹动鳄鱼的，咒诅那夜。
Let it be cursed by those who put a curse on the day; who are ready to make Leviathan awake.

愿那夜黎明的星宿变为黑暗，盼亮却不亮，也不见早晨的光线（光线原文作眼皮）。
Let its morning stars be dark; let it be looking for light, but may it not have any; let it not see the eyes of the dawn.

因没有把怀我胎的门关闭，也没有将患难对我的眼隐藏。
Because it did not keep the doors of my mother's body shut, so that trouble might be veiled from my eyes.

我为何不出母胎而死。为何不出母腹绝气。
Why did death not take me when I came out of my mother's body, why did I not, when I came out, give up my last breath?

为何有膝接收我。为何有奶哺养我。
Why did the knees take me, or why the breasts that they might give me milk?

不然，我就早已躺卧安睡。
For then I might have gone to my rest in quiet, and in sleep have been in peace,

和地上为自己重造荒邱的君王，谋士。
With kings and the wise ones of the earth, who put up great houses for themselves;

或与有金子，将银子装满了房屋的王子一同安息。
Or with rulers who had gold, and whose houses were full of silver;

或像隐而未现，不到期而落的胎，归于无有，如同未见光的婴孩。
Or as a child dead at birth I might never have come into existence; like young children who have not seen the light.

在那里恶人止息搅扰，困乏人得享安息。
There the passions of the evil are over, and those whose strength has come to an end have rest.

被囚的人同得安逸，不听见督工的声音。
There the prisoners are at peace together; the voice of the overseer comes not again to their ears.

大小都在那里。奴仆脱离主人的辖制。
The small and the great are there, and the servant is free from his master.

受患难的人，为何有光赐给他呢？心中愁苦的人，为何有生命赐给他呢？
Why does he give light to him who is in trouble, and life to the bitter in soul;

他们切望死，却不得死。求死，胜于求隐藏的珍宝。
To those whose desire is for death, but it comes not; who are searching for it more than for secret wealth;

他们寻见坟墓就快乐，极其欢喜。
Who are glad with great joy, and full of delight when they come to their last resting-place;

人的道路既然遮隐，神又把他四面围困，为何有光赐给他呢？
To a man whose way is veiled, and who is shut in by God?

我未曾吃饭就发出叹息。我唉哼的声音涌出如水。
In place of my food I have grief, and cries of sorrow come from me like water.

因我所恐惧的临到我身，我所惧怕的迎我而来。
For I have a fear and it comes on me, and my heart is greatly troubled.

我不得安逸，不得平静，也不得安息，却有患难来到。
I have no peace, no quiet, and no rest; nothing but pain comes on me.

提幔人以利法回答说，
And Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and said,

人若想与你说话，你就厌烦吗？但谁能忍住不说呢？
If one says a word, will it be a weariness to you? but who is able to keep from saying what is in his mind?

你素来教导许多的人，又坚固软弱的手。
Truly, you have been a helper to others, and you have made feeble hands strong;

你的言语曾扶助那将要跌倒的人。你又使软弱的膝稳固。
He who was near to falling has been lifted up by your words, and you have given strength to bent knees.

但现在祸患临到你，你就昏迷，挨近你，你便惊惶。
But now it has come on you and it is a weariness to you; you are touched by it and your mind is troubled.

你的倚靠不是在你敬畏神吗？你的盼望不是在你行事纯正吗？
Is not your fear of God your support, and your upright way of life your hope?

请你追想，无辜的人有谁灭亡。正直的人在何处剪除。
Have you ever seen destruction come to an upright man? or when were the god-fearing ever cut off?

按我所见，耕罪孽，种毒害的人，都照样收割。
What I have seen is that those by whom trouble has been ploughed, and evil planted, get the same for themselves.

神一出气，他们就灭亡。神一发怒，他们就消没。
By the breath of God destruction takes them, and by the wind of his wrath they are cut off.

狮子的吼叫，和猛狮的声音，尽都止息。少壮狮子的牙齿，也都敲掉。
Though the noise of the lion and the sounding of his voice, may be loud, the teeth of the young lions are broken.

老狮子因绝食而死。母狮之子也都离散。
The old lion comes to his end for need of food, and the young of the she-lion go wandering in all directions.

我暗暗地得了默示。我耳朵也听其细微的声音。
A word was given to me secretly, and the low sound of it came to my ears.

在思念夜中，异象之间，世人沉睡的时候。
In troubled thoughts from visions of the night, when deep sleep comes on men,

恐惧，战兢临到我身，使我百骨打战。
Fear came on me and shaking, and my bones were full of trouble;

有灵从我面前经过，我身上的毫毛直立。
And a breath was moving over my face; the hair of my flesh became stiff:

那灵停住，我却不能辨其形状。有影像在我眼前。我在静默中听见有声音说，
Something was present before me, but I was not able to see it clearly; there was a form before my eyes: a quiet voice came to my ears, saying:

必死的人岂能比神公义吗？人岂能比造他的主洁净吗？
May a man be upright before God? or a man be clean before his Maker?

主不信靠他的臣仆，并且指他的使者为愚昧。
Truly, he puts no faith in his servants, and he sees error in his angels;

何况那住在土房，根基在尘土里，被蠹虫所毁坏的人呢？
How much more those living in houses of earth, whose bases are in the dust! They are crushed more quickly than an insect;

早晚之间，就被毁灭，永归无有，无人理会。
Between morning and evening they are completely broken; they come to an end for ever, and no one takes note.

他帐棚的绳索岂不从中抽出来呢？他死，且是无智慧而死。
If their tent-cord is pulled up, do they not come to an end, and without wisdom?

你且呼求，有谁答应你？诸圣者之中，你转向那一位呢？
Give now a cry for help; is there anyone who will give you an answer? and to which of the holy ones will you make your prayer?

忿怒害死愚妄人，嫉妒杀死痴迷人。
For wrath is the cause of death to the foolish, and he who has no wisdom comes to his end through passion.

我曾见愚妄人扎下根，但我忽然咒诅他的住处。
I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly the curse came on his house.

他的儿女远离稳妥的地步，在城门口被压，并无人搭救。
Now his children have no safe place, and they are crushed before the judges, for no one takes up their cause.

他的庄稼有饥饿的人吃尽了，就是在荆棘里的也抢去了。他的财宝有网罗张口吞灭了。
Their produce is taken by him who has no food, and their grain goes to the poor, and he who is in need of water gets it from their spring.

祸患原不是从土中出来。患难也不是从地里发生。
For evil does not come out of the dust, or trouble out of the earth;

人生在世必遇患难，如同火星飞腾。
But trouble is man's fate from birth, as the flames go up from the fire.

至于我，我必仰望神，把我的事情托付他。
But as for me, I would make my prayer to God, and I would put my cause before him:

他行大事不可测度，行奇事不可胜数。
Who does great things outside our knowledge, wonders without number:

降雨在地上，赐水于田里。
Who gives rain on the earth, and sends water on the fields:

将卑微的安置在高处，将哀痛的举到稳妥之地。
Lifting up those who are low, and putting the sad in a safe place;

破坏狡猾人的计谋，使他们所谋的不得成就。
Who makes the designs of the wise go wrong, so that they are unable to give effect to their purposes.

他叫有智慧的中了自己的诡计，使狡诈人的计谋速速灭亡。
He takes the wise in their secret designs, and the purposes of the twisted are cut off suddenly.

他们白昼遇见黑暗，午间摸索如在夜间。
In the daytime it becomes dark for them, and in the sunlight they go feeling about as if it was night.

神拯救穷乏人，脱离他们口中的刀，和强暴人的手。
But he keeps safe from their sword those who have no father, and the poor from the power of the strong.

这样，贫寒的人有指望，罪孽之辈必塞口无言。
So the poor man has hope, and the mouth of the evil-doer is stopped.

神所惩治的人是有福的。所以你不可轻看全能者的管教。
Truly, that man is happy who has training from the hand of God: so do not let your heart be shut to the teaching of the Ruler of all.

因为他打破，又缠裹。他击伤，用手医治。
For after his punishment he gives comfort, and after wounding, his hands make you well.

你六次遭难，他必救你。就是七次，灾祸也无法害你。
He will keep you safe from six troubles, and in seven no evil will come near you.

在饥荒中，他必救你脱离死亡。在争战中，他必救你脱离刀剑的权力。
When there is need of food he will keep you from death, and in war from the power of the sword.

你必被隐藏，不受口舌之害。灾殃临到，你也不惧怕。
He will keep you safe from the evil tongue; and you will have no fear of wasting when it comes.

你遇见灾害饥馑，就必嬉笑。地上的野兽，你也不惧怕。
You will make sport of destruction and need, and will have no fear of the beasts of the earth.

因为你必与田间的石头立约，田里的野兽也必与你和好。
For you will be in agreement with the stones of the earth, and the beasts of the field will be at peace with you.

你必知道你帐棚平安，要查看你的羊圈，一无所失。
And you will be certain that your tent is at peace, and after looking over your property you will see that nothing is gone.

也必知道你的后裔将来发达，你的子孙像地上的青草。
You will be certain that your seed will be great, and your offspring like the plants of the earth.

你必寿高年迈才归坟墓，好像禾捆到时收藏。
You will come to your last resting-place in full strength, as the grain is taken up to the crushing-floor in its time.

这理，我们已经考察，本是如此。你须要听，要知道是与自己有益。
See, we have made search with care, and it is so; it has come to our ears; see that you take note of it for yourself.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

惟愿我的烦恼称一称，我一切的灾害放在天平里。
If only my passion might be measured, and put into the scales against my trouble!

现今都比海沙更重，所以我的言语急躁。
For then its weight would be more than the sand of the seas: because of this my words have been uncontrolled.

因全能者的箭射入我身，其毒，我的灵喝尽了。神的惊吓摆阵攻击我。
For the arrows of the Ruler of all are present with me, and their poison goes deep into my spirit: his army of fears is put in order against me.

野驴有草岂能叫唤，牛有料，岂能吼叫。
Does the ass of the fields give out his voice when he has grass? or does the ox make sounds over his food?

物淡而无盐岂可吃吗？蛋青有什么滋味呢？
Will a man take food which has no taste without salt? or is there any taste in the soft substance of purslain?

看为可厌的食物，我心不肯挨近。
My soul has no desire for such things, they are as disease in my food.

惟愿我得着所求的，愿神赐我所切望的。
If only I might have an answer to my prayer, and God would give me my desire!

就是愿神把我压碎，伸手将我剪除。
If only he would be pleased to put an end to me; and would let loose his hand, so that I might be cut off!

我因没有违弃那圣者的言语，就仍以此为安慰，在不止息的痛苦中还可踊跃。
So I would still have comfort, and I would have joy in the pains of death, for I have not been false to the words of the Holy One.

我有什么气力使我等候。我有什么结局使我忍耐。
Have I strength to go on waiting, or have I any end to be looking forward to?

我的气力岂是石头的气力。我的肉身岂是铜的呢？
Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh brass?

在我岂不是毫无帮助吗？智慧岂不是从我心中赶出净尽吗？
I have no help in myself, and wisdom is completely gone from me.

那将要灰心，离弃全能者，不敬畏神的人，他的朋友当以慈爱待他。
He whose heart is shut against his friend has given up the fear of the Ruler of all.

我的弟兄诡诈，好像溪水，又像溪水流干的河道。
My friends have been false like a stream, like streams in the valleys which come to an end:

这河因结冰发黑，有雪藏在其中。
Which are dark because of the ice, and the snow falling into them;

天气渐暖就随时消化，日头炎热便从原处干涸。
Under the burning sun they are cut off, and come to nothing because of the heat.

结伴的客旅离弃大道，顺河边行，到荒野之地死亡。
The camel-trains go out of their way; they go up into the waste and come to destruction.

提玛结伴的客旅瞻望。示巴同伙的人等候。
The camel-trains of Tema were searching with care, the bands of Sheba were waiting for them:

他们因失了盼望就抱愧，来到那里便蒙羞。
They were put to shame because of their hope; they came and their hope was gone.

现在你们正是这样，看见惊吓的事便惧怕。
So have you now become to me; you see my sad condition and are in fear.

我岂说，请你们供给我，从你们的财物中送礼物给我。
Did I say, Give me something? or, Make a payment for me out of your wealth?

岂说，拯救我脱离敌人的手吗？救赎我脱离强暴人的手吗？
Or, Get me out of the power of my hater? or, Give money so that I may be free from the power of the cruel ones?

请你们教导我，我便不作声。使我明白在何事上有错。
Give me teaching and I will be quiet; and make me see my error.

正直的言语力量何其大。但你们责备是责备什么呢？
How pleasing are upright words! but what force is there in your arguments?

绝望人的讲论既然如风，你们还想要驳正言语吗？
My words may seem wrong to you, but the words of him who has no hope are for the wind.

你们想为孤儿拈阄，以朋友当货物。
Truly, you are such as would give up the child of a dead man to his creditors, and would make a profit out of your friend.

现在请你们看看我，我决不当面说谎。
Now then, let your eyes be turned to me, for truly I will not say what is false to your face.

请你们转意，不要不公。请再转意，我的事有理。
Let your minds be changed, and do not have an evil opinion of me; yes, be changed, for my righteousness is still in me.

我的舌上岂有不义吗？我的口里岂不辨奸恶吗？
Is there evil in my tongue? is not the cause of my trouble clear to me?

人在世上岂无争战吗？他的日子不像雇工人的日子吗？
Has not man his ordered time of trouble on the earth? and are not his days like the days of a servant working for payment?

像奴仆切慕黑影，像雇工人盼望工价。
As a servant desiring the shades of evening, and a workman looking for his payment:

我也照样经过困苦的日月，夜间的疲乏为我而定。
So I have for my heritage months of pain to no purpose, and nights of weariness are given to me.

我躺卧的时候便说，我何时起来，黑夜就过去呢？我尽是反来覆去，直到天亮。
When I go to my bed, I say, When will it be time to get up? but the night is long, and I am turning from side to side till morning light.

我的肉体以虫子和尘土为衣。我的皮肤才收了口又重新破裂。
My flesh is covered with worms and dust; my skin gets hard and then is cracked again.

我的日子比梭更快，都消耗在无指望之中。
My days go quicker than the cloth-worker's thread, and come to an end without hope.

求你想念，我的生命不过是一口气。我的眼睛必不再见福乐。
O, keep in mind that my life is wind: my eye will never again see good.

观看我的人，他的眼必不再见我。你的眼目要看我，我却不在了。
The eye of him who sees me will see me no longer: your eyes will be looking for me, but I will be gone.

云彩消散而过。照样，人下阴间也不再上来。
A cloud comes to an end and is gone; so he who goes down into the underworld comes not up again.

他不再回自己的家，故土也不再认识他。
He will not come back to his house, and his place will have no more knowledge of him.

我不禁止我口。我灵愁苦，要发出言语。我心苦恼，要吐露哀情。
So I will not keep my mouth shut; I will let the words come from it in the pain of my spirit, my soul will make a bitter outcry.

我对神说，我岂是洋海，岂是大鱼，你竟防守我呢？
Am I a sea, or a sea-beast, that you put a watch over me?

若说，我的床必安慰我，我的榻必解释我的苦情。
When I say, In my bed I will have comfort, there I will get rest from my disease;

你就用梦惊骇我，用异象恐吓我。
Then you send dreams to me, and visions of fear;

甚至我宁肯噎死，宁肯死亡，胜似留我这一身的骨头。
So that a hard death seems better to my soul than my pains.

我厌弃性命，不愿永活。你任凭我吧，因我的日子都是虚空。
I have no desire for life, I would not be living for ever! Keep away from me, for my days are as a breath.

人算什么，你竟看他为大，将他放在心上，
What is man, that you have made him great, and that your attention is fixed on him,

每早鉴察他，时刻试验他。
And that your hand is on him every morning, and that you are testing him every minute?

你到何时才转眼不看我，才任凭我咽下唾沫呢？
How long will it be before your eyes are turned away from me, so that I may have a minute's breathing-space?

鉴察人的主阿，我若有罪，于你何妨？为何以我当你的箭靶子，使我厌弃自己的性命？
If I have done wrong, what have I done to you, O keeper of men? why have you made me a mark for your blows, so that I am a weariness to myself?

为何不赦免我的过犯，除掉我的罪孽。我现今要躺卧在尘土中。你要殷勤地寻找我，我却不在了。
And why do you not take away my sin, and let my wrongdoing be ended? for now I go down to the dust, and you will be searching for me with care, but I will be gone.

书亚人比勒达回答说，
Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and said,

这些话你要说到几时？口中的言语如狂风要到几时呢？
How long will you say these things, and how long will the words of your mouth be like a strong wind?

神岂能偏离公平？全能者岂能偏离公义？
Does God give wrong decisions? or is the Ruler of all not upright in his judging?

或者你的儿女得罪了他，他使他们受报应。
If your children have done evil against him, then their punishment is from his hand.

你若殷勤地寻求神，向全能者恳求。
If you will make search for God with care, and put your request before the Ruler of all;

你若清洁正直，他必定为你起来，使你公义的居所兴旺。
If you are clean and upright; then he will certainly be moved to take up your cause, and will make clear your righteousness by building up your house again.

你起初虽然微小，终久必甚发达。
And though your start was small, your end will be very great.

请你考问前代，追念他们的列祖所查究的。
Put the question now to the past generations, and give attention to what has been searched out by their fathers:

（我们不过从昨日才有，一无所知。我们在世的日子好像影儿。）
(For we are but of yesterday, and have no knowledge, because our days on earth are gone like a shade:)

他们岂不指教你，告诉你，从心里发出言语来呢？
Will they not give you teaching, and say words of wisdom to you?

蒲草没有泥，岂能发长？芦荻没有水，岂能生发？
Will the river-plant come up in its pride without wet earth? will the grass get tall without water?

尚青的时候，还没有割下，比百样的草先枯槁。
When it is still green, without being cut down, it becomes dry and dead before any other plant.

凡忘记神的人，景况也是这样。不虔敬人的指望要灭没。
So is the end of all who do not keep God in mind; and the hope of the evil-doer comes to nothing:

他所仰赖的必折断，他所倚靠的是蜘蛛网。
Whose support is cut off, and whose hope is no stronger than a spider's thread.

他要倚靠房屋，房屋却站立不住。他要抓住房屋，房屋却不能存留。
He is looking to his family for support, but it is not there; he puts his hope in it, but it comes to nothing.

他在日光之下发青，蔓子爬满了园子。
He is full of strength before the sun, and his branches go out over his garden.

他的根盘绕石堆，扎入石地。
His roots are twisted round the stones, forcing their way in between them.

他若从本地被拔出，那地就不认识他，说，我没有见过你。
If he is taken away from his place, then it will say, I have not seen you.

看哪，这就是他道中之乐。以后必另有人从地而生。
Such is the joy of his way, and out of the dust another comes up to take his place.

神必不丢弃完全人，也不扶助邪恶人。
Truly, God will not give up him who is without sin, and will not take evil-doers by the hand.

他还要以喜笑充满你的口，以欢呼充满你的嘴。
The time will come when your mouth will be full of laughing, and cries of joy will come from your lips.

恨恶你的要披戴惭愧。恶人的帐棚，必归于无有。
Your haters will be clothed with shame, and the tent of the sinner will not be seen again.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

我真知道是这样。但人在神面前怎能成为义呢？
Truly, I see that it is so: and how is it possible for a man to get his right before God?

若愿意与他争辩，千中之一也不能回答。
If a man was desiring to go to law with him, he would not be able to give him an answer to one out of a thousand questions.

他心里有智慧，且大有能力。谁向神刚硬而得亨通呢？
He is wise in heart and great in strength: who ever made his face hard against him, and any good came of it?

他发怒，把山翻倒挪移，山并不知觉。
It is he who takes away the mountains without their knowledge, overturning them in his wrath:

他使地震动，离其本位，地的柱子就摇撼。
Who is moving the earth out of its place, so that its pillars are shaking:

他吩咐日头不出来，就不出来，又封闭众星。
Who gives orders to the sun, and it does not give its light; and who keeps the stars from shining.

他独自铺张苍天，步行在海浪之上。
By whose hand the heavens were stretched out, and who is walking on the waves of the sea:

他造北斗，参星，昴星，并南方的密宫。
Who made the Bear and Orion, and the Pleiades, and the store-houses of the south:

他行大事，不可测度，行奇事，不可胜数。
Who does great things not to be searched out; yes, wonders without number.

他从我旁边经过，我却不看见。他在我面前行走，我倒不知觉。
See, he goes past me and I see him not: he goes on before, but I have no knowledge of him.

他夺取，谁能阻挡。谁敢问他，你做什么。
If he puts out his hand to take, by whom may it be turned back? who may say to him, What are you doing?

神必不收回他的怒气。扶助拉哈伯的，屈身在他以下。
God's wrath may not be turned back; the helpers of Rahab were bent down under him.

既是这样，我怎敢回答他，怎敢选择言语与他辩论呢？
How much less may I give an answer to him, using the right words in argument with him?

我虽有义，也不回答他。只要向那审判我的恳求。
Even if my cause was good, I would not be able to give an answer; I would make request for grace from him who was against me.

我若呼吁，他应允我。我仍不信他真听我的声音。
If I had sent for him to be present, and he had come, I would have no faith that he would give ear to my voice.

他用暴风折断我，无故地加增我的损伤。
For I would be crushed by his storm, my wounds would be increased without cause.

我就是喘一口气，他都不容，倒使我满心苦恼。
He would not let me take my breath, but I would be full of bitter grief.

若论力量，他真有能力。若论审判，他说谁能将我传来呢？
If it is a question of strength, he says, Here I am! and if it is a question of a cause at law, he says, Who will give me a fixed day?

我虽有义，自己的口要定我为有罪。我虽完全，我口必显我为弯曲。
Though I was in the right, he would say that I was in the wrong; I have done no evil; but he says that I am a sinner.

我本完全，不顾自己。我厌恶我的性命。
I have done no wrong; I give no thought to what becomes of me; I have no desire for life.

善恶无分，都是一样。所以我说，完全人和恶人，他都灭绝。
It is all the same to me; so I say, He puts an end to the sinner and to him who has done no wrong together.

若忽然遭杀害之祸，他必戏笑无辜的人遇难。
If death comes suddenly through disease, he makes sport of the fate of those who have done no wrong.

世界交在恶人手中。蒙蔽世界审判官的脸，若不是他，是谁呢？
The land is given into the power of the evil-doer; the faces of its judges are covered; if not by him, then who has done it?

我的日子比跑信的更快，急速过去，不见福乐。
My days go quicker than a post-runner: they go in flight, they see no good.

我的日子过去如快船，如急落抓食的鹰。
They go rushing on like reed-boats, like an eagle dropping suddenly on its food.

我若说，我要忘记我的哀情，除去我的愁容，心中畅快。
If I say, I will put my grief out of mind, I will let my face be sad no longer and I will be bright;

我因愁苦而惧怕，知道你必不以我为无辜。
I go in fear of all my pains; I am certain that I will not be free from sin in your eyes.

我必被你定为有罪，我何必徒然劳苦呢？
You will not let me be clear of sin! why then do I take trouble for nothing?

我若用雪水洗身，用碱洁净我的手。
If I am washed with snow water, and make my hands clean with soap;

你还要扔我在坑里，我的衣服都憎恶我。
Then you will have me pushed into the dust, so that I will seem disgusting to my very clothing.

他本不像我是人，使我可以回答他，又使我们可以同听审判。
For he is not a man as I am, that I might give him an answer, that we might come together before a judge.

我们中间没有听讼的人，可以向我们两造按手。
There is no one to give a decision between us, who might have control over us.

愿他把杖离开我，不使惊惶威吓我。
Let him take away his rod from me and not send his fear on me:

我就说话，也不惧怕他，现在我却不是那样。
Then I would say what is in my mind without fear of him; for there is no cause of fear in myself.

我厌烦我的性命，必由着自己述说我的哀情。因心里苦恼，我要说话。
My soul is tired of life; I will let my sad thoughts go free in words; my soul will make a bitter outcry.

对神说，不要定我有罪。要指示我，你为何与我争辩。
I will say to God, Do not put me down as a sinner; make clear to me what you have against me.

你手所造的，你又欺压，又藐视，却光照恶人的计谋。这事你以为美吗？
What profit is it to you to be cruel, to give up the work of your hands, looking kindly on the design of evil-doers?

你的眼岂是肉眼，你查看岂像人查看吗？
Have you eyes of flesh, or do you see as man sees?

你的日子岂像人的日子，你的年岁岂像人的年岁。
Are your days as the days of man, or your years like his,

就追问我的罪孽，寻察我的罪过吗？
That you take note of my sin, searching after my wrongdoing,

其实，你知道我没有罪恶，并没有能救我脱离你手的。
Though you see that I am not an evil-doer; and there is no one who is able to take a man out of your hands?

你的手创造我，造就我的四肢百体，你还要毁灭我。
Your hands made me, and I was formed by you, but then, changing your purpose, you gave me up to destruction.

求你记念制造我如抟泥一般，你还要使我归于尘土吗？
O keep in mind that you made me out of earth; and will you send me back again to dust?

你不是倒出我来好像奶，使我凝结如同奶饼吗？
Was I not drained out like milk, becoming hard like cheese?

你以皮和肉为衣给我穿上，用骨与筋把我全体联络。
By you I was clothed with skin and flesh, and joined together with bones and muscles.

你将生命和慈爱赐给我，你也眷顾保全我的心灵。
You have been kind to me, and your grace has been with me, and your care has kept my spirit safe.

然而，你待我的这些事早已藏在你心里，我知道你久有此意。
But you kept these things in the secret of your heart; I am certain this was in your thoughts:

我若犯罪，你就察看我，并不赦免我的罪孽。
That, if I did wrong, you would take note of it, and would not make me clear from sin:

我若行恶，便有了祸。我若为义，也不敢抬头。正是满心羞愧，眼见我的苦情。
That, if I was an evil-doer, the curse would come on me; and if I was upright, my head would not be lifted up, being full of shame and overcome with trouble.

我若昂首自得，你就追捕我如狮子，又在我身上显出奇能。
And that if there was cause for pride, you would go after me like a lion; and again put out your wonders against me:

你重立见证攻击我，向我加增恼怒，如军兵更换着攻击我。
That you would send new witnesses against me, increasing your wrath against me, and letting loose new armies on me.

你为何使我出母胎呢？不如我当时气绝，无人得见我。
Why then did you make me come out of my mother's body? It would have been better for me to have taken my last breath, and for no eye to have seen me,

这样，就如没有我一般，一出母胎就被送入坟墓。
And for me to have been as if I had not been; to have been taken from my mother's body straight to my last resting-place.

我的日子不是甚少吗？求你停手宽容我，叫我在往而不返之先，就是往黑暗，和死荫之地以先，可以稍得畅快。
Are not the days of my life small in number? Let your eyes be turned away from me, so that I may have a little pleasure,


Before I go to the place from which I will not come back, to the land where all is dark and black,

那地甚是幽暗，是死荫混沌之地。那里的光好像幽暗。
A land of thick dark, without order, where the very light is dark.

拿玛人琐法回答说，
Then Zophar the Naamathite made answer and said,

这许多的言语岂不该回答吗？多嘴多舌的人岂可称为义吗？
Are all these words to go unanswered? and is a man seen to be right because he is full of talk?

你夸大的话，岂能使人不作声吗？你戏笑的时候，岂没有人叫你害羞吗？
Are your words of pride to make men keep quiet? and are you to make sport, with no one to put you to shame?

你说，我的道理纯全，我在你眼前洁净。
You may say, My way is clean, and I am free from sin in your eyes.

惟愿神说话，愿他开口攻击你。
But if only God would take up the word, opening his lips in argument with you;

并将智慧的奥秘指示你，他有诸般的智识。所以当知道神追讨你，比你罪孽该得的还少。
And would make clear to you the secrets of wisdom, and the wonders of his purpose!

你考察，就能测透神吗？你岂能尽情测透全能者吗？
Are you able to take God's measure, to make discovery of the limits of the Ruler of all?

他的智慧高于天，你还能做什么。深于阴间，你还能知道什么。
They are higher than heaven; what is there for you to do? deeper than the underworld, and outside your knowledge;

其量比地长，比海宽。
Longer in measure than the earth, and wider than the sea.

他若经过，将人拘禁，招人受审，谁能阻挡他呢？
If he goes on his way, shutting a man up and putting him to death, who may make him go back from his purpose?

他本知道虚妄的人。人的罪孽，他虽不留意，还是无所不见。
For in his eyes men are as nothing; he sees evil and takes note of it.

空虚的人却毫无知识。人生在世好像野驴的驹子。
And so a hollow-minded man will get wisdom, when a young ass of the field gets teaching.

你若将心安正，又向主举手。
But if you put your heart right, stretching out your hands to him;

你手里若有罪孽，就当远远地除掉，也不容非义住在你帐棚之中。
If you put far away the evil of your hands, and let no wrongdoing have a place in your tent;

那时，你必仰起脸来毫无斑点。你也必坚固，无所惧怕。
Then truly your face will be lifted up, with no mark of sin, and you will be fixed in your place without fear:

你必忘记你的苦楚，就是想起也如流过去的水一样。
For your sorrow will go from your memory, like waters flowing away:

你在世的日子要比正午更明，虽有黑暗仍像早晨。
And your life will be brighter than day; though it is dark, it will become like the morning.

你因有指望就必稳固，也必四围巡查，坦然安息。
And you will be safe because there is hope; after looking round, you will take your rest in quiet;

你躺卧，无人惊吓，且有许多人向你求恩。
Sleeping with no fear of danger; and men will be desiring to have grace in your eyes;

但恶人的眼目必要失明。他们无路可逃。他们的指望就是气绝。
But the eyes of the evil-doers will be wasting away; their way of flight is gone, and their only hope is the taking of their last breath.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

你们真是子民哪，你们死亡，智慧也就灭没了。
No doubt you have knowledge, and wisdom will come to an end with you.

但我也有聪明，与你们一样，并非不及你们。你们所说的，谁不知道呢？
But I have a mind as well as you; I am equal to you: yes, who has not knowledge of such things as these?

我这求告神，蒙他应允的人，竟成了朋友所讥笑的。公义完全人，竟受了人的讥笑。
It seems that I am to be as one who is a cause of laughing to his neighbour, one who makes his prayer to God and is answered! the upright man who has done no wrong is to be made sport of!

安逸的人，心里藐视灾祸。这灾祸常常等待滑脚的人。
In the thought of him who is in comfort there is no respect for one who is in trouble; such is the fate of those whose feet are slipping.

强盗的帐棚兴旺，惹神的人稳固，神多将财物送到他们手中。
There is wealth in the tents of those who make destruction, and those by whom God is moved to wrath are safe; even those whose god is their strength.

你且问走兽，走兽必指教你。又问空中的飞鸟，飞鸟必告诉你。
But put now a question to the beasts, and get teaching from them; or to the birds of the heaven, and they will make it clear to you;

或与地说话，地必指教你。海中的鱼也必向你说明。
Or to the things which go flat on the earth, and they will give you wisdom; and the fishes of the sea will give you news of it.

看这一切，谁不知道是耶和华的手做成的呢？
Who does not see by all these that the hand of the Lord has done this?

凡活物的生命，和人类的气息，都在他手中。
In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all flesh of man.

耳朵岂不试验言语，正如上膛尝食物吗？
Are not words tested by the ear, even as food is tasted by the mouth?

年老的有智慧，寿高的有知识。
Old men have wisdom, and a long life gives knowledge.

在神有智慧和能力，他有谋略和知识。
With him there is wisdom and strength; power and knowledge are his.

他拆毁的，就不能再建造。他捆住人，便不得开释。
Truly, there is no building up of what is pulled down by him; when a man is shut up by him, no one may let him loose.

他把水留住，水便枯干。他再发出水来，水就翻地。
Truly, he keeps back the waters and they are dry; he sends them out and the earth is overturned.

在他有能力和智慧。被诱惑的，与诱惑人的，都是属他。
With him are strength and wise designs; he who is guided into error, together with his guide, are in his hands;

他把谋士剥衣掳去，又使审判官变成愚人。
He takes away the wisdom of the wise guides, and makes judges foolish;

他放松君王的绑，又用带子捆他们的腰。
He undoes the chains of kings, and puts his band on them;

他把祭司剥衣掳去，又使有能的人倾败。
He makes priests prisoners, overturning those in safe positions;

他废去忠信人的讲论，又夺去老人的聪明。
He makes the words of responsible persons without effect, and takes away the good sense of the old;

他使君王蒙羞被辱，放松有力之人的腰带。
He puts shame on chiefs, and takes away the power of the strong;

他将深奥的事从黑暗中彰显，使死荫显为光明。
Uncovering deep things out of the dark, and making the deep shade bright;

他使邦国兴旺而又毁灭，他使邦国开广而又掳去。
Increasing nations, and sending destruction on them; making wide the lands of peoples, and then giving them up.

他将地上民中首领的聪明夺去，使他们在荒废无路之地漂流。
He takes away the wisdom of the rulers of the earth, and sends them wandering in a waste where there is no way.

他们无光，在黑暗中摸索，又使他们东倒西歪，像醉酒的人一样。
They go feeling about in the dark without light, wandering without help like those overcome with wine.

这一切，我眼都见过。我耳都听过，而且明白。
Truly, my eye has seen all this, word of it has come to my ear, and I have knowledge of it.

你们所知道的，我也知道，并非不及你们。
The same things are in my mind as in yours; I am equal to you.

我真要对全能者说话。我愿与神理论。
But I would have talk with the Ruler of all, and my desire is to have an argument with God.

你们是编造谎言的，都是无用的医生。
But you put a false face on things; all your attempts to put things right are of no value.

惟愿你们全然不作声。这就算为你们的智慧。
If only you would keep quiet, it would be a sign of wisdom!

请你们听我的辩论，留心听我口中的分诉。
Give ear to the argument of my mouth, and take note of the words of my lips.

你们要为神说不义的话吗？为他说诡诈的言语吗？
Will you say in God's name what is not right, and put false words into his mouth?

你们要为神徇情吗？要为他争论吗？
Will you have respect for God's person in this cause, and put yourselves forward as his supporters?

他查出你们来，这岂是好吗？人欺哄人，你们也要照样欺哄他吗？
Will it be good for you to be searched out by him, or have you the thought that he may be guided into error like a man?

你们若暗中徇情，他必要责备你们。
He will certainly put you right, if you have respect for persons in secret.

他的尊荣岂不叫你们惧怕吗？他的惊吓岂不临到你们吗？
Will not his glory put you in fear, so that your hearts will be overcome before him?

你们以为可记念的箴言是炉灰的箴言。你们以为可靠的坚垒是淤泥的坚垒。
Your wise sayings are only dust, and your strong places are only earth.

你们不要作声，任凭我吧。让我说话，无论如何我都承当。
Keep quiet, and let me say what is in my mind, whatever may come to me.

我何必把我的肉挂在牙上，将我的命放在手中。
I will take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand.

他必杀我。我虽无指望，然而我在他面前还要辩明我所行的。
Truly, he will put an end to me; I have no hope; but I will not give way in argument before him;

这要成为我的拯救，因为不虔诚的人，不得到他面前。
And that will be my salvation, for an evil-doer would not come before him,

你们要细听我的言语，使我所辩论的入你们的耳中。
Give ear with care to my words, and keep what I say in your minds.

我已陈明我的案，知道自己有义。
See now, I have put my cause in order, and I am certain that I will be seen to be right.

有谁与我争论，我就情愿缄默不言，气绝而亡。
Is any one able to take up the argument against me? If so, I would keep quiet and give up my breath.

惟有两件不要向我施行，我就不躲开你的面。
Only two things do not do to me, then I will come before your face:

就是把你的手缩回，远离我身。又不使你的惊惶威吓我。
Take your hand far away from me; and let me not be overcome by fear of you.

这样，你呼叫，我就回答。或是让我说话，你回答我。
Then at the sound of your voice I will give answer; or let me put forward my cause for you to give me an answer.

我的罪孽和罪过有多少呢？求你叫我知道我的过犯与罪愆。
What is the number of my evil-doings and my sins? give me knowledge of them.

你为何掩面，拿我当仇敌呢？
Why is your face veiled from me, as if I was numbered among your haters?

你要惊动被风吹的叶子吗？要追赶枯干的碎秸吗？
Will you be hard on a leaf in flight before the wind? will you make a dry stem go more quickly on its way?

你按罪状刑罚我，又使我担当幼年的罪孽。
For you put bitter things on record against me, and send punishment on me for the sins of my early years;

也把我的脚上了木狗，并窥察我一切的道路，为我的脚掌划定界限。
And you put chains on my feet, watching all my ways, and making a limit for my steps;

我已经像灭绝的烂物，像虫蛀的衣裳。
Though a man comes to nothing like a bit of dead wood, or like a robe which has become food for the worm.

人为妇人所生，日子短少，多有患难。
As for man, the son of woman, his days are short and full of trouble.

出来如花，又被割下。飞去如影，不能存留。
He comes out like a flower, and is cut down: he goes in flight like a shade, and is never seen again.

这样的人你岂睁眼看他吗？又叫我来受审吗？
Is it on such a one as this that your eyes are fixed, with the purpose of judging him?

谁能使洁净之物出于污秽之中呢？无论谁也不能。
If only a clean thing might come out of an unclean! But it is not possible.

人的日子既然限定，他的月数在你那里，你也派定他的界限，使他不能越过。
If his days are ordered, and you have knowledge of the number of his months, having given him a fixed limit past which he may not go;

便求你转眼不看他，使他得歇息。直等他像雇工人完毕他的日子。
Let your eyes be turned away from him, and take your hand from him, so that he may have pleasure at the end of his day, like a servant working for payment.

树若被砍下，还可指望发芽，嫩枝生长不息。
For there is hope of a tree; if it is cut down, it will come to life again, and its branches will not come to an end.

其根虽然衰老在地里，干也死在土中。
Though its root may be old in the earth, and its cut-off end may be dead in the dust;

及至得了水气，还要发芽，又长枝条，像新栽的树一样。
Still, at the smell of water, it will make buds, and put out branches like a young plant.

但人死亡而消灭。他气绝，竟在何处呢？
But man comes to his death and is gone: he gives up his spirit, and where is he?

海中的水绝尽，江河消散干涸。
The waters go from a pool, and a river becomes waste and dry;

人也是如此，躺下不再起来。等到天没有了，仍不得复醒，也不得从睡中唤醒。
So man goes down to his last resting-place and comes not again: till the heavens come to an end, they will not be awake or come out of their sleep.

惟愿你把我藏在阴间，存于隐密处，等你的忿怒过去。愿你为我定了日期，记念我。
If only you would keep me safe in the underworld, putting me in a secret place till your wrath is past, giving me a fixed time when I might come to your memory again!

人若死了岂能再活呢？我只要在我一切争战的日子，等我被释放的时候来到（被释放或作改变）。
If death takes a man, will he come to life again? All the days of my trouble I would be waiting, till the time came for me to be free.

你呼叫，我便回答。你手所做的，你必羡慕。
At the sound of your voice I would give an answer, and you would have a desire for the work of your hands.

但如今你数点我的脚步，岂不窥察我的罪过吗？
For now my steps are numbered by you, and my sin is not overlooked.

我的过犯被你封在囊中，也缝严了我的罪孽。
My wrongdoing is corded up in a bag, and my sin is shut up safe.

山崩变为无有。磐石挪开原处。
But truly a mountain falling comes to dust, and a rock is moved from its place;

水流消磨石头，所流溢的洗去地上的尘土。你也照样灭绝人的指望。
The stones are crushed small by the force of the waters; the dust of the earth is washed away by their overflowing: and so you put an end to the hope of man.

你攻击人常常得胜，使他去世。你改变他的容貌，叫他往而不回。
You overcome him for ever, and he is gone; his face is changed in death, and you send him away.

他儿子得尊荣，他也不知道。降为卑，他也不觉得。
His sons come to honour, and he has no knowledge of it; they are made low, but he is not conscious of it.

但知身上疼痛，心中悲哀。
Only his flesh still has pain, and his soul is sad.

提幔人以利法回答说，
And Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and said,

智慧人岂可用虚空的知识回答，用东风充满肚腹呢？
Will a wise man make answer with knowledge of no value, or will he give birth to the east wind?

他岂可用无益的话，和无济于事的言语，理论呢？
Will he make arguments with words in which is no profit, and with sayings which have no value?

你是废弃敬畏的意，在神面前阻止敬虔的心。
Truly, you make the fear of God without effect, so that the time of quiet worship before God is made less by your outcry.

你的罪孽指教你的口。你选用诡诈人的舌头。
For your mouth is guided by your sin, and you have taken the tongue of the false for yourself.

你自己的口定你有罪，并非是我。你自己的嘴，见证你的不是。
It is by your mouth, even yours, that you are judged to be in the wrong, and not by me; and your lips give witness against you.

你岂是头一个被生的人吗？你受造在诸山之先吗？
Were you the first man to come into the world? or did you come into being before the hills?

你曾听见神的密旨吗？你还将智慧独自得尽吗？
Were you present at the secret meeting of God? and have you taken all wisdom for yourself?

你知道什么是我们不知道的呢？你明白什么是我们不明白的呢？
What knowledge have you which we have not? is there anything in your mind which is not in ours?

我们这里有白发的，和年纪老迈的，比你父亲还老。
With us are men who are grey-haired and full of years, much older than your father.

神用温和的话安慰你，你以为太小吗？
Are the comforts of God not enough for you, and the gentle word which was said to you?

你的心为何将你逼去。你的眼为何冒出火星。
Why is your heart uncontrolled, and why are your eyes lifted up;

使你的灵反对神，也任你的口发这言语。
So that you are turning your spirit against God, and letting such words go out of your mouth?

人是什么，竟算为洁净呢？妇人所生的是什么，竟算为义呢？
What is man, that he may be clean? and how may the son of woman be upright?

神不信靠他的众圣者。在他眼前，天也不洁净。
Truly, he puts no faith in his holy ones, and the heavens are not clean in his eyes;

何况那污秽可憎，喝罪孽如水的世人呢？
How much less one who is disgusting and unclean, a man who takes in evil like water!

我指示你，你要听。我要述说所看见的。
Take note and give ear to my words; and I will say what I have seen:

就是智慧人从列祖所受，传说而不隐瞒的。
(The things which wise men have got from their fathers, and have not kept secret from us;

（这地惟独赐给他们，并没有外人从他们中间经过）。
For only to them was the land given, and no strange people were among them:)

恶人一生之日劬劳痛苦，强暴人一生的年数也是如此。
The evil man is in pain all his days, and the number of the years stored up for the cruel is small.

惊吓的声音常在他耳中。在平安时，抢夺的必临到他那里。
A sound of fear is in his ears; in time of peace destruction will come on him:

他不信自己能从黑暗中转回，他被刀剑等候。
He has no hope of coming safe out of the dark, and his fate will be the sword;

他漂流在外求食，说，哪里有食物呢？他知道黑暗的日子，在他手边预备好了。
He is wandering about in search of bread, saying, Where is it? and he is certain that the day of trouble is ready for him:

急难困苦叫他害怕，而且胜了他，好像君王预备上阵一样。
He is greatly in fear of the dark day, trouble and pain overcome him:

他伸手攻击神，以骄傲攻击全能者。
Because his hand is stretched out against God, and his heart is lifted up against the Ruler of all,

挺着颈项，用盾牌的厚凸面，向全能者直闯。
Running against him like a man of war, covered by his thick breastplate; even like a king ready for the fight,

是因他的脸蒙上脂油，腰积成肥肉。
Because his face is covered with fat, and his body has become thick;

他曾住在荒凉城邑，无人居住，将成乱堆的房屋。
And he has made his resting-place in the towns which have been pulled down, in houses where no man had a right to be, whose fate was to become masses of broken walls.

他不得富足，财物不得常存，产业在地上也不加增。
He does not get wealth for himself, and is unable to keep what he has got; the heads of his grain are not bent down to the earth.

他不得出离黑暗。火焰要将他的枝子烧干。因神口中的气，他要灭亡（灭亡原文作走去）。
He does not come out of the dark; his branches are burned by the flame, and the wind takes away his bud.

他不用倚靠虚假欺哄自己，因虚假必成为他的报应。
Let him not put his hope in what is false, falling into error: for he will get deceit as his reward.

他的日期未到之先，这事必成就。他的枝子不得青绿。
His branch is cut off before its time, and his leaf is no longer green.

他必像葡萄树的葡萄，未熟而落。又像橄榄树的花，一开而谢。
He is like a vine whose grapes do not come to full growth, or an olive-tree dropping its flowers.

原来不敬虔之辈必无生育。受贿赂之人的帐棚必被火烧。
For the band of the evil-doers gives no fruit, and the tents of those who give wrong decisions for reward are burned with fire.

他们所怀的是毒害，所生的是罪孽，心里所预备的是诡诈。
Evil has made them with child, and they give birth to trouble; and the fruit of their body is shame for themselves.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

这样的话我听了许多。你们安慰人，反叫人愁烦。
Such things have frequently come to my ears: you are comforters who only give trouble.

虚空的言语有穷尽吗？有什么话惹动你回答呢？
May words which are like the wind be stopped? or what is troubling you to make answer to them?

我也能说你们那样的话。你们若处在我的境遇，我也会联络言语攻击你们，又能向你们摇头。
It would not be hard for me to say such things if your souls were in my soul's place; joining words together against you, and shaking my head at you:

但我必用口坚固你们，用嘴消解你们的忧愁。
I might give you strength with my mouth, and not keep back the comfort of my lips.

我虽说话，忧愁仍不得消解。我虽停住不说，忧愁就离开我吗？
If I say what is in my mind, my pain becomes no less: and if I keep quiet, how much of it goes from me?

但现在神使我困倦，使亲友远离我。
But now he has overcome me with weariness and fear, and I am in the grip of all my trouble.

又抓住我，作见证攻击我。我身体的枯瘦，也当面见证我的不是。
It has come up as a witness against me, and the wasting of my flesh makes answer to my face.

主发怒撕裂我，逼迫我，向我切齿。我的敌人怒目看我。
I am broken by his wrath, and his hate has gone after me; he has made his teeth sharp against me: my haters are looking on me with cruel eyes;

他们向我开口，打我的脸羞辱我，聚会攻击我。
Their mouths are open wide against me; the blows of his bitter words are falling on my face; all of them come together in a mass against me.

神把我交给不敬虔的人，把我扔到恶人的手中。
God gives me over to the power of sinners, sending me violently into the hands of evil-doers.

我素来安逸，他折断我，掐住我的颈项，把我摔碎。又立我为他的箭靶子。
I was in comfort, but I have been broken up by his hands; he has taken me by the neck, shaking me to bits; he has put me up as a mark for his arrows.

他的弓箭手四面围绕我。他破裂我的肺腑，并不留情，把我的胆倾倒在地上，
His bowmen come round about me; their arrows go through my body without mercy; my life is drained out on the earth.

将我破裂又破裂，如同勇士向我直闯。
I am broken with wound after wound; he comes rushing on me like a man of war.

我缝麻布在我皮肤上，把我的角放在尘土中。
I have made haircloth the clothing of my skin, and my horn is rolled in the dust.

我的脸因哭泣发紫，在我的眼皮上有死荫。
My face is red with weeping, and my eyes are becoming dark;

我的手中却无强暴。我的祈祷也是清洁。
Though my hands have done no violent acts, and my prayer is clean.

地阿，不要遮盖我的血。不要阻挡我的哀求。
O earth, let not my blood be covered, and let my cry have no resting-place!

现今，在天有我的见证，在上有我的中保。
Even now my witness is in heaven, and the supporter of my cause is on high.

我的朋友讥诮我，我却向神眼泪汪汪。
My friends make sport of me; to God my eyes are weeping,

愿人得与神辩白，如同人与朋友辩白一样。
So that he may give decision for a man in his cause with God, and between a son of man and his neighbour.

因为再过几年，我必走那往而不返之路。
For in a short time I will take the journey from which I will not come back.

我的心灵消耗，我的日子灭尽。坟墓为我预备好了。
My spirit is broken, my days are ended, the last resting-place is ready for me.

真有戏笑我的在我这里，我眼常见他们惹动我。
Truly, those who make sport of me are round about me, and my eyes become dark because of their bitter laughing.

愿主拿凭据给我，自己为我作保。在你以外谁肯与我击掌呢？
Be pleased, now, to be responsible for me to yourself; for there is no other who will put his hand in mine.

因你使他们心不明理，所以你必不高举他们。
You have kept their hearts from wisdom: for this cause you will not give them honour.

控告他的朋友，以朋友为可抢夺的，连他儿女的眼睛也要失明。
As for him who is false to his friend for a reward, light will be cut off from the eyes of his children.

神使我作了民中的笑谈。他们也吐唾沫在我脸上。
He has made me a word of shame to the peoples; I have become a mark for their sport.

我的眼睛因忧愁昏花。我的百体好像影儿。
My eyes have become dark because of my pain, and all my body is wasted to a shade.

正直人因此必惊奇。无辜的人，要兴起攻击不敬虔之辈。
The upright are surprised at this, and he who has done no wrong is troubled because of the evil-doers.

然而，义人要持守所行的道。手洁的人要力上加力。
Still the upright keeps on his way, and he who has clean hands gets new strength.

至于你们众人，可以再来辩论吧。你们中间，我找不着一个智慧人。
But come back, now, all of you, come; and I will not see a wise man among you.

我的日子已经过了。我的谋算，我心所想望的已经断绝。
My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the desires of my heart.

他们以黑夜为白昼，说，亮光近乎黑暗。
They are changing night into day; they say, The light is near the dark.

我若盼望阴间为我的房屋，若下榻在黑暗中，
If I am waiting for the underworld as my house, if I have made my bed in the dark;

若对朽坏说，你是我的父。对虫说，你是我的母亲姐妹。
If I say to the earth, You are my father; and to the worm, My mother and my sister;

这样，我的指望在哪里呢？我所指望的谁能看见呢？
Where then is my hope? and who will see my desire?

等到安息在尘土中，这指望必下到阴间的门闩那里了。
Will they go down with me into the underworld? Will we go down together into the dust?

书亚人比勒达回答说，
Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and said,

你寻索言语要到几时呢？你可以揣摩思想，然后我们就说话。
How long will it be before you have done talking? Get wisdom, and then we will say what is in our minds.

我们为何算为畜生，在你眼中看作污秽呢？
Why do we seem as beasts in your eyes, and as completely without knowledge?

你这恼怒将自己撕裂的，难道大地为你见弃，磐石挪开原处吗？
But come back, now, come: you who are wounding yourself in your passion, will the earth be given up because of you, or a rock be moved out of its place?

恶人的亮光必要熄灭。他的火焰必不照耀。
For the light of the sinner is put out, and the flame of his fire is not shining.

他帐棚中的亮光要变为黑暗。他以上的灯也必熄灭。
The light is dark in his tent, and the light shining over him is put out.

他坚强的脚步必见狭窄。自己的计谋必将他绊倒。
The steps of his strength become short, and by his design destruction overtakes him.

因为他被自己的脚陷入网中，走在缠人的网罗上。
His feet take him into the net, and he goes walking into the cords.

圈套必抓住他的脚跟。机关必擒获他。
His foot is taken in the net; he comes into its grip.

活扣为他藏在土内。羁绊为他藏在路上。
The twisted cord is put secretly in the earth to take him, and the cord is placed in his way.

四面的惊吓要使他害怕，并且追赶他的脚跟。
He is overcome by fears on every side, they go after him at every step.

他的力量必因饥饿衰败，祸患要在他旁边等候。
His strength is made feeble for need of food, and destruction is waiting for his falling footstep.

他本身的肢体要被吞吃，死亡的长子要吞吃他的肢体。
His skin is wasted by disease, and his body is food for the worst of diseases.

他要从所倚靠的帐棚被拔出来，带到惊吓的王那里。
He is pulled out of his tent where he was safe, and he is taken away to the king of fears.

不属他的必住在他的帐棚里。硫磺必撒在他所住之处。
In his tent will be seen that which is not his, burning stone is dropped on his house.

下边，他的根本要枯干。上边，他的枝子要剪除。
Under the earth his roots are dry, and over it his branch is cut off.

他的记念在地上必然灭亡。他的名字在街上也不存留。
His memory is gone from the earth, and in the open country there is no knowledge of his name.

他必从光明中被撵到黑暗里，必被赶出世界。
He is sent away from the light into the dark; he is forced out of the world.

在本民中必无子无孙。在寄居之地也无一人存留。
He has no offspring or family among his people, and in his living-place there is no one of his name.

以后来的要惊奇他的日子，好像以前去的受了惊骇。
At his fate those of the west are shocked, and those of the east are overcome with fear.

不义之人的住处总是这样。此乃不认识神之人的地步。
Truly, these are the houses of the sinner, and this is the place of him who has no knowledge of God.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

你们搅扰我的心，用言语压碎我，要到几时呢？
How long will you make my life bitter, crushing me with words?

你们这十次羞辱我。你们苦待我也不以为耻。
Ten times now you have made sport of me; it gives you no sense of shame to do me wrong.

果真我有错，这错乃是在我。
And, truly, if I have been in error, the effect of my error is only on myself.

你们果然要向我夸大，以我的羞辱为证指责我。
If you make yourselves great against me, using my punishment as an argument against me,

就该知道是神倾覆我，用网罗围绕我。
Be certain that it is God who has done me wrong, and has taken me in his net.

我因委曲呼叫，却不蒙应允。我呼求，却不得公断。
Truly, I make an outcry against the violent man, but there is no answer: I give a cry for help, but no one takes up my cause.

神用篱笆拦住我的道路，使我不得经过。又使我的路径黑暗。
My way is walled up by him so that I may not go by: he has made my roads dark.

他剥去我的荣光，摘去我头上的冠冕。
He has put off my glory from me, and taken the crown from my head.

他在四围攻击我，我便归于死亡，将我的指望如树拔出来。
I am broken down by him on every side, and I am gone; my hope is uprooted like a tree.

他的忿怒向我发作，以我为敌人。
His wrath is burning against me, and I am to him as one of his haters.

他的军旅一齐上来，修筑战路攻击我。在我帐棚的四围安营。
His armies come on together, they make their road high against me, and put up their tents round mine.

他把我的弟兄隔在远处，使我所认识的，全然与我生疏。
He has taken my brothers far away from me; they have seen my fate and have become strange to me.

我的亲戚与我断绝。我的密友都忘记我。
My relations and my near friends have given me up, and those living in my house have put me out of their minds.

在我家寄居的，和我的使女都以我为外人。我在他们眼中看为外邦人。
I am strange to my women-servants, and seem to them as one from another country.

我呼唤仆人，虽用口求他，他还是不回答。
At my cry my servant gives me no answer, and I have to make a prayer to him.

我口的气味，我妻子厌恶。我的恳求，我同胞也憎嫌。
My breath is strange to my wife, and I am disgusting to the offspring of my mother's body.

连小孩子也藐视我。我若起来，他们都嘲笑我。
Even young children have no respect for me; when I get up their backs are turned on me.

我的密友都憎恶我。我平日所爱的人向我翻脸。
All the men of my circle keep away from me; and those dear to me are turned against me.

我的皮肉紧贴骨头。我只剩牙皮逃脱了。
My bones are joined to my skin, and I have got away with my flesh in my teeth.

我朋友阿，可怜我。可怜我。因为神的手攻击我。
Have pity on me, have pity on me, O my friends! for the hand of God is on me.

你们为什么仿佛神逼迫我，吃我的肉还以为不足呢？
Why are you cruel to me, like God, for ever saying evil against me?

惟愿我的言语现在写上，都记录在书上。
If only my words might be recorded! if they might be put in writing in a book!

用铁笔镌刻，用铅灌在磐石上，直存到永远。
And with an iron pen and lead be cut into the rock for ever!

我知道我的救赎主活着，末了必站立在地上。
But I am certain that he who will take up my cause is living, and that in time to come he will take his place on the dust;

我这皮肉灭绝之后，我必在肉体之外得见神。
And ... without my flesh I will see God;

我自己要见他，亲眼要看他，并不像外人。我的心肠在我里面消灭了。
Whom I will see on my side, and not as one strange to me. My heart is broken with desire.

你们若说，我们逼迫他要何等地重呢？惹事的根乃在乎他。
If you say, How cruel we will be to him! because the root of sin is clearly in him:

你们就当惧怕刀剑。因为忿怒惹动刀剑的刑罚，使你们知道有报应（原文作审判）。
Be in fear of the sword, for the sword is the punishment for such things, so that you may be certain that there is a judge.

拿玛人琐法回答说，
Then Zophar the Naamathite made answer and said,

我心中急躁，所以我的思念叫我回答。
For this cause my thoughts are troubling me and driving me on.

我已听见那羞辱我，责备我的话。我的悟性叫我回答。
I have to give ear to arguments which put me to shame, and your answers to me are wind without wisdom.

你岂不知亘古以来，自从人生在地。
Have you knowledge of this from early times, when man was placed on the earth,

恶人夸胜是暂时的，不敬虔人的喜乐，不过转眼之间吗？
That the pride of the sinner is short, and the joy of the evil-doer but for a minute?

他的尊荣虽达到天上，头虽顶到云中，
Though he is lifted up to the heavens, and his head goes up to the clouds;

他终必灭亡，像自己的粪一样。素来见他的人要说，他在哪里呢？
Like the waste from his body he comes to an end for ever: those who have seen him say, Where is he?

他必飞去如梦，不再寻见，速被赶去，如夜间的异象。
He is gone like a dream, and is not seen again; he goes in flight like a vision of the night.

亲眼见过他的，必不再见他。他的本处也再见不着他。
The eye which saw him sees him no longer; and his place has no more knowledge of him.

他的儿女要求穷人的恩。他的手要赔还不义之财。
His children are hoping that the poor will be kind to them, and his hands give back his wealth.

他的骨头虽然有青年之力，却要和他一同躺卧在尘土中。
His bones are full of young strength, but it will go down with him into the dust.

他口内虽以恶为甘甜，藏在舌头底下。
Though evil-doing is sweet in his mouth, and he keeps it secretly under his tongue;

爱恋不舍，含在口中。
Though he takes care of it, and does not let it go, but keeps it still in his mouth;

他的食物在肚里却要化为酸，在他里面成为虺蛇的恶毒。
His food becomes bitter in his stomach; the poison of snakes is inside him.

他吞了财宝，还要吐出。神要从他腹中掏出来。
He takes down wealth as food, and sends it up again; it is forced out of his stomach by God.

他必吸饮虺蛇的毒气。蝮蛇的舌头也必杀他。
He takes the poison of snakes into his mouth, the tongue of the snake is the cause of his death.

流奶与蜜之河，他不得再见。
Let him not see the rivers of oil, the streams of honey and milk.

他劳碌得来的要赔还，不得享用（原文作吞下），不能照所得的财货欢乐。
He is forced to give back the fruit of his work, and may not take it for food; he has no joy in the profit of his trading.

他欺压穷人，且又离弃。强取非自己所盖的房屋（或作强取房屋不得再建造）。
Because he has been cruel to the poor, turning away from them in their trouble; because he has taken a house by force which he did not put up;

他因贪而无厌，所喜悦的连一样也不能保守。
There is no peace for him in his wealth, and no salvation for him in those things in which he took delight.

其余的没有一样他不吞灭，所以他的福乐不能长久。
He had never enough for his desire; for this cause his well-being will quickly come to an end.

他在满足有余的时候，必到狭窄的地步。凡受苦楚的人，都必加手在他身上。
Even when his wealth is great, he is full of care, for the hand of everyone who is in trouble is turned against him.

他正要充满肚腹的时候，神必将猛烈的忿怒，降在他身上。正在他吃饭的时候，要将这忿怒像雨降在他身上。
God gives him his desire, and sends the heat of his wrath on him, making it come down on him like rain.

他要躲避铁器。铜弓的箭要将他射透。
He may go in flight from the iron spear, but the arrow from the bow of brass will go through him;

他把箭一抽，就从他身上出来。发光的箭头从他胆中出来，有惊惶临在他身上。
He is pulling it out, and it comes out of his back; and its shining point comes out of his side; he is overcome by fears.

他的财宝归于黑暗。人所不吹的火要把他烧灭，要把他帐棚中所剩下的烧毁。
All his wealth is stored up for the dark: a fire not made by man sends destruction on him, and on everything in his tent.

天要显明他的罪孽，地要兴起攻击他。
The heavens make clear his sin, and the earth gives witness against him.

他的家产必然过去。神发怒的日子，他的货物都要消灭。
The produce of his house is taken away into another country, like things given into the hands of others in the day of wrath.

这是恶人从神所得的分，是神为他所定的产业。
This is the reward of the evil man, and the heritage given to him by God.

约伯回答说，
Then Job made answer and said,

你们要细听我的言语，就算是你们安慰我。
Give attention with care to my words; and let this be your comfort.

请宽容我，我又要说话。说了以后，任凭你们嗤笑吧。
Let me say what is in my mind, and after that, go on making sport of me.

我岂是向人诉冤，为何不焦急呢？
As for me, is my outcry against man? is it then to be wondered at if my spirit is troubled?

你们要看着我而惊奇，用手捂口。
Take note of me and be full of wonder, put your hand on your mouth.

我每逢思想，心就惊惶，浑身战兢。
At the very thought of it my flesh is shaking with fear.

恶人为何存活，享大寿数，势力强盛呢？
Why is life given to the evil-doers? why do they become old and strong in power?

他们眼见儿孙，和他们一同坚立。
Their children are ever with them, and their offspring before their eyes.

他们的家宅平安无惧。神的杖也不加在他们身上。
Their houses are free from fear, and the rod of God does not come on them.

他们的公牛孳生而不断绝。母牛下犊而不掉胎。
Their ox is ready at all times to give seed; their cow gives birth, without dropping her young.

他们打发小孩子出去，多如羊群。他们的儿女踊跃跳舞。
They send out their young ones like a flock, and their children have pleasure in the dance,

他们随着琴鼓歌唱，又因箫声欢喜。
They make songs to the instruments of music, and are glad at the sound of the pipe.

他们度日诸事亨通，转眼下入阴间。
Their days come to an end without trouble, and suddenly they go down to the underworld.

他们对神说，离开我们吧。我们不愿晓得你的道。
Though they said to God, Go away from us, for we have no desire for the knowledge of your ways.

全能者是谁，我们何必事奉他呢？求告他有什么益处呢？
What is the Ruler of all, that we may give him worship? and what profit is it to us to make prayer to him?

看哪，他们亨通不在乎自己。恶人所谋定的离我好远。
Truly, is not their well-being in their power? (The purpose of the evil-doers is far from me.)

恶人的灯何尝熄灭。患难何尝临到他们呢？神何尝发怒，向他们分散灾祸呢？
How frequently is the light of the evil-doers put out, or does trouble come on them? how frequently does his wrath take them with cords?

他们何尝像风前的碎秸，如暴风刮去的糠秕呢？
How frequently are they as dry stems before the wind, or as grass taken away by the storm-wind?

你们说，神为恶人的儿女积蓄罪孽。我说，不如本人受报，好使他亲自知道。
You say, God keeps punishment stored up for his children. Let him send it on the man himself, so that he may have the punishment of it!

愿他亲眼看见自己败亡，亲自饮全能者的忿怒。
Let his eyes see his trouble, and let him be full of the wrath of the Ruler of all!

他的岁月既尽，他还顾他本家吗？
For what interest has he in his house after him, when the number of his months is ended?

神既审判那在高位的，谁能将知识教训他呢？
Is anyone able to give teaching to God? for he is the judge of those who are on high.

有人至死身体强壮，尽得平靖安逸。
One comes to his end in complete well-being, full of peace and quiet:

他的奶桶充满，他的骨髓滋润。
His buckets are full of milk, and there is no loss of strength in his bones.

有人至死心中痛苦，终身未尝福乐的滋味。
And another comes to his end with a bitter soul, without ever tasting good.

他们一样躺卧在尘土中，都被虫子遮盖。
Together they go down to the dust, and are covered by the worm.

我知道你们的意思，并诬害我的计谋。
See, I am conscious of your thoughts, and of your violent purposes against me;

你们说，霸者的房屋在哪里？恶人住过的帐棚在哪里？
For you say, Where is the house of the ruler, and where is the tent of the evil-doer?

你们岂没有询问过路的人吗？不知道他们所引的证据吗？
Have you not put the question to the travellers, and do you not take note of their experience?

就是恶人在祸患的日子得存留，在发怒的日子得逃脱。
How the evil man goes free in the day of trouble, and has salvation in the day of wrath?

他所行的，有谁当面给他说明。他所做的，有谁报应他呢？
Who will make his way clear to his face? and if he has done a thing, who gives him punishment for it?

然而他要被抬到茔地，并有人看守坟墓。
He is taken to his last resting-place, and keeps watch over it.

他要以谷中的土块为甘甜，在他以先去的无数，在他以后去的更多。
The earth of the valley covering his bones is sweet to him, and all men come after him, as there were unnumbered before him.

你们对答的话中既都错谬，怎么徒然安慰我呢？
Why then do you give me comfort with words in which there is no profit, when you see that there is nothing in your answers but deceit?

提幔人以利法回答说，
Then Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and said,

人岂能使神有益呢？智慧人但能有益于己。
Is it possible for a man to be of profit to God? No, for a man's wisdom is only of profit to himself.

你为人公义，岂叫全能者喜悦呢？你行为完全，岂能使他得利呢？
Is it of any interest to the Ruler of all that you are upright? or is it of use to him that your ways are without sin?

岂是因你敬畏他，就责备你，审判你吗？
Is it because you give him honour that he is sending punishment on you and is judging you?

你的罪恶岂不是大吗？你的罪孽也没有穷尽。
Is not your evil-doing great? and there is no end to your sins.

因你无故强取弟兄的物为当头，剥去贫寒人的衣服。
For you have taken your brother's goods when he was not in your debt, and have taken away the clothing of those who have need of it.

困乏的人，你没有给他水喝。饥饿的人，你没有给他食物。
You do not give water to the tired traveller, and from him who has no food you keep back bread.

有能力的人就得地土。尊贵的人也住在其中。
For it was the man with power who had the land, and the man with an honoured name who was living in it.

你打发寡妇空手回去，折断孤儿的膀臂。
You have sent widows away without hearing their cause, and you have taken away the support of the child who has no father.

因此，有网罗环绕你，有恐惧忽然使你惊惶。
For this cause nets are round your feet, and you are overcome with sudden fear.

或有黑暗蒙蔽你，并有洪水淹没你。
Your light is made dark so that you are unable to see, and you are covered by a mass of waters.

神岂不是在高天吗？你看星宿何其高呢？
Is not God as high as heaven? and see the stars, how high they are!

你说，神知道什么？他岂能看透幽暗施行审判呢？
And you say, What knowledge has God? is he able to give decisions through the deep dark?

密云将他遮盖，使他不能看见。他周游穹苍。
Thick clouds are covering him, so that he is unable to see; and he is walking on the arch of heaven.

你要依从上古的道吗？这道是恶人所行的。
Will you keep the old way by which evil men went?

他们未到死期，忽然除灭。根基毁坏，好像被江河冲去。
Who were violently taken away before their time, who were overcome by the rush of waters:

他们向神说，离开我们吧。又说，全能者能把我们怎么样呢？
Who said to God, Go away from us; and, What is the Ruler of all able to do to us?

哪知，神以美物充满他们的房屋。但恶人所谋定的离我好远。
Though he made their houses full of good things: but the purpose of the evil-doers is far from me!

义人看见他们的结局就欢喜。无辜的人嗤笑他们。
The upright saw it and were glad: and those who had done no wrong made sport of them,

说，那起来攻击我们的果然被剪除，其余的都被火烧灭。
Saying, Truly, their substance is cut off, and their wealth is food for the fire.

你要认识神，就得平安。福气也必临到你。
Put yourself now in a right relation with him and be at peace: so will you do well in your undertakings.

你当领受他口中的教训，将他的言语存在心里。
Be pleased to take teaching from his mouth, and let his words be stored up in your heart.

你若归向全能者，从你帐棚中远除不义，就必得建立。
If you come back to the Ruler of all, making yourself low before him; if you put evil far away from your tents;

要将你的珍宝丢在尘土里，将俄斐的黄金丢在溪河石头之间。
And put your gold in the dust, even your gold of Ophir among the rocks of the valleys;

全能者就必为你的珍宝，作你的宝银。
Then the Ruler of all will be your gold, and his teaching will be your silver;

你就要以全能者为喜乐，向神仰起脸来。
For then you will have delight in the Ruler of all, and your face will be lifted up to God.

你要祷告他，他就听你。你也要还你的愿。
You will make your prayer to him, and be answered; and you will give effect to your oaths.

你定意要作何事，必然给你成就。亮光也必照耀你的路。
Your purposes will come about, and light will be shining on your ways.

人使你降卑，你仍可说，必得高升。谦卑的人神必然拯救。
For God makes low those whose hearts are lifted up, but he is a saviour to the poor in spirit.

人非无辜，神且要搭救他。他因你手中清洁，必蒙拯救。
He makes safe the man who is free from sin, and if your hands are clean, salvation will be yours.

约伯回答说，
And Job made answer and said,

如今我的哀告还算为悖逆。我的责罚比我的唉哼还重。
Even today my outcry is bitter; his hand is hard on my sorrow.

惟愿我能知道在哪里可以寻见神，能到他的台前。
If only I had knowledge of where he might be seen, so that I might come even to his seat!

我就在他面前将我的案件陈明，满口辩白。
I would put my cause in order before him, and my mouth would be full of arguments.

我必知道他回答我的言语，明白他向我所说的话。
I would see what his answers would be, and have knowledge of what he would say to me.

他岂用大能与我争辩吗？必不这样，他必理会我。
Would he make use of his great power to overcome me? No, but he would give attention to me.

在他那里，正直人可以与他辩论。这样，我必永远脱离那审判我的。
There an upright man might put his cause before him; and I would be free for ever from my judge.

只是，我往前行，他不在那里，往后退，也不能见他。
See, I go forward, but he is not there; and back, but I do not see him;

他在左边行事，我却不能看见，在右边隐藏，我也不能见他。
I am looking for him on the left hand, but there is no sign of him; and turning to the right, I am not able to see him.

然而他知道我所行的路。他试炼我之后，我必如精金。
For he has knowledge of the way I take; after I have been tested I will come out like gold.

我脚追随他的步履。我谨守他的道，并不偏离。
My feet have gone in his steps; I have kept in his way, without turning to one side or to the other.

他嘴唇的命令，我未曾背弃。我看重他口中的言语，过于我需用的饮食。
I have never gone against the orders of his lips; the words of his mouth have been stored up in my heart.

只是他心志已定，谁能使他转意呢？他心里所愿的，就行出来。
But his purpose is fixed and there is no changing it; and he gives effect to the desire of his soul.

他向我所定的，就必做成。这类的事他还有许多。
For what has been ordered for me by him will be gone through to the end: and his mind is full of such designs.

所以我在他面前惊惶，我思念这事，便惧怕他。
For this cause I am in fear before him, my thoughts of him overcome me.

神使我丧胆，全能者使我惊惶。
For God has made my heart feeble, and my mind is troubled before the Ruler of all.

我的恐惧，不是因为黑暗，也不是因为幽暗蒙蔽我的脸。
For I am overcome by the dark, and by the black night which is covering my face.

全能者既定期罚恶，为何不使认识他的人看见那日子呢？
Why are times not stored up by the Ruler of all, and why do those who have knowledge of him not see his days?

有人挪移地界，抢夺群畜而牧养。
The landmarks are changed by evil men, they violently take away flocks, together with their keepers.

他们拉去孤儿的驴，强取寡妇的牛为当头。
They send away the ass of him who has no father, they take the widow's ox for debt.

他们使穷人离开正道，世上的贫民尽都隐藏。
The crushed are turned out of the way; all the poor of the earth go into a secret place together.

这些贫穷人，如同野驴出到旷野，殷勤寻找食物。他们靠着野地给儿女糊口，
Like asses in the waste land they go out to their work, looking for food with care; from the waste land they get bread for their children.

收割别人田间的禾稼，摘取恶人余剩的葡萄。
They get mixed grain from the field, and they take away the late fruit from the vines of those who have wealth.

终夜赤身无衣，天气寒冷毫无遮盖，
They take their rest at night without clothing, and have no cover in the cold.

在山上被大雨淋湿，因没有避身之处就挨近磐石。
They are wet with the rain of the mountains, and get into the cracks of the rock for cover.

又有人从母怀中抢夺孤儿，强取穷人的衣服为当头。
The child without a father is forced from its mother's breast, and they take the young children of the poor for debt.

使人赤身无衣，到处流行，且因饥饿扛抬禾捆，
Others go about without clothing, and though they have no food, they get in the grain from the fields.

在那些人的围墙内造油，榨酒，自己还口渴。
Between the lines of olive-trees they make oil; though they have no drink, they are crushing out the grapes.

在多民的城内有人唉哼，受伤的人哀号。神却不理会那恶人的愚妄。
From the town come sounds of pain from those who are near death, and the soul of the wounded is crying out for help; but God does not take note of their prayer.

又有人背弃光明，不认识光明的道，不住在光明的路上。
Then there are those who are haters of the light, who have no knowledge of its ways, and do not go in them.

杀人的黎明起来，杀害困苦穷乏人，夜间又作盗贼。
He who is purposing death gets up before day, so that he may put to death the poor and those in need.

奸夫等候黄昏，说，必无眼能见我，就把脸蒙蔽。
And the man whose desire is for the wife of another is waiting for the evening, saying, No eye will see me; and he puts a cover on his face. And in the night the thief goes about;

盗贼黑夜挖窟窿，白日躲藏，并不认识光明。
In the dark he makes holes in the walls of houses: in the daytime they are shutting themselves up, they have no knowledge of the light.

他们看早晨如幽暗，因为他们晓得幽暗的惊骇。
For the middle of the night is as morning to them, they are not troubled by the fear of the dark.

这些恶人犹如浮萍快快飘去。他们所得的分在世上被咒诅。他们不得再走葡萄园的路。
They go quickly on the face of the waters; their heritage is cursed in the earth; the steps of the crusher of grapes are not turned to their vine-garden.

干旱炎热消没雪水，阴间也如此消没犯罪之辈。
Snow waters become dry with the heat: so do sinners go down into the underworld.

怀他的母（原文作胎）要忘记他。虫子要吃他，觉得甘甜。他不再被人记念。不义的人必如树折断。
The public place of his town has no more knowledge of him, and his name has gone from the memory of men: he is rooted up like a dead tree.

他恶待（或作他吞灭）不怀孕不生养的妇人，不善待寡妇。
He is not kind to the widow, and he has no pity for her child.

然而神用能力保全有势力的人，那性命难保的人仍然兴起。
But God by his power gives long life to the strong; he gets up again, though he has no hope of life.

神使他们安稳，他们就有所倚靠。神的眼目也看顾他们的道路。
He takes away his fear of danger and gives him support; and his eyes are on his ways.

他们被高举，不过片时就没有了。他们降为卑，被除灭，与众人一样，又如谷穗被割。
For a short time they are lifted up; then they are gone; they are made low, they are pulled off like fruit, and like the heads of grain they are cut off.

若不是这样，谁能证实我是说谎的，将我的言语驳为虚空呢？
And if it is not so, now, who will make it clear that my words are false, and that what I say is of no value?

书亚人比勒达回答说，
Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and said,

神有治理之权，有威严可畏。他在高处施行和平。
Rule and power are his; he makes peace in his high places.

他的诸军，岂能数算？他的光亮一发，谁不蒙照呢？
Is it possible for his armies to be numbered? and on whom is not his light shining?

这样在神面前，人怎能称义？妇人所生的怎能洁净？
How then is it possible for man to be upright before God? or how may he be clean who is a son of woman?

在神眼前，月亮也无光亮，星宿也不清洁。
See, even the moon is not bright, and the stars are not clean in his eyes:

何况如虫的人，如蛆的世人呢？
How much less man who is an insect, and the son of man who is a worm!

约伯回答说，
Then Job made answer and said,

无能的人，蒙你何等的帮助。膀臂无力的人，蒙你何等的拯救。
How have you given help to him who has no power! how have you been the salvation of the arm which has no strength!

无智慧的人，蒙你何等的指教。你向他多显大知识。
How have you given teaching to him who has no wisdom, and fully made clear true knowledge!

你向谁发出言语来。谁的灵从你而出。
To whom have your words been said? and whose spirit came out from you?

在大水，和水族以下的阴魂，战兢。
The shades in the underworld are shaking; the waters and those living in them.

在神面前，阴间显露。灭亡也不得遮掩。
The underworld is uncovered before him, and Destruction has no veil.

神将北极铺在空中，将大地悬在虚空。
By his hand the north is stretched out in space, and the earth is hanging on nothing.

将水包在密云中，云却不破裂。
By him the waters are shut up in his thick clouds, and the cloud does not give way under them.

遮蔽他的宝座，将云铺在其上。
By him the face of his high seat is veiled, and his cloud stretched out over it.

在水面的周围划出界限，直到光明黑暗的交界。
By him a circle is marked out on the face of the waters, to the limits of the light and the dark.

天的柱子，因他的斥责，震动惊奇。
The pillars of heaven are shaking, and are overcome by his sharp words.

他以能力搅动大海（搅动或作平静），他借知识打伤拉哈伯。
By his power the sea was made quiet; and by his wisdom Rahab was wounded.

借他的灵使天有妆饰，他的手刺杀快蛇。
By his wind the heavens become bright: by his hand the quickly moving snake was cut through.

看哪，这不过是神工作的些微。我们所听于他的，是何等细微的声音。他大能的雷声谁能明透呢？
See, these are only the outskirts of his ways; and how small is that which comes to our ears about him! But the thunder of his acts of power is outside all knowledge.

约伯接着说，
And Job again took up the word and said,

神夺去我的理，全能者使我心中愁苦。我指着永生的神起誓。
By the life of God, who has taken away my right; and of the Ruler of all, who has made my soul bitter;

我的生命尚在我里面，神所赐呼吸之气，仍在我的鼻孔内。
(For all my breath is still in me, and the spirit of God is my life;)

我的嘴决不说非义之言，我的舌也不说诡诈之语。
Truly, there is no deceit in my lips, and my tongue does not say what is false.

我断不以你们为是，我至死必不以自己为不正。
Let it be far from me! I will certainly not say that you are right! I will come to death before I give up my righteousness.

我持定我的义，必不放松。在世的日子，我心必不责备我。
I will keep it safe, and will not let it go: my heart has nothing to say against any part of my life.

愿我的仇敌如恶人一样。愿那起来攻击我的，如不义之人一般。
Let my hater be like the evil man, and let him who comes against me be as the sinner.

不敬虔的人虽然得利，神夺取其命的时候，还有什么指望呢？
For what is the hope of the sinner when he is cut off, when God takes back his soul?

患难临到他，神岂能听他的呼求？
Will his cry come to the ears of God when he is in trouble?

他岂以全能者为乐，随时求告神呢？
Will he take delight in the Ruler of all, and make his prayer to God at all times?

神的作为，我要指教你们。全能者所行的，我也不隐瞒。
I will give you teaching about the hand of God; I will not keep secret from you what is in the mind of the Ruler of all.

你们自己也都见过，为何全然变为虚妄呢？
Truly, you have all seen it yourselves; why then have you become completely foolish?

神为恶人所定的分，强暴人从全能者所得的报（报原文作产业）乃是这样。
This is the punishment of the evil-doer from God, and the heritage given to the cruel by the Ruler of all.

倘或他的儿女增多，还是被刀所杀。他的子孙必不得饱食。
If his children are increased, it is for the sword; and his offspring have not enough bread.

他所遗留的人必死而埋葬，他的寡妇也不哀哭。
When those of his house who are still living come to their end by disease, they are not put into the earth, and their widows are not weeping for them.

他虽积蓄银子如尘沙，预备衣服如泥土。
Though he may get silver together like dust, and make ready great stores of clothing;

他只管预备，义人却要穿上。他的银子，无辜的人要分取。
He may get them ready, but the upright will put them on, and he who is free from sin will take the silver for a heritage.

他建造房屋如虫做窝，又如守望者所搭的棚。
His house has no more strength than a spider's thread, or a watchman's tent.

他虽富足躺卧，却不得收殓，转眼之间就不在了。
He goes to rest full of wealth, but does so for the last time: on opening his eyes, he sees it there no longer.

惊恐如波涛将他追上。暴风在夜间将他刮去。
Fears overtake him like rushing waters; in the night the storm-wind takes him away.

东风把他飘去，又刮他离开本处。
The east wind takes him up and he is gone; he is forced violently out of his place.

神要向他射箭，并不留情。他恨不得逃脱神的手。
God sends his arrows against him without mercy; he goes in flight before his hand.

人要向他拍掌，并要发叱声，使他离开本处。
Men make signs of joy because of him, driving him from his place with sounds of hissing.

银子有矿，炼金有方。
Truly there is a mine for silver, and a place where gold is washed out.

铁从地里挖出，铜从石中熔化。
Iron is taken out of the earth, and stone is changed into brass by the fire.

人为黑暗定界限，查究幽暗阴翳的石头，直到极处。
Man puts an end to the dark, searching out to the farthest limit the stones of the deep places of the dark.

在无人居住之处刨开矿穴，过路的人也想不到他们。又与人远离，悬在空中摇来摇去。
He makes a deep mine far away from those living in the light of day; when they go about on the earth, they have no knowledge of those who are under them, who are hanging far from men, twisting from side to side on a cord.

至于地，能出粮食，地内好像被火翻起来。
As for the earth, bread comes out of it; but under its face it is turned up as if by fire.

地中的石头有蓝宝石，并有金沙。
Its stones are the place of sapphires, and it has dust of gold.

矿中的路鸷鸟不得知道，鹰眼也未见过。
No bird has knowledge of it, and the hawk's eye has never seen it.

狂傲的野兽未曾行过。猛烈的狮子也未曾经过。
The great beasts have not gone over it, and the cruel lion has not taken that way.

人伸手凿开坚石，倾倒山根。
Man puts out his hand on the hard rock, overturning mountains by the roots.

在磐石中凿出水道，亲眼看见各样宝物。
He makes deep ways, cut through the rock, and his eye sees everything of value.

他封闭水不得滴流，使隐藏的物显露出来。
He keeps back the streams from flowing, and makes the secret things come out into the light.

然而，智慧有何处可寻？聪明之处在哪里呢？
But where may wisdom be seen? and where is the resting-place of knowledge?

智慧的价值无人能知，在活人之地也无处可寻。
Man has not seen the way to it, and it is not in the land of the living.

深渊说，不在我内。沧海说，不在我中。
The deep waters say, It is not in me: and the sea says, It is not with me.

智慧非用黄金可得，也不能平白银为它的价值。
Gold may not be given for it, or a weight of silver in payment for it.

俄斐金，和贵重的红玛瑙，并蓝宝石，不足与较量。
It may not be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the onyx of great price, or the sapphire.

黄金，和玻璃，不足与比较。精金的器皿，不足与兑换。
Gold and glass are not equal to it in price, and it may not be exchanged for jewels of the best gold.

珊瑚，水晶都不足论。智慧的价值胜过珍珠（或作红宝石）。
There is no need to say anything about coral or crystal; and the value of wisdom is greater than that of pearls.

古实的红璧玺，不足与比较。精金，也不足与较量。
The topaz of Ethiopia is not equal to it, and it may not be valued with the best gold.

智慧从何处来呢？聪明之处在哪里呢？
From where then does wisdom come, and where is the resting-place of knowledge?

是向一切有生命的眼目隐藏，向空中的飞鸟掩蔽。
For it is kept secret from the eyes of all living, unseen by the birds of the air.

灭没和死亡说，我们风闻其名。
Destruction and Death say, We have only had word of it with our ears.

神明白智慧的道路，晓得智慧的所在。
God has knowledge of the way to it, and of its resting-place;

因他鉴察直到地极，遍观普天之下。
For his eyes go to the ends of the earth, and he sees everything under heaven.

要为风定轻重，又度量诸水。
When he made a weight for the wind, measuring out the waters;

他为雨露定命令，为雷电定道路。
When he made a law for the rain, and a way for the thunder-flames;

那时他看见智慧，而且述说。他坚定，并且查究。
Then he saw it, and put it on record; he gave it its fixed form, searching it out completely.

他对人说，敬畏主就是智慧。远离恶便是聪明。
And he said to man, Truly the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to keep from evil is the way to knowledge.

约伯又接着说，
And Job again took up the word and said,

惟愿我的景况如从前的月份，如神保守我的日子。
If only I might again be as I was in the months which are past, in the days when God was watching over me!

那时他的灯照在我头上。我借他的光行过黑暗。
When his light was shining over my head, and when I went through the dark by his light.

我愿如壮年的时候，那时我在帐棚中。神待我有密友之情。
As I was in my flowering years, when my tent was covered by the hand of God;

全能者仍与我同在。我的儿女都环绕我。
While the Ruler of all was still with me, and my children were round me;

奶多可洗我的脚。磐石为我出油成河。
When my steps were washed with milk, and rivers of oil were flowing out of the rock for me.

我出到城门，在街上设立座位。
When I went out of my door to go up to the town, and took my seat in the public place,

少年人见我而回避，老年人也起身站立。
The young men saw me, and went away, and the old men got up from their seats;

王子都停止说话，用手捂口。
The rulers kept quiet, and put their hands on their mouths;

首领静默无声，舌头贴住上膛。
The chiefs kept back their words, and their tongues were joined to the roofs of their mouths.

耳朵听我的，就称我有福。眼睛看我的，便称赞我。
For when it came to their ears, men said that I was truly happy; and when their eyes saw, they gave witness to me;

因我拯救哀求的困苦人，和无人帮助的孤儿。
For I was a saviour to the poor when he was crying for help, to the child with no father, and to him who had no supporter.

将要灭亡的为我祝福。我也使寡妇心中欢乐。
The blessing of him who was near to destruction came on me, and I put a song of joy into the widow's heart.

我以公义为衣服，以公平为外袍和冠冕。
I put on righteousness as my clothing, and was full of it; right decisions were to me a robe and a head-dress.

我为瞎子的眼，瘸子的脚。
I was eyes to the blind, and feet to him who had no power of walking.

我为穷乏人的父，素不认识的人，我查明他的案件。
I was a father to the poor, searching out the cause of him who was strange to me.

我打破不义之人的牙床，从他牙齿中夺了所抢的。
By me the great teeth of the evil-doer were broken, and I made him give up what he had violently taken away.

我便说，我必死在家中（原文作窝中），必增添我的日子，多如尘沙。
Then I said, I will come to my end with my children round me, my days will be as the sand in number;

我的根长到水边，露水终夜沾在我的枝上。
My root will be open to the waters, and the night mist will be on my branches,

我的荣耀在身上增新，我的弓在手中日强。
My glory will be ever new, and my bow will be readily bent in my hand.

人听见我而仰望，静默等候我的指教。
Men gave ear to me, waiting and keeping quiet for my suggestions.

我说话之后，他们就不再说。我的言语像雨露滴在他们身上。
After I had said what was in my mind, they were quiet and let my words go deep into their hearts;

他们仰望我如仰望雨，又张开口如切慕春雨。
They were waiting for me as for the rain, opening their mouths wide as for the spring rains.

他们不敢自信，我就向他们含笑。他们不使我脸上的光改变。
I was laughing at them when they had no hope, and the light of my face was never clouded by their fear.

我为他们选择道路，又坐首位。我如君王在军队中居住，又如吊丧的安慰伤心的人。
I took my place as a chief, guiding them on their way, and I was as a king among his army. ...

但如今，比我年少的人戏笑我。其人之父我曾藐视，不肯安在看守我羊群的狗中。
But now those who are younger than I make sport of me; those whose fathers I would not have put with the dogs of my flocks.

他们壮年的气力既已衰败，其手之力与我何益呢？
Of what use is the strength of their hands to me? all force is gone from them.

他们因穷乏饥饿，身体枯瘦，在荒废凄凉的幽暗中啃干燥之地。
They are wasted for need of food, biting the dry earth; their only hope of life is in the waste land.

在草丛之中采咸草，罗腾的根为他们的食物（罗腾小树名松类）。
They are pulling off the salt leaves from the brushwood, and making a meal of roots.

他们从人中被赶出，人追喊他们如贼一般。
They are sent out from among their townsmen, men are crying after them as thieves

以致他们住在荒谷之间，在地洞和岩穴中。
They have to get a resting-place in the hollows of the valleys, in holes of the earth and rocks.

在草丛中叫唤，在荆棘下聚集。
They make noises like asses among the brushwood; they get together under the thorns.

这都是愚顽下贱人的儿女，他们被鞭打，赶出境外。
They are sons of shame, and of men without a name, who have been forced out of the land.

现在这些人以我为歌曲，以我为笑谈。
And now I have become their song, and I am a word of shame to them.

他们厌恶我，躲在旁边站着，不住地吐唾沫在我脸上。
I am disgusting to them; they keep away from me, and put marks of shame on me.

松开他们的绳索苦待我，在我面前脱去辔头。
For he has made loose the cord of my bow, and put me to shame; he has sent down my flag to the earth before me.

这等下流人在我右边起来，推开我的脚，筑成战路来攻击我。
The lines of his men of war put themselves in order, and make high their ways of destruction against me:

这些无人帮助的，毁坏我的道，加增我的灾。
They have made waste my roads, with a view to my destruction; his bowmen come round about me;

他们来如同闯进大破口，在毁坏之间滚在我身上。
As through a wide broken place in the wall they come on, I am overturned by the shock of their attack.

惊恐临到我，驱逐我的尊荣如风，我的福禄如云过去。
Fears have come on me; my hope is gone like the wind, and my well-being like a cloud.

现在我心极其悲伤。困苦的日子将我抓住。
But now my soul is turned to water in me, days of trouble overtake me:

夜间，我里面的骨头刺我，疼痛不止，好像龈我。
The flesh is gone from my bones, and they give me no rest; there is no end to my pains.

因神的大力，我的外衣污秽不堪，又如里衣的领子将我缠住。
With great force he takes a grip of my clothing, pulling me by the neck of my coat.

神把我扔在淤泥中，我就像尘土和炉灰一般。
Truly God has made me low, even to the earth, and I have become like dust.

主阿，我呼求你，你不应允我。我站起来，你就定睛看我。
You give no answer to my cry, and take no note of my prayer.

你向我变心，待我残忍，又用大能追逼我。
You have become cruel to me; the strength of your hand is hard on me.

把我提在风中，使我驾风而行，又使我消灭在烈风中。
Lifting me up, you make me go on the wings of the wind; I am broken up by the storm.

我知道要使我临到死地，到那为众生所定的阴宅。
For I am certain that you will send me back to death, and to the meeting-place ordered for all living.

然而，人仆倒岂不伸手？遇灾难岂不求救呢？
Has not my hand been stretched out in help to the poor? have I not been a saviour to him in his trouble?

人遭难，我岂不为他哭泣呢？人穷乏，我岂不为他忧愁呢？
Have I not been weeping for the crushed? and was not my soul sad for him who was in need?

我仰望得好处，灾祸就到了。我等待光明，黑暗便来了。
For I was looking for good, and evil came; I was waiting for light, and it became dark.

我心里烦扰不安，困苦的日子临到我身。
My feelings are strongly moved, and give me no rest; days of trouble have overtaken me.

我没有日光就哀哭行去（或作我面发黑并非因日晒）。我在会中站着求救。
I go about in dark clothing, uncomforted; I get up in the public place, crying out for help.

我与野狗为弟兄，与鸵鸟为同伴。
I have become a brother to the jackals, and go about in the company of ostriches.

我的皮肤黑而脱落，我的骨头因热烧焦。
My skin is black and dropping off me; and my bones are burning with the heat of my disease.

所以，我的琴音变为悲音，我的箫声变为哭声。
And my music has been turned to sorrow, and the sound of my pipe into the noise of weeping.

我与眼睛立约，怎能恋恋瞻望处女呢？
I made an agreement with my eyes; how then might my eyes be looking on a virgin?

从至上的神所得之分，从至高全能者所得之业，是什么呢？
For what is God's reward from on high, or the heritage given by the Ruler of all from heaven?

岂不是祸患临到不义的，灾害临到作孽的呢？
Is it not trouble for the sinner, and destruction for the evil-doers?

神岂不是察看我的道路，数点我的脚步呢？
Does he not see my ways, and are not my steps all numbered?

我若与虚谎同行，脚若追随诡诈。
If I have gone in false ways, or my foot has been quick in working deceit;

我若被公道的天平称度，使神可以知道我的纯正。
(Let me be measured in upright scales, and let God see my righteousness:)

我的脚步若偏离正路，我的心若随着我的眼目，若有玷污粘在我手上。
If my steps have been turned out of the way, or if my heart went after my eyes, or if the property of another is in my hands;

就愿我所种的有别人吃，我田所产的被拔出来。
Let me put seed in the earth for another to have the fruit of it, and let my produce be uprooted.

我若受迷惑，向妇人起淫念，在邻舍的门外蹲伏。
If my heart went after another man's wife, or if I was waiting secretly at my neighbour's door;

就愿我的妻子给别人推磨，别人也与她同室。
Then let my wife give pleasure to another man and let others make use of her body.

因为这是大罪，是审判官当罚的罪孽。
For that would be a crime; it would be an act for which punishment would be measured out by the judges:

这本是火焚烧，直到毁灭，必拔除我所有的家产。
It would be a fire burning even to destruction, and taking away all my produce.

我的仆婢与我争辩的时候，我若藐视不听他们的情节。
If I did wrong in the cause of my man-servant, or my woman-servant, when they went to law with me;

神兴起，我怎样行呢？他察问，我怎样回答呢？
What then will I do when God comes as my judge? and what answer may I give to his questions?

造我在腹中的，不也是造他吗？将他与我抟在腹中的，岂不是一位吗？
Did not God make him as well as me? did he not give us life in our mothers' bodies?

我若不容贫寒人得其所愿，或叫寡妇眼中失望，
If I kept back the desire of the poor; if the widow's eye was looking for help to no purpose;

或独自吃我一点食物，孤儿没有与我同吃。
If I kept my food for myself, and did not give some of it to the child with no father;

（从幼年时孤儿与我同长，好像父子一样。我从出母腹就扶助寡妇）。（扶助原文作引领）
(For I was cared for by God as by a father from my earliest days; he was my guide from the body of my mother;)

我若见人因无衣死亡，或见穷乏人身无遮盖。
If I saw one near to death for need of clothing, and that the poor had nothing covering him;

我若不使他因我羊的毛得暖，为我祝福。
If his back did not give me a blessing, and the wool of my sheep did not make him warm;

我若在城门口见有帮助我的，举手攻击孤儿。
If my hand had been lifted up against him who had done no wrong, when I saw that I was supported by the judges;

情愿我的肩头从缺盆骨脱落，我的膀臂从羊矢骨折断。
May my arm be pulled from my body, and be broken from its base.

因神降的灾祸使我恐惧。因他的威严，我不能妄为。
For the fear of God kept me back, and because of his power I might not do such things.

我若以黄金为指望，对精金说，你是我的倚靠。
If I made gold my hope, or if I ever said to the best gold, I have put my faith in you;

我若因财物丰裕，因我手多得资财而欢喜。
If I was glad because my wealth was great, and because my hand had got together a great store;

我若见太阳发光，明月行在空中，
If, when I saw the sun shining, and the moon moving on its bright way,

心就暗暗被引诱，口便亲手。
A secret feeling of worship came into my heart, and my hand gave kisses from my mouth;

这也是审判官当罚的罪孽，又是我背弃在上的神。
That would have been another sin to be rewarded with punishment by the judges; for I would have been false to God on high.

我若见恨我的遭报就欢喜，见他遭灾便高兴。
If I was glad at the trouble of my hater, and gave cries of joy when evil overtook him;

（我没有容口犯罪，咒诅他的生命）
(For I did not let my mouth give way to sin, in putting a curse on his life;)

若我帐棚的人未尝说，谁不以主人的食物吃饱呢？
If the men of my tent did not say, Who has not had full measure of his meat?

（从来我没有容客旅在街上住宿，却开门迎接行路的人）
The traveller did not take his night's rest in the street, and my doors were open to anyone on a journey;

我若像亚当（亚当或作别人）遮掩我的过犯，将罪孽藏在怀中。
If I kept my evil doings covered, and my sin in the secret of my breast,

因惧怕大众，又因宗族藐视我使我惊恐，以致闭口无言，杜门不出。
For fear of the great body of people, or for fear that families might make sport of me, so that I kept quiet, and did not go out of my door;

惟愿有一位肯听我。（看哪，在这里有我所划的押，愿全能者回答我）
If only God would give ear to me, and the Ruler of all would give me an answer! or if what he has against me had been put in writing!

愿那敌我者，所写的状词在我这里，我必带在肩上，又绑在头上为冠冕。
Truly I would take up the book in my hands; it would be to me as a crown;

我必向他述说我脚步的数目，必如君王进到他面前。
I would make clear the number of my steps, I would put it before him like a prince! The words of Job are ended.

我若夺取田地，这地向我喊冤，犁沟一同哭泣。
If my land has made an outcry against me, or the ploughed earth has been in sorrow;

我若吃地的出产不给价值，或叫原主丧命。
If I have taken its produce without payment, causing the death of its owners;

愿这地长蒺藜代替麦子，长恶草代替大麦。约伯的话说完了。
Then in place of grain let thorns come up, and in place of barley evil-smelling plants.

于是这三个人，因约伯自以为义就，不再回答他。
So these three men gave no more answers to Job, because he seemed to himself to be right.

那时有布西人，兰族巴拉迦的儿子，以利户向约伯发怒。因约伯自以为义，不以神为义。
And Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was angry, burning with wrath against Job, because he seemed to himself more right than God;

他又向约伯的三个朋友发怒。因为他们想不出回答的话来，仍以约伯为有罪。
And he was angry with his three friends, because they had been unable to give him an answer, and had not made Job's sin clear.

以利户要与约伯说话，就等候他们，因为他们比自己年老。
Now Elihu had kept quiet while Job was talking, because they were older than he;

以利户见这三个人口中无话回答，就怒气发作。
And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of the three men, he was very angry.

布西人，巴拉迦的儿子，以利户回答说，我年轻，你们老迈。因此我退让，不敢向你们陈说我的意见。
And Elihu, the son of Barachel the Buzite, made answer and said, I am young, and you are very old, so I was in fear, and kept myself from putting my knowledge before you.

我说，年老的当先说话。寿高的当以智慧教训人。
I said to myself, It is right for the old to say what is in their minds, and for those who are far on in years to give out wisdom.

但在人里面有灵，全能者的气使人有聪明。
But truly it is the spirit in man, even the breath of the Ruler of all, which gives them knowledge.

尊贵的不都有智慧。寿高的不都能明白公平。
It is not the old who are wise, and those who are full of years have not the knowledge of what is right.

因此我说，你们要听我言，我也要陈说我的意见。
So I say, Give ear to me, and I will put forward my knowledge.

你们查究所要说的话。那时我等候你们的话，侧耳听你们的辩论。
I was waiting for your words, I was giving ear to your wise sayings; while you were searching out what to say,

留心听你们。谁知你们中间无一人折服约伯，驳倒他的话。
I was taking note; and truly not one of you was able to make clear Job's error, or to give an answer to his words.

你们切不可说，我们寻得智慧。神能胜他，人却不能。
Take care that you do not say, Wisdom is here; God may overcome him, but not man.

约伯没有向我争辩。我也不用你们的话回答他。
I will not put forward words like these, or make use of your sayings in answer to him.

他们惊奇不再回答，一言不发。
Fear has overcome them, they have no more answers to give; they have come to an end of words.

我岂因他们不说话，站住不再回答，仍旧等候呢？
And am I to go on waiting while they have nothing to say? while they keep quiet and give no more answers?

我也要回答我的一分话，陈说我的意见。
I will give my answer; I will put forward my knowledge:

因为我的言语满怀。我里面的灵激动我。
For I am full of words, I am unable to keep in my breath any longer:

我的胸怀如盛酒之囊，没有出气之缝，又如新皮袋快要破裂。
My stomach is like wine which is unable to get out; like skins full of new wine, it is almost burst.

我要说话，使我舒畅。我要开口回答。
Let me say what is in my mind, so that I may get comfort; let me give answer with open mouth.

我必不看人的情面，也不奉承人。
Let me not give respect to any man, or give names of honour to any living.

我不晓得奉承。若奉承，造我的主必快快除灭我。
For I am not able to give names of honour to any man; and if I did, my Maker would quickly take me away.

约伯阿，请听我的话，留心听我一切的言语。
And now, O Job, give ear to my words, and take note of all I say.

我现在开口，用舌发言。
See, now my mouth is open, my tongue gives out words.

我的言语要发明心中所存的正直。我所知道的，我嘴唇要诚实地说出。
My heart is overflowing with knowledge, my lips say what is true.

神的灵造我，全能者的气使我得生。
The spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Ruler of all gives me life.

你若回答我，就站起来，在我面前陈明。
If you are able, give me an answer; put your cause in order, and come forward.

我在神面前与你一样，也是用土造成。
See, I am the same as you are in the eyes of God; I was cut off from the same bit of wet earth.

我不用威严惊吓你，也不用势力重压你。
Fear of me will not overcome you, and my hand will not be hard on you.

你所说的，我听见了，也听见你的言语，说，
But you said in my hearing, and your voice came to my ears:

我是清洁无过的，我是无辜的。在我里面也没有罪孽。
I am clean, without sin; I am washed, and there is no evil in me:

神找机会攻击我，以我为仇敌，
See, he is looking for something against me; in his eyes I am as one of his haters;

把我的脚上了木狗，窥察我一切的道路。
He puts chains on my feet; he is watching all my ways.

我要回答你说，你这话无理，因神比世人更大。
Truly, in saying this you are wrong; for God is greater than man.

你为何与他争论呢？因他的事都不对人解说。
Why do you put forward your cause against him, saying, He gives no answer to any of my words?

神说一次，两次，世人却不理会。
For God gives his word in one way, even in two, and man is not conscious of it:

人躺在床上沉睡的时候，神就用梦，和夜间的异象，
In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep comes on men, while they take their rest on their beds;

开通他们的耳朵，将当受的教训印在他们心上，
Then he makes his secrets clear to men, so that they are full of fear at what they see;

好叫人不从自己的谋算，不行骄傲的事。（原文作将骄傲向人隐藏）
In order that man may be turned from his evil works, and that pride may be taken away from him;

拦阻人不陷于坑里，不死在刀下。
To keep back his soul from the underworld, and his life from destruction.

人在床上被惩治，骨头中不住地疼痛。
Pain is sent on him as a punishment, while he is on his bed; there is no end to the trouble in his bones;

以致他的口厌弃食物，心厌恶美味。
He has no desire for food, and his soul is turned away from delicate meat;

他的肉消瘦，不得再见。先前不见的骨头都凸出来。
His flesh is so wasted away, that it may not be seen, and his bones. ...

他的灵魂临近深坑。他的生命近于灭命的。
And his soul comes near to the underworld, and his life to the angels of death.

一千天使中，若有一个作传话的与神同在，指示人所当行的事。
If now there may be an angel sent to him, one of the thousands which there are to be between him and God, and to make clear to man what is right for him;

神就给他开恩，说，救赎他免得下坑。我已经得了赎价。
And if he has mercy on him, and says, Let him not go down to the underworld, I have given the price for his life:

他的肉要比孩童的肉更嫩。他就返老还童。
Then his flesh becomes young again, and he comes back to the days of his early strength;

他祷告神，神就喜悦他，使他欢呼朝见神的面。神又看他为义。
He makes his prayer to God, and he has mercy on him; he sees God's face with cries of joy; he gives news of his righteousness to men;

他在人前歌唱说，我犯了罪，颠倒是非，这竟与我无益。
He makes a song, saying, I did wrong, turning from the straight way, but he did not give me the reward of my sin.

神救赎我的灵魂免入深坑。我的生命也必见光。
He kept my soul from the underworld, and my life sees the light in full measure.

神两次，三次，向人行这一切的事。
Truly, God does all these things to man, twice and three times,

为要从深坑救回人的灵魂，使他被光照耀与活人一样。
Keeping back his soul from the underworld, so that he may see the light of life.

约伯阿，你当侧耳听我的话，不要作声，等我讲说。
Take note O Job, give ear to me; keep quiet, while I say what is in my mind.

你若有话说，就可以回答我。你只管说，因我愿以你为是。
If you have anything to say, give me an answer; for it is my desire that you may be judged free from sin.

若不然，你就听我说。你不要作声，我便将智慧教训你。
If not, give attention to me, and keep quiet, and I will give you wisdom.

以利户又说，
And Elihu made answer and said,

你们智慧人，要听我的话。有知识的人，要留心听我说。
Give ear, you wise, to my words; and you who have knowledge, give attention to me;

因为耳朵试验话语，好像上膛尝食物。
For words are tested by the ear, as food is tasted by the mouth.

我们当选择何为是，彼此知道何为善。
Let us make the decision for ourselves as to what is right; let us have the knowledge among ourselves of what is good.

约伯曾说，我是公义，神夺去我的理。
For Job has said, I am upright, and it is God who has taken away my right;

我虽有理，还算为说谎言的。我虽无过，受的伤还不能医治。
Though I am right, still I am in pain; my wound may not be made well, though I have done no wrong.

谁像约伯，喝讥诮如同喝水呢？
What man is like Job, a man who freely makes sport of God,

他与作孽的结伴，和恶人同行。
And goes in the company of evil-doers, walking in the way of sinners?

他说，人以神为乐，总是无益。
For he has said, It is no profit to a man to take delight in God.

所以你们明理的人，要听我的话。神断不至行恶，全能者断不至作孽。
Now then, you wise, take note; you men of knowledge, give ear to me. Let it be far from God to do evil, and from the Ruler of all to do wrong.

他必按人所作的报应人，使各人照所行的得报。
For he gives to every man the reward of his work, and sees that he gets the fruit of his ways.

神必不作恶，全能者也不偏离公平。
Truly, God does not do evil, and the Ruler of all is not a false judge.

谁派他治理地，安定全世界呢？
Who put the earth into his care, or made him responsible for the world?

他若专心为己，将灵和气收归自己。
If he made his spirit come back to him, taking his breath into himself again,

凡有血气的就必一同死亡，世人必仍归尘土。
All flesh would come to an end together, and man would go back to the dust.

你若明理，就当听我的话，留心听我言语的声音。
If you are wise, take note of this; give ear to the voice of my words.

难道恨恶公平的可以掌权吗？那有公义的，有大能的，岂可定他有罪吗？
How may a hater of right be a ruler? and will you say that the upright Ruler of all is evil?

他对君王说，你是鄙陋的。对贵臣说，你是邪恶的。
He who says to a king, You are an evil-doer; and to rulers, You are sinners;

他待王子不徇情面，也不看重富足的过于贫穷的，因为都是他手所造。
Who has no respect for rulers, and who gives no more attention to those who have wealth than to the poor, for they are all the work of his hands.

在转眼之间，半夜之中，他们就死亡。百姓被震动而去世。有权力的被夺去非借人手。
Suddenly they come to an end, even in the middle of the night: the blow comes on the men of wealth, and they are gone, and the strong are taken away without the hand of man.

神注目观看人的道路，看明人的脚步。
For his eyes are on the ways of a man, and he sees all his steps.

没有黑暗，阴翳能给作孽的藏身。
There is no dark place, and no thick cloud, in which the workers of evil may take cover.

神审判人，不必使人到他面前再三鉴察。
For he does not give man a fixed time to come before him to be judged.

他用难测之法，打破有能力的人，设立别人代替他们。
He sends the strong to destruction without searching out their cause, and puts others in their place.

他原知道他们的行为，使他们在夜间倾倒灭亡。
For he has knowledge of their works, overturning them in the night, so that they are crushed.

他在众人眼前击打他们，如同击打恶人一样。
The evil-doers are broken by his wrath, he puts his hand on them with force before the eyes of all onlookers.

因为他们偏行不跟从他，也不留心他的道，
Because they did not go after him, and took no note of his ways,

甚至使贫穷人的哀声，达到他那里。他也听了困苦人的哀声。
So that the cry of the poor might come up to him, and the prayer of those in need come to his ears.

他使人安静，谁能扰乱（或作定罪）呢？他掩面谁能见他呢？无论待一国，或一人都是如此。
...

使不虔敬的人不得作王，免得有人牢笼百姓。
...

有谁对神说，我受了责罚，不再犯罪。
...

我所看不明的，求你指教我。我若作了孽，必不再作。
...

他施行报应，岂要随你的心愿，叫你推辞不受吗？选定的是你，不是我。你所知道的只管说吧。
...

明理的人，和听我话的智慧人，必对我说。
Men of knowledge, and all wise men, hearing me, will say,

约伯说话没有知识，言语中毫无智慧。
Job's words do not come from knowledge; they are not the fruit of wisdom.

愿约伯被试验到底，因他回答像恶人一样。
May Job be tested to the end, because his answers have been like those of evil men.

他在罪上又加悖逆。在我们中间拍手，用许多言语轻慢神。
For in addition to his sin, he is uncontrolled in heart; before our eyes he makes sport of God, increasing his words against him.

以利户又说，
And Elihu made answer and said,

你以为有理，或以为你的公义胜于神的公义，
Does it seem to you to be right, and righteousness before God, to say,

才说这与我有什么益处。我不犯罪比犯罪有什么好处呢？
What profit is it to me, and how am I better off than if I had done wrong?

我要回答你，和在你这里的朋友。
I will make answer to you and to your friends:

你要向天观看，瞻望那高于你的穹苍。
Let your eyes be turned to the heavens, and lifted up to see the skies; they are higher than you.

你若犯罪，能使神受何害呢？你的过犯加增，能使神受何损呢？
If you have done wrong, is he any the worse for it? and if your sins are great in number, what is it to him?

你若是公义，还能加增他什么呢？他从你手里还接受什么呢？
If you are upright, what do you give to him? or what does he take from your hand?

你的过恶，或能害你这类的人。你的公义，或能叫世人得益处。
Your evil-doing may have an effect on a man like yourself, or your righteousness on a son of man.

人因多受欺压就哀求，因受能者的辖制（辖制原文作膀臂）便求救。
Because the hand of the cruel is hard on them, men are making sounds of grief; they are crying out for help because of the arm of the strong.

却无人说，造我的神在哪里？他使人夜间歌唱。
But no one has said, Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night;

教训我们胜于地上的走兽，使我们有聪明胜于空中的飞鸟。
Who gives us more knowledge than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of the heaven?

他们在那里，因恶人的骄傲呼求，却无人答应。
There they are crying out because of the pride of the evil-doers, but he gives them no answer.

虚妄的呼求，神必不垂听。全能者也必不眷顾。
But God will not give ear to what is false, or the Ruler of all take note of it;

何况你说，你不得见他。你的案件在他面前，你等候他吧。
How much less when you say that you do not see him; that the cause is before him, and you are waiting for him.

但如今因他未曾发怒降罚，也不甚理会狂傲，
And now ... ;

所以约伯开口说虚妄的话，多发无知识的言语。
And Job's mouth is open wide to give out what is of no profit, increasing words without knowledge.

以利户又接着说，
And Elihu went on to say,

你再容我片时，我就指示你，因我还有话为神说。
Give me a little more time, and I will make it clear to you; for I have still something to say for God.

我要将所知道的从远处引来，将公义归给造我的主。
I will get my knowledge from far, and I will give righteousness to my Maker.

我的言语真不虚谎。有知识全备的与你同在。
For truly my words are not false; one who has all knowledge is talking with you.

神有大能，并不藐视人。他的智慧甚广。
Truly, God gives up the hard-hearted, and will not give life to the sinner.

他不保护恶人的性命，却为困苦人伸冤。
His eyes are ever on the upright, and he gives to the crushed their right;

他时常看顾义人，使他们和君王同坐宝座，永远要被高举。
Lifting them up to the seat of kings, and making them safe for ever.

他们若被锁链捆住，被苦难的绳索缠住，
And if they have been prisoned in chains, and taken in cords of trouble,

他就把他们的作为，和过犯指示他们，叫他们知道有骄傲的行动。
Then he makes clear to them what they have done, even their evil works in which they have taken pride.

他也开通他们的耳朵，得受教训，吩咐他们离开罪孽转回。
Their ear is open to his teaching, and he gives them orders so that their hearts may be turned from evil.

他们若听从事奉他，就必度日亨通，历年福乐。
If they give ear to his voice, and do his word, then he gives them long life, and years full of pleasure.

若不听从，就要被刀杀灭，无知无识而死。
But if not, they come to their end, and give up their breath without knowledge.

那心中不敬虔的人积蓄怒气。神捆绑他们，他们竟不求救。
Those who have no fear of God keep wrath stored up in their hearts; they give no cry for help when they are made prisoners.

必在青年时死亡，与污秽人一样丧命。
They come to their end while they are still young, their life is short like that of those who are used for sex purposes in the worship of their gods.

神借着困苦救拔困苦人，趁他们受欺压，开通他们的耳朵。
He makes the wrong done to the poor the way of their salvation, opening their ears by their trouble.

神也必引你出离患难，进入宽阔不狭窄之地。摆在你席上的必满有肥甘。
...

但你满口有恶人批评的言语。判断和刑罚抓住你。
...

不可容忿怒触动你，使你不服责罚。也不可因赎价大就偏行。
...

你的呼求（呼求或作资财），或是你一切的势力，果有灵验，叫你不受患难吗？
...

不要切慕黑夜，就是众民在本处被除灭的时候。
...

你要谨慎，不可重看罪孽，因你选择罪孽，过于选择苦难。
Take care not to be turned to sin, for you have taken evil for your part in place of sorrow.

神行事有高大的能力。教训人的有谁像他呢？
Truly God is lifted up in strength; who is a ruler like him?

谁派定他的道路？谁能说，你所行的不义？
Who ever gave orders to him, or said to him, You have done wrong?

你不可忘记称赞他所行的为大，就是人所歌颂的。
See that you give praise to his work, about which men make songs.

他所行的，万人都看见，世人也从远处观看。
All people are looking on it; man sees it from far.

神为大，我们不能全知，他的年数不能测度。
Truly, God is great, greater than all our knowledge; the number of his years may not be searched out.

他吸取水点，这水点从云雾中就变成雨。
For he takes up the drops from the sea; he sends them through his mist as rain,

云彩将雨落下，沛然降与世人。
Flowing down from the sky, and dropping on the peoples.

谁能明白云彩如何铺张，和神行宫的雷声呢？
And who has knowledge of how the clouds are stretched out, or of the thunders of his tent?

他将亮光普照在自己的四围。他又遮覆海底。
See, he is stretching out his mist, covering the tops of the mountains with it.

他用这些审判众民，且赐丰富的粮食。
For by these he gives food to the peoples, and bread in full measure.

他以电光遮手，命闪电击中敌人（或作中了靶子）。
He takes the light in his hands, sending it against the mark.

所发的雷声显明他的作为，又向牲畜指明要起暴风。
The thunder makes clear his passion, and the storm gives news of his wrath.

因此我心战兢，从原处移动。
At this my heart is shaking; it is moved out of its place.

听阿，神轰轰的声音，是他口中所发的响声。
Give ear to the rolling noise of his voice; to the hollow sound which goes out of his mouth.

他发响声震遍天下，发电光闪到地极。
He sends it out through all the heaven, and his thunder-flame to the ends of the earth.

随后人听见有雷声轰轰，大发威严，雷电接连不断。
After it a voice is sounding, thundering out the word of his power; he does not keep back his thunder-flames; from his mouth his voice is sounding.

神发出奇妙的雷声，他行大事，我们不能测透。
He does wonders, more than may be searched out; great things of which we have no knowledge;

他对雪说，要降在地上，对大雨和暴雨也是这样说。
For he says to the snow, Make the earth wet; and to the rain-storm, Come down.

他封住各人的手，叫所造的万人，都晓得他的作为。
He puts an end to the work of every man, so that all may see his work.

百兽进入穴中，卧在洞内。
Then the beasts go into their holes, and take their rest.

暴风出于南宫。寒冷出于北方。
Out of its place comes the storm-wind, and the cold out of its store-houses.

神嘘气成冰。宽阔之水也都凝结。
By the breath of God ice is made, and the wide waters are shut in.

他使密云盛满水气，布散电光之云。
The thick cloud is weighted with thunder-flame, and the cloud sends out its light;

这云是借他的指引游行旋转，得以在全地面上，行他一切所吩咐的，
And it goes this way and that, round about, turning itself by his guiding, to do whatever he gives orders to be done, on the face of his world of men,

或为责罚，或为润地，或为施行慈爱。
For a rod, or for a curse, or for mercy, causing it to come on the mark.

约伯阿，你要留心听，要站立思想神奇妙的作为。
Give ear to this, O Job, and keep quiet in your place; and take note of the wonders worked by God.

神如何吩咐这些，如何使云中的电光照耀，你知道吗？
Have you knowledge of God's ordering of his works, how he makes the light of his cloud to be seen?

云彩如何浮于空中，那知识全备者奇妙的作为，你知道吗？
Have you knowledge of the balancings of the clouds, the wonders of him who has all wisdom?

南风使地寂静，你的衣服就如火热，你知道吗？
You, whose clothing is warm, when the earth is quiet because of the south wind,

你岂能与神同铺穹苍吗？这穹苍坚硬，如同铸成的镜子。
Will you, with him, make the skies smooth, and strong as a polished looking-glass?

我们愚昧不能陈说。请你指教我们该对他说什么话。
Make clear to me what we are to say to him; we are unable to put our cause before him, because of the dark.

人岂可说，我愿与他说话。岂有人自愿灭亡吗？
How may he have knowledge of my desire for talk with him? or did any man ever say, May destruction come on me?

现在有云遮蔽，人不得见穹苍的光亮。但风吹过，天又发晴。
And now the light is not seen, for it is dark because of the clouds; but a wind comes, clearing them away.

金光出于北方，在神那里有可怕的威严。
A bright light comes out of the north; God's glory is greatly to be feared.

论到全能者，我们不能测度。他大有能力，有公平和大义，必不苦待人。
There is no searching out of the Ruler of all: his strength and his judging are great; he is full of righteousness, doing no wrong.

所以，人敬畏他。凡自以为心中有智慧的人，他都不顾念。
For this cause men go in fear of him; he has no respect for any who are wise in heart.

那时，耶和华从旋风中回答约伯说，
And the Lord made answer to Job out of the storm-wind, and said,

谁用无知的言语，使我的旨意暗昧不明。
Who is this who makes the purpose of God dark by words without knowledge?

你要如勇士束腰。我问你，你可以指示我。
Get your strength together like a man of war; I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

我立大地根基的时候，你在哪里呢？你若有聪明，只管说吧。
Where were you when I put the earth on its base? Say, if you have knowledge.

你若晓得就说，是谁定地的尺度？是谁把准绳拉在其上？
By whom were its measures fixed? Say, if you have wisdom; or by whom was the line stretched out over it?

地的根基安置在何处？地的角石是谁安放的？
On what were its pillars based, or who put down its angle-stone,

那时晨星一同歌唱，神的众子也都欢呼。
When the morning stars made songs together, and all the sons of the gods gave cries of joy?

海水冲出，如出胎胞，那时谁将它关闭呢？
Or where were you when the sea came to birth, pushing out from its secret place;

是我用云彩当海的衣服，用幽暗当包裹它的布，
When I made the cloud its robe, and put thick clouds as bands round it,

为它定界限，又安门和闩，
Ordering a fixed limit for it, with locks and doors;

说，你只可到这里，不可越过。你狂傲的浪要到此止住。
And said, So far you may come, and no farther; and here the pride of your waves will be stopped?

你自生以来，曾命定晨光，使清晨的日光知道本位。
Have you, from your earliest days, given orders to the morning, or made the dawn conscious of its place;

叫这光普照地的四极，将恶人从其中驱逐出来吗？
So that it might take a grip of the skirts of the earth, shaking all the evil-doers out of it?

因这光，地面改变如泥上印印，万物出现如衣服一样。
It is changed like wet earth under a stamp, and is coloured like a robe;

亮光不照恶人，强横的膀臂也必折断。
And from the evil-doers their light is kept back, and the arm of pride is broken.

你曾进到海源，或在深渊的隐密处行走吗？
Have you come into the springs of the sea, walking in the secret places of the deep?

死亡的门曾向你显露吗？死荫的门你曾见过吗？
Have the doors of death been open to you, or have the door-keepers of the dark ever seen you?

地的广大你能明透吗？你若全知道，只管说吧。
Have you taken note of the wide limits of the earth? Say, if you have knowledge of it all.

光明的居所从何而至？黑暗的本位在于何处？
Which is the way to the resting-place of the light, and where is the store-house of the dark;

你能带到本境，能看明其室之路吗？
So that you might take it to its limit, guiding it to its house?

你总知道，因为你早已生在世上，你日子的数目也多。
No doubt you have knowledge of it, for then you had come to birth, and the number of your days is great.

你曾进入雪库。或见过雹仓吗？
Have you come into the secret place of snow, or have you seen the store-houses of the ice-drops,

这雪雹乃是我为降灾，并打仗和争战的日子所预备的。
Which I have kept for the time of trouble, for the day of war and fighting?

光亮从何路分开？东风从何路分散遍地？
Which is the way to the place where the wind is measured out, and the east wind sent out over the earth?

谁为雨水分道？谁为雷电开路？
By whom has the way been cut for the flowing of the rain, and the flaming of the thunder;

使雨降在无人之地，无人居住的旷野。
Causing rain to come on a land where no man is living, on the waste land which has no people;

使荒废凄凉之地得以丰足，青草得以发生。
To give water to the land where there is waste and destruction, and to make the dry land green with young grass?

雨有父吗？露水珠是谁生的呢？
Has the rain a father? or who gave birth to the drops of night mist?

冰出于谁的胎？天上的霜是谁生的呢？
Out of whose body came the ice? and who gave birth to the cold mist of heaven?

诸水坚硬（或作隐藏）如石头，深渊之面凝结成冰。
The waters are joined together, hard as a stone, and the face of the deep is covered.

你能系住昴星的结吗？能解开参星的带吗？
Are the bands of the Pleiades fixed by you, or are the cords of Orion made loose?

你能按时领出十二宫吗？能引导北斗和随它的众星吗（星原文作子）？
Do you make Mazzaroth come out in its right time, or are the Bear and its children guided by you?

你知道天的定例吗？能使地归在天的权下吗？
Have you knowledge of the laws of the heavens? did you give them rule over the earth?

你能向云彩扬起声来，使倾盆的雨遮盖你吗？
Is your voice sent up to the cloud, so that you may be covered by the weight of waters?

你能发出闪电，叫它行去，使它对你说，我们在这里。
Do you send out the thunder-flames, so that they may go, and say to you, Here we are?

谁将智慧放在怀中？谁将聪明赐于心内？
Who has put wisdom in the high clouds, or given knowledge to the lights of the north?

谁能用智慧数算云彩呢？尘土聚集成团，土块紧紧结连。那时，谁能倾倒天上的瓶呢？
By whose wisdom are the clouds numbered, or the water-skins of the heavens turned to the earth,


When the earth becomes hard as metal, and is joined together in masses?

母狮子在洞中蹲伏，少壮狮子在隐密处埋伏。你能为它们抓取食物，使它们饱足吗？
Do you go after food for the she-lion, or get meat so that the young lions may have enough,


When they are stretched out in their holes, and are waiting in the brushwood?

乌鸦之雏因无食物飞来飞去，哀告神。那时，谁为它预备食物呢？
Who gives in the evening the meat he is searching for, when his young ones are crying to God; when the young lions with loud noise go wandering after their food?

山岩间的野山羊几时生产，你知道吗？母鹿下犊之期，你能察定吗？
Have you knowledge of the rock-goats? or do you see the roes giving birth to their young?

它们怀胎的月数，你能数算吗？它们几时生产，你能晓得吗？
Is the number of their months fixed by you? or is the time when they give birth ordered by you?

它们屈身，将子生下，就除掉疼痛。
They are bent down, they give birth to their young, they let loose the fruit of their body.

这子渐渐肥壮，在荒野长大，去而不回。
Their young ones are strong, living in the open country; they go out and do not come back again.

谁放野驴出去自由。谁解开快驴的绳索。
Who has let the ass of the fields go free? or made loose the bands of the loud-voiced beast?

我使旷野作它的住处，使咸地当它的居所。
To whom I have given the waste land for a heritage, and the salt land as a living-place.

它嗤笑城内的喧嚷，不听赶牲口的喝声。
He makes sport of the noise of the town; the voice of the driver does not come to his ears;

遍山是它的草场。它寻找各样青绿之物。
He goes looking for his grass-lands in the mountains, searching out every green thing.

野牛岂肯服事你。岂肯住在你的槽旁。
Will the ox of the mountains be your servant? or is his night's resting-place by your food-store?

你岂能用套绳将野牛笼在犁沟之间。它岂肯随你耙山谷之地。
Will he be pulling your plough with cords, turning up the valleys after you?

岂可因它的力大就倚靠它。岂可把你的工交给它做吗？
Will you put your faith in him, because his strength is great? will you give the fruit of your work into his care?

岂可信靠它把你的粮食运到家，又收聚你禾场上的谷吗？
Will you be looking for him to come back, and get in your seed to the crushing-floor?

鸵鸟的翅膀欢然扇展，岂是显慈爱的翎毛和羽毛吗？
Is the wing of the ostrich feeble, or is it because she has no feathers,

因它把蛋留在地上，在尘土中使得温暖。
That she puts her eggs on the earth, warming them in the dust,

却想不到被脚踹碎，或被野兽践踏。
Without a thought that they may be crushed by the foot, and broken by the beasts of the field?

它忍心待雏，似乎不是自己的。虽然徒受劳苦，也不为雏惧怕。
She is cruel to her young ones, as if they were not hers; her work is to no purpose; she has no fear.

因为神使它没有智慧，也未将悟性赐给它。
For God has taken wisdom from her mind, and given her no measure of knowledge.

它几时挺身展开翅膀，就嗤笑马和骑马的人。
When she is shaking her wings on high, she makes sport of the horse and of him who is seated on him.

马的大力是你所赐的吗？它颈项上？？挲的鬃是你给它披上的吗？
Do you give strength to the horse? is it by your hand that his neck is clothed with power?

是你叫它跳跃像蝗虫吗？它喷气之威使人惊惶。
Is it through you that he is shaking like a locust, in the pride of his loud-sounding breath?

它在谷中刨地，自喜其力。它出去迎接佩带兵器的人。
He is stamping with joy in the valley; he makes sport of fear.

它嗤笑可怕的事并不惊惶，也不因刀剑退回。
In his strength he goes out against the arms of war, turning not away from the sword.

箭袋和发亮的枪，并短枪在它身上铮铮有声。
The bow is sounding against him; he sees the shining point of spear and arrow.

它发猛烈的怒气将地吞下。一听角声就不耐站立。
Shaking with passion, he is biting the earth; he is not able to keep quiet at the sound of the horn;

角每发声，它说呵哈。它从远处闻着战气，又听见军长大发雷声，和兵丁呐喊。
When it comes to his ears he says, Aha! He is smelling the fight from far off, and hearing the thunder of the captains, and the war-cries.

鹰雀飞翔，展开翅膀一直向南，岂是借你的智慧吗？
Is it through your knowledge that the hawk takes his flight, stretching out his wings to the south?

大鹰上腾在高处搭窝，岂是听你的吩咐吗？
Or is it by your orders that the eagle goes up, and makes his resting-place on high?

它住在山岩，以山峰和坚固之所为家，
On the rock is his house, and on the mountain-top his strong place.

从那里窥看食物，眼睛远远观望。
From there he is watching for food; his eye sees it far off.

它的雏也咂血。被杀的人在哪里。它也在哪里。
His young have blood for their drink, and where the dead bodies are, there is he to be seen.

耶和华又对约伯说，
...

强辩的岂可与全能者争论吗？与神辩驳的可以回答这些吧。
Will he who is protesting give teaching to the Ruler of all? Let him who has arguments to put forward against God give an answer.

于是，约伯回答耶和华说，
And Job said in answer to the Lord,

我是卑贱的。我用什么回答你呢？只好用手捂口。
Truly, I am of no value; what answer may I give to you? I will put my hand on my mouth.

我说了一次，再不回答。说了两次，就不再说。
I have said once, and even twice, what was in my mind, but I will not do so again.

于是，耶和华从旋风中回答约伯说，
Then the Lord made answer to Job out of the storm-wind, and said,

你要如勇士束腰。我问你，你可以指示我。
Get your strength together like a man of war: I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

你岂可废弃我所拟定的。岂可定我有罪，好显自己为义吗？
Will you even make my right of no value? will you say that I am wrong in order to make clear that you are right?

你有神那样的膀臂吗？你能像他发雷声吗？
Have you an arm like God? have you a voice of thunder like his?

你要以荣耀庄严为妆饰，以尊荣威严为衣服。
Put on the ornaments of your pride; be clothed with glory and power:

要发出你满溢的怒气，见一切骄傲的人，使他降卑。
Let your wrath be overflowing; let your eyes see all the sons of pride, and make them low.

见一切骄傲的人，将他制伏，把恶人践踏在本处。
Send destruction on all who are lifted up, pulling down the sinners from their places.

将他们一同隐藏在尘土中，把他们的脸蒙蔽在隐密处。
Let them be covered together in the dust; let their faces be dark in the secret place of the underworld.

我就认你右手能以救自己。
Then I will give praise to you, saying that your right hand is able to give you salvation.

你且观看河马。我造你也造它。它吃草与牛一样。
See now the Great Beast, whom I made, even as I made you; he takes grass for food, like the ox.

它的气力在腰间，能力在肚腹的筋上。
His strength is in his body, and his force in the muscles of his stomach.

它摇动尾巴如香柏树。它大腿的筋互相联络。
His tail is curving like a cedar; the muscles of his legs are joined together.

它的骨头好像铜管。它的肢体仿佛铁棍。
His bones are pipes of brass, his legs are like rods of iron.

它在神所造的物中为首。创造它的给它刀剑。
He is the chief of the ways of God, made by him for his pleasure.

诸山给它出食物，也是百兽游玩之处。
He takes the produce of the mountains, where all the beasts of the field are at play.

它伏在莲叶之下，卧在芦苇隐密处和水洼子里。
He takes his rest under the trees of the river, and in the pool, under the shade of the water-plants.

莲叶的阴凉遮蔽它。溪旁的柳树环绕它。
He is covered by the branches of the trees; the grasses of the stream are round him.

河水泛滥，它不发战。就是约旦河的水涨到它口边，也是安然。
Truly, if the river is overflowing, it gives him no cause for fear; he has no sense of danger, even if Jordan is rushing against his mouth.

在它防备的时候，谁能捉拿它？谁能牢笼它穿它的鼻子呢？
Will anyone take him when he is on the watch, or put metal teeth through his nose?

你能用鱼钩钓上鳄鱼吗？能用绳子压下它的舌头吗？
Is it possible for Leviathan to be pulled out with a fish-hook, or for a hook to be put through the bone of his mouth?

你能用绳索穿它的鼻子吗？能用钩穿它的腮骨吗？
Will you put a cord into his nose, or take him away with a cord round his tongue?

它岂向你连连恳求，说柔和的话吗？
Will he make prayers to you, or say soft words to you?

岂肯与你立约，使你拿它永远作奴仆吗？
Will he make an agreement with you, so that you may take him as a servant for ever?

你岂可拿它当雀鸟玩耍吗？岂可为你的幼女将它拴住吗？
Will you make sport with him, as with a bird? or put him in chains for your young women?

搭伙的渔夫岂可拿它当货物吗？能把它分给商人吗？
Will the fishermen make profit out of him? will they have him cut up for the traders?

你能用倒钩枪扎满它的皮，能用鱼叉叉满它的头吗？
Will you put sharp-pointed irons into his skin, or fish-spears into his head?

你按手在它身上，想与它争战，就不再这样行吧。
Only put your hand on him, and see what a fight you will have; you will not do it again!

人指望捉拿它是徒然的。一见它，岂不丧胆吗？
Truly, the hope of his attacker is false; he is overcome even on seeing him!

没有那么凶猛的人敢惹它。这样，谁能在我面前站立得住呢？
He is so cruel that no one is ready to go against him. Who then is able to keep his place before me?

谁先给我什么，使我偿还呢？天下万物都是我的。
Who ever went against me, and got the better of me? There is no one under heaven!

论到鳄鱼的肢体和其大力，并美好的骨骼，我不能缄默不言。
I will not keep quiet about the parts of his body, or about his power, and the strength of his frame.

谁能剥它的外衣？谁能进它上下牙骨之间呢？
Who has ever taken off his outer skin? who may come inside his inner coat of iron?

谁能开它的腮颊？它牙齿四围是可畏的。
Who has made open the doors of his face? Fear is round about his teeth.

它以坚固的鳞甲为可夸，紧紧合闭，封得严密。
His back is made of lines of plates, joined tight together, one against the other, like a stamp.

这鳞甲一一相连，甚至气不得透入其间，
One is so near to the other that no air may come between them.

都是互相联络，胶结，不能分离。
They take a grip of one another; they are joined together, so that they may not be parted.

它打喷嚏就发出光来。它眼睛好像早晨的光线（光线原文作眼皮）。
His sneezings give out flames, and his eyes are like the eyes of the dawn.

从它口中发出烧着的火把，与飞迸的火星。
Out of his mouth go burning lights, and flames of fire are jumping up.

从它鼻孔冒出烟来，如烧开的锅和点着的芦苇。
Smoke comes out of his nose, like a pot boiling on the fire.

它的气点着煤炭，有火焰从它口中发出。
His breath puts fire to coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.

它颈项中存着劲力。在它面前的都恐吓蹦跳。
Strength is in his neck, and fear goes dancing before him.

它的肉块互相联络，紧贴其身，不能摇动。
The plates of his flesh are joined together, fixed, and not to be moved.

它的心结实如石头，如下磨石那样结实。
His heart is as strong as a stone, hard as the lower crushing-stone.

它一起来，勇士都惊恐，心里慌乱，便都昏迷。
When he gets ready for the fight, the strong are overcome with fear.

人若用刀，用枪，用标枪，用尖枪扎它，都是无用。
The sword may come near him but is not able to go through him; the spear, or the arrow, or the sharp-pointed iron.

它以铁为干草，以铜为烂木。
Iron is to him as dry grass, and brass as soft wood.

箭不能恐吓它使它逃避。弹石在它看为碎秸。
The arrow is not able to put him to flight: stones are no more to him than dry stems.

棍棒算为禾秸。它嗤笑短枪飕的响声。
A thick stick is no better than a leaf of grass, and he makes sport of the onrush of the spear.

它肚腹下如尖瓦片，它如钉耙经过淤泥。
Under him are sharp edges of broken pots: as if he was pulling a grain-crushing instrument over the wet earth.

它使深渊开滚如锅，使洋海如锅中的膏油。
The deep is boiling like a pot of spices, and the sea like a perfume-vessel.

它行的路随后发光，令人想深渊如同白发。
After him his way is shining, so that the deep seems white.

在地上没有像它造的那样，无所惧怕。
On earth there is not another like him, who is made without fear.

凡高大的，它无不藐视。它在骄傲的水族上作王。
Everything which is high goes in fear of him; he is king over all the sons of pride.

约伯回答耶和华说，
And Job said in answer to the Lord,

我知道，你万事都能做。你的旨意不能拦阻。
I see that you are able to do every thing, and to give effect to all your designs.

谁用无知的言语，使你的旨意隐藏呢？我所说的，是我不明白的。这些事太奇妙，是我不知道的。
Who is this who makes dark the purpose of God by words without knowledge? For I have been talking without knowledge about wonders not to be searched out.

求你听我，我要说话。我问你，求你指示我。
Give ear to me, and I will say what is in my mind; I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

我从前风闻有你，现在亲眼看见你。
Word of you had come to my ears, but now my eye has seen you.

因此我厌恶自己，（自己或作我的言语）在尘土和炉灰中懊悔。
For this cause I give witness that what I said is false, and in sorrow I take my seat in the dust.

耶和华对约伯说话以后，就对提幔人以利法说，我的怒气向你和你两个朋友发作，因为你们议论我，不如我的仆人约伯说的是。
And it came about, after he had said these words to Job, that the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, I am very angry with you and your two friends, because you have not said what is right about me, as my servant Job has.

现在你们要取七只公牛，七只公羊，到我仆人约伯那里去，为自己献上燔祭，我的仆人约伯就为你们祈祷。我因悦纳他，就不按你们的愚妄办你们。你们议论我，不如我的仆人约伯说的是。
And now, take seven oxen and seven sheep, and go to my servant Job, and give a burned offering for yourselves, and my servant Job will make prayer for you, that I may not send punishment on you; because you have not said what is right about me, as my servant Job has.

于是提幔人以利法，书亚人比勒达，拿玛人琐法照着耶和华所吩咐的去行。耶和华就悦纳约伯。
And Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as the Lord had said. And the Lord gave ear to Job.

约伯为他的朋友祈祷。耶和华就使约伯从苦境转回（苦境原文作掳掠），并且耶和华赐给他的，比他从前所有的加倍。
And the Lord made up to Job for all his losses, after he had made prayer for his friends: and all Job had before was increased by the Lord twice as much.

约伯的弟兄，姐妹，和以先所认识的人都来见他，在他家里一同吃饭。又论到耶和华所降与他的一切灾祸，都为他悲伤安慰他。每人也送他一块银子和一个金环。
And all his brothers and sisters, and his friends of earlier days, came and took food with him in his house; and made clear their grief for him, and gave him comfort for all the evil which the Lord had sent on him; and they all gave him a bit of money and a gold ring.

这样，耶和华后来赐福给约伯比先前更多。他有一万四千羊，六千骆驼，一千对牛，一千母驴。
And the Lord's blessing was greater on the end of Job's life than on its start: and so he came to have fourteen thousand sheep and goats, and six thousand camels, and two thousand oxen, and a thousand she-asses.

他也有七个儿子，三个女儿。
And he had seven sons and three daughters.

他给长女起名叫耶米玛，次女叫基洗亚，三女叫基连哈朴。
And he gave the first the name of Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-happuch;

在那全地的妇女中，找不着像约伯的女儿那样美貌。她们的父亲使她们在弟兄中得产业。
And there were no women so beautiful as the daughters of Job in all the earth: and their father gave them a heritage among their brothers.

此后，约伯又活了一百四十年，得见他的儿孙，直到四代。
And after this Job had a hundred and forty years of life, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.

这样，约伯年纪老迈，日子满足而死。
And Job came to his end, old and full of days.

ow I take my seat in the dust.

耶和华对约伯说话以后，就对提幔人以利法说，我的怒气向你和你两个朋友发作，因为你们议论我，不如我的仆人约伯说的是。
And it came about, after he had said these words to Job, that the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, I am very angry with you and your two friends, because you have not said what is right about me, as my servant Job has.

现在你们要取七只公牛，七只公羊，到我仆人约伯那里去，为自己献上燔祭，我的仆人约伯就为你们祈祷。我因悦纳他，就不按你们的愚妄办你们。你们议论我，不如我的仆人约伯说的是。
And now, take seven oxen and seven sheep, and go to my servant Job, and give a burned offering for yourselves, and my servant Job will make prayer for you, that I may not send punishment on you; because you have not said what is right about me, as my servant Job has.

于是提幔人以利法，书亚人比勒达，拿玛人琐法照着耶和华所吩咐的去行。耶和华就悦纳约伯。
And Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as the Lord had said. And the Lord gave ear to Job.

约伯为他的朋友祈祷。耶和华就使约伯从苦境转回（苦境原文作掳掠），并且耶和华赐给他的，比他从前所有的加倍。
And the Lord made up to Job for all his losses, after he had made prayer for his friends: and all Job had before was increased by the Lord twice as much.

约伯的弟兄，姐妹，和以先所认识的人都来见他，在他家里一同吃饭。又论到耶和华所降与他的一切灾祸，都为他悲伤安慰他。每人也送他一块银子和一个金环。
And all his brothers and sisters, and his friends of earlier days, came and took food with him in his house; and made clear their grief for him, and gave him comfort for all the evil which the Lord had sent on him; and they all gave him a bit of money and a gold ring.

这样，耶和华后来赐福给约伯比先前更多。他有一万四千羊，六千骆驼，一千对牛，一千母驴。
And the Lord's blessing was greater on the end of Job's life than on its start: and so he came to have fourteen thousand sheep and goats, and six thousand camels, and two thousand oxen, and a thousand she-asses.

他也有七个儿子，三个女儿。
And he had seven sons and three daughters.

他给长女起名叫耶米玛，次女叫基洗亚，三女叫基连哈朴。
And he gave the first the name of Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-happuch;

在那全地的妇女中，找不着像约伯的女儿那样美貌。她们的父亲使她们在弟兄中得产业。
And there were no women so beautiful as the daughters of Job in all the earth: and their father gave them a heritage among their brothers.

此后，约伯又活了一百四十年，得见他的儿孙，直到四代。
And after this Job had a hundred and forty years of life, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.

这样，约伯年纪老迈，日子满足而死。
And Job came to his end, old and full of days.

