约书亚记 Joshua


耶和华的仆人摩西死了以后，耶和华晓谕摩西的帮手，嫩的儿子约书亚，说，
Now after the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, the word of the Lord came to Joshua, the son of Nun, Moses' helper, saying,

我的仆人摩西死了。现在你要起来，和众百姓过这约旦河，往我所要赐给以色列人的地去。
Moses my servant is dead; so now get up! Go over Jordan, you and all this people, into the land which I am giving to them, to the children of Israel.

凡你们脚掌所踏之地，我都照着我所应许摩西的话赐给你们了。
Every place on which you put your foot I have given to you, as I said to Moses.

从旷野，和这利巴嫩，直到伯拉大河。赫人的全地。又到大海日落之处。都要作你们的境界。
From the waste land and this mountain Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates, and all the land of the Hittites to the Great Sea, in the west, will be your country.

你平生的日子，必无一人能在你面前站立得住。我怎样与摩西同在，也必照样与你同在。我必不撇下你，也不丢弃你。
While you are living, all will give way before you: as I was with Moses, so I will be with you; I will not take away my help from you or give you up.

你当刚强壮胆。因为你必使这百姓承受那地为业，就是我向他们列祖起誓应许赐给他们的地。
Take heart and be strong; for you will give to this people for their heritage the land which I gave by an oath to their fathers.

只要刚强，大大壮胆，谨守遵行我仆人摩西所吩咐你的一切律法，不可偏离左右，使你无论往哪里去，都可以顺利。
Only take heart and be very strong; take care to do all the law which Moses my servant gave you, not turning from it to the right hand or to the left, so that you may do well in all your undertakings.

这律法书不可离开你的口，总要昼夜思想，好使你谨守遵行这书上所写的一切话。如此，你的道路就可以亨通，凡事顺利。
Let this book of the law be ever on your lips and in your thoughts day and night, so that you may keep with care everything in it; then a blessing will be on all your way, and you will do well.

我岂没有吩咐你吗？你当刚强壮胆。不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。因为你无论往哪里去，耶和华你的神必与你同在。
Have I not given you your orders? Take heart and be strong; have no fear and do not be troubled; for the Lord your God is with you wherever you go,

于是，约书亚吩咐百姓的官长说，
Then Joshua gave their orders to those who were in authority over the people, saying,

你们要走遍营中，吩咐百姓说，当预备食物。因为三日之内你们要过这约旦河，进去得耶和华你们神赐你们为业之地。
Go through the tents and give orders to the people, saying, Get ready a store of food; for in three days you are to go over this river Jordan and take for your heritage the land which the Lord your God is giving you.

约书亚对流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人说，
And to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said,

你们要追念耶和华的仆人摩西所吩咐你们的话说，耶和华你们的神使你们得享平安，也必将这地赐给你们。
Keep in mind what Moses, the servant of the Lord, said to you, The Lord your God is sending you rest and will give you this land.

你们的妻子，孩子，和牲畜都可以留在约旦河东，摩西所给你们的地。但你们中间一切大能的勇士都要带着兵器在你们的弟兄前面过去，帮助他们，
Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle will be kept here in the land which Moses gave you on this side of Jordan; but you, the fighting-men, are to go over before your brothers, armed, to give them help;

等到耶和华使你们的弟兄象你们一样得享平安，并且得着耶和华你们神所赐他们为业之地，那时才可以回你们所得之地，承受为业，就是耶和华的仆人摩西在约旦河东，向日出之地所给你们的。
Till the Lord has given your brothers rest, as he has given it to you, and they have taken their heritage in the land which the Lord your God is giving them: then you will go back to the land of your heritage which Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave you on the east side of Jordan.

他们回答约书亚说，你所吩咐我们行的，我们都必行。你所差遣我们去的，我们都必去。
Then they said to Joshua in answer, Whatever you say to us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go.

我们从前在一切事上怎样听从摩西，现在也必照样听从你。惟愿耶和华你的神与你同在，像与摩西同在一样。
As we gave attention to Moses in all things, so we will give attention to you: and may the Lord your God be with you as he was with Moses.

无论什么人违背你的命令，不听从你所吩咐他的一切话，就必治死他。你只要刚强壮胆。
Whoever goes against your orders, and does not give attention to all your words, will be put to death: only take heart and be strong.

当下，嫩的儿子约书亚从什亭暗暗打发两个人作探子，吩咐说，你们去窥探那地和耶利哥。于是二人去了，来到一个妓女名叫喇合的家里，就在那里躺卧。
Then Joshua, the son of Nun, sent two men from Shittim secretly, with the purpose of searching out the land, and Jericho. So they went and came to the house of a loose woman of the town, named Rahab, where they took their rest for the night.

有人告诉耶利哥王说，今夜有以色列人来到这里窥探此地。
And it was said to the king of Jericho, See, some men have come here tonight from the children of Israel with the purpose of searching out the land.

耶利哥王打发人去见喇合说，那来到你这里，进了你家的人要交出来，因为他们来窥探全地。
Then the king of Jericho sent to Rahab, saying, Send out the men who have come to you and are in your house; for they have come with the purpose of searching out all the land.

女人将二人隐藏，就回答说，那人果然到我这里来。他们是哪里来的我却不知道。
And the woman took the two men and put them in a secret place; then she said, Yes, the men came to me, but I had no idea where they came from;

天黑，要关城门的时候，他们出去了，往哪里去我却不知道。你们快快地去追赶，就必追上。
And when it was the time for shutting the doors at dark, they went out; I have no idea where the men went: but if you go after them quickly, you will overtake them.

（先是女人领二人上了房顶，将他们藏在那里所摆的麻秸中。）
But she had taken them up to the roof, covering them with the stems of flax which she had put out in order there.

那些人就往约旦河的渡口追赶他们去了。追赶他们的人一出去，城门就关了。
So the men went after them on the road to Jordan as far as the river-crossing: and when they had gone out after them, the door into the town was shut.

二人还没有躺卧，女人就上房顶，到他们那里，
And before the men went to rest, she came up to them on the roof,

对他们说，我知道耶和华已经把这地赐给你们，并且因你们的缘故我们都惊慌了。这地的一切居民在你们面前心都消化了。
And said to them, It is clear to me that the Lord has given you the land, and that the fear of you has come on us;

因为我们听见你们出埃及的时候，耶和华怎样在你们前面使红海的水干了，并且你们怎样待约旦河东的两个亚摩利王西宏和噩，将他们尽行毁灭。
For we have had news of how the Lord made the Red Sea dry before you when you came out of Egypt; and what you did to the two kings of the Amorites, on the other side of Jordan, to Sihon and Og, whom you gave up to the curse.

我们一听见这些事，心就消化了。因你们的缘故，并无一人有胆气。耶和华你们的神本是上天下地的神。
And because of this news, our hearts became like water, and there was no more spirit in any of us because of you; for the Lord your God is God in heaven on high and here on earth.

现在我既是恩待你们，求你们指着耶和华向我起誓，也要恩待我父家，并给我一个实在的证据，
So now, will you give me your oath by the Lord, that, because I have been kind to you, you will be kind to my father's house,

要救活我的父母，弟兄，姐妹，和一切属他们的，拯救我们性命不死。
And that you will keep safe my father and mother and my brothers and sisters and all they have, so that death may not come on us?

二人对她说，你若不泄漏我们这件事，我们情愿替你们死。耶和华将这地赐给我们的时候，我们必以慈爱诚实待你。
And the men said to her, Our life for yours if you keep our business secret; and when the Lord has given us the land, we will keep faith and be kind to you.

于是女人用绳子将二人从窗户里缒下去。因她的房子是在城墙边上，她也住在城墙上。
Then she let them down from the window by a cord, for the house where she was living was on the town wall.

她对他们说，你们且往山上去，恐怕追赶的人碰见你们。要在那里隐藏三天，等追赶的人回来，然后才可以走你们的路。
And she said to them, Get away into the hill-country, or the men who have gone after you will overtake you; keep yourselves safe there for three days, till the searchers have come back, and then go on your way.

二人对她说，你要这样行。不然，你叫我们所起的誓就与我们无干了。
And the men said to her, We will only be responsible for this oath which you have made us take,

我们来到这地的时候，你要把这条朱红线绳系在缒我们下去的窗户上，并要使你的父母，弟兄，和你父的全家都聚集在你家中。
If, when we come into the land, you put this cord of bright red thread in the window from which you let us down; and get your father and mother and your brothers and all your family into the house;

凡出了你家门往街上去的，他的罪必归到自己的头上（罪原文作血），与我们无干了。凡在你家里的，若有人下手害他，流他血的罪就归到我们的头上。
Then if anyone goes out of your house into the street, his blood will be on his head, we will not be responsible; but if any damage comes to anyone in the house, his blood will be on our heads.

你若泄漏我们这件事，你叫我们所起的誓就与我们无干了。
But if you say anything about our business here, then we will be free from the oath you have made us take.

女人说，照你们的话行吧。于是打发他们去了，又把朱红线绳系在窗户上。
And she said, Let it be as you say. Then she sent them away, and they went; and she put the bright red cord in the window.

二人到山上，在那里住了三天，等着追赶的人回去了。追赶的人一路找他们，却找不着。
And they went into the hill-country and were there three days, till the men who had gone after them had come back; and those who went after them were searching for them everywhere without coming across them.

二人就下山回来，过了河，到嫩的儿子约书亚那里，向他述说所遭遇的一切事。
Then the two men came down from the hill-country and went over and came back to Joshua, the son of Nun; and they gave him a complete account of what had taken place.

又对约书亚说，耶和华果然将那全地交在我们手中。那地的一切居民在我们面前心都消化了。
And they said to Joshua, Truly, the Lord has given all the land into our hands; and all the people of the land have become like water because of us.

约书亚清早起来，和以色列众人都离开什亭，来到约旦河，就住在那里，等候过河。
Then Joshua got up early in the morning, and, moving on from Shittim, he and all the children of Israel came to Jordan and were there for the night before going over.

过了三天，官长走遍营中，
And at the end of three days, the men in authority over the people went through the tents,

吩咐百姓说，你们看见耶和华你们神的约柜，又见祭司利未人抬着，就要离开所住的地方，跟着约柜去。
Giving the people their orders, and saying, When you see the ark of the agreement of the Lord your God lifted up by the priests, the Levites, then get up from your places and go after it;

只是你们和约柜相离要量二千肘，不可与约柜相近，使你们知道所当走的路，因为这条路你们向来没有走过。
But let there be a space between you and it of about two thousand cubits: come no nearer to it, so that you may see the way you have to go, for you have not been over this way before.

约书亚吩咐百姓说，你们要自洁，因为明天耶和华必在你们中间行奇事。
And Joshua said to the people, Make yourselves holy, for tomorrow the Lord will do works of wonder among you.

约书亚又吩咐祭司说，你们抬起约柜，在百姓前头过去。于是他们抬起约柜，在百姓前头走。
Then Joshua said to the priests, Take up the ark of the agreement and go over in front of the people. So they took up the ark of the agreement and went in front of the people.

耶和华对约书亚说，从今日起，我必使你在以色列众人眼前尊大，使他们知道我怎样与摩西同在，也必照样与你同在。
And the Lord said to Joshua, From now on I will give you glory in the eyes of all Israel, so that they may see that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with you.

你要吩咐抬约柜的祭司说，你们到了约旦河的水边上，就要在约旦河水里站住。
And you are to give orders to the priests who take up the ark of the agreement, and say, When you come to the edge of the waters of Jordan, go no further.

约书亚对以色列人说，你们近前来，听耶和华你们神的话。
And Joshua said to the children of Israel, Come to me here: and give ear to the words of the Lord your God.

约书亚说，看哪，普天下主的约柜必在你们前头过去，到约旦河里，因此你们就知道在你们中间有永生神。并且他必在你们面前赶出迦南人，赫人，希未人，比利洗人，革迦撒人，亚摩利人，耶布斯人。
And Joshua said, By this you will see that the living God is among you, and that he will certainly send out from before you the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Hivite and the Perizzite and the Girgashite and the Amorite and the Jebusite.


See, the ark of the agreement of the Lord of all the earth is going over before you into Jordan.

你们现在要从以色列支派中拣选十二个人，每支派一人，
So take twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, a man from every tribe.

等到抬普天下主耶和华约柜的祭司把脚站在约旦河水里，约旦河的水，就是从上往下流的水，必然断绝，立起成垒。
And when the feet of the priests who take up the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, come to rest in the waters of Jordan, the waters of Jordan will be cut off, all the waters flowing down from higher up, and will come together in a mass.

百姓离开帐棚要过约旦河的时候，抬约柜的祭司乃在百姓的前头。
So when the people went out from their tents to go over Jordan, the priests who took up the ark of the agreement were in front of the people;

他们到了约旦河，脚一入水（原来约旦河水在收割的日子涨过两岸），
And when those who took up the ark came to Jordan, and the feet of the priests who took up the ark were touching the edge of the water (for the waters of Jordan are overflowing all through the time of the grain-cutting),

那从上往下流的水便在极远之地，撒拉但旁的亚当城那里停住，立起成垒。那往亚拉巴的海，就是盐海，下流的水全然断绝。于是百姓在耶利哥的对面过去了。
Then the waters flowing down from higher up were stopped and came together in a mass a long way back at Adam, a town near Zarethan; and the waters flowing down to the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, were cut off: and the people went across opposite Jericho.

抬耶和华约柜的祭司在约旦河中的干地上站定，以色列众人都从干地上过去，直到国民尽都过了约旦河。
And the priests who took up the ark of the agreement of the Lord kept their places, with their feet on dry land in the middle of Jordan, while all Israel went over on dry land, till all the nation had gone over Jordan.

国民尽都过了约旦河，耶和华就对约书亚说，
Now when all the nation had come to the other side of Jordan, the Lord said to Joshua,

你从民中要拣选十二个人，每支派一人，
Take twelve men from the people, a man for every tribe,

吩咐他们说，你们从这里，从约旦河中，祭司脚站定的地方，取十二块石头带过去，放在你们今夜要住宿的地方。
And say to them, Take up from the middle of Jordan, from the place where the feet of the priests were resting, twelve stones, and take them over with you and put them down in the place where you take your rest tonight.

于是，约书亚将他从以色列人中所预备的那十二个人，每支派一人，都召了来。
So Joshua sent for the twelve men, whom he had ready, one man out of every tribe of the children of Israel,

对他们说，你们下约旦河中，过到耶和华你们神的约柜前头，按着以色列人十二支派的数目，每人取一块石头扛在肩上。
And he said to them, Go over before the ark of the Lord your God into the middle of Jordan, and let every one of you take up a stone on his back, one for every tribe of the children of Israel:

这些石头在你们中间可以作为证据。日后，你们的子孙问你们说，这些石头是什么意思。
So that this may be a sign among you; when your children say to you in time to come, What is the reason for these stones?

你们就对他们说，这是因为约旦河的水在耶和华的约柜前断绝。约柜过约旦河的时候，约旦河的水就断绝了。这些石头要作以色列人永远的纪念。
Then you will say to them, Because the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the Lord's agreement; when it went over Jordan the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones will be a sign for the children of Israel, keeping it in their memory for ever.

以色列人就照约书亚所吩咐的，按着以色列人支派的数目，从约旦河中取了十二块石头，都遵耶和华所吩咐约书亚的行了。他们把石头带过去，到他们所住宿的地方，就放在那里。
So the children of Israel did as Joshua gave them orders, and took twelve stones from the middle of Jordan, as the Lord had said to Joshua, one for every tribe of the children of Israel; these they took across with them to their night's resting-place and put them down there.

约书亚另把十二块石头立在约旦河中，在抬约柜的祭司脚站立的地方。直到今日，那石头还在那里。
And Joshua put up twelve stones in the middle of Jordan, where the feet of the priests who took up the ark of the agreement had been placed: and there they are to this day.

抬约柜的祭司站在约旦河中，等到耶和华晓谕约书亚吩咐百姓的事办完了，是照摩西所吩咐约书亚的一切话。于是百姓急速过去了。
For the priests who took up the ark kept there in the middle of Jordan till all the orders given to Joshua by Moses from the Lord had been done: then the people went over quickly.

众百姓尽都过了河，耶和华的约柜和祭司就在百姓面前过去。
And when all the people had come to the other side, the ark of the Lord went over, and the priests, before the eyes of the people.

流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人都照摩西所吩咐他们的，带着兵器在以色列人前头过去。
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh went over armed before the children of Israel as Moses had said to them:

约有四万人都准备打仗，在耶和华面前过去，到耶利哥的平原，等候上阵。
About forty thousand armed for war went over before the Lord to the fight, to the lowlands of Jericho.

当那日，耶和华使约书亚在以色列众人眼前尊大。在他平生的日子，百姓敬畏他，像从前敬畏摩西一样。
That day the Lord made Joshua great in the eyes of all Israel; and all the days of his life they went in fear of him, as they had gone in fear of Moses.

耶和华晓谕约书亚说，
Then the Lord said to Joshua,

你吩咐抬法柜的祭司从约旦河里上来。
Give orders to the priests who take up the ark of witness, to come up out of Jordan.

约书亚就吩咐祭司说，你们从约旦河里上来。
So Joshua gave orders to the priests, saying, Come up now out of Jordan.

抬耶和华约柜的祭司从约旦河里上来，脚掌刚落旱地，约旦河的水就流到原处，仍旧涨过两岸。
And when the priests who took up the ark of the Lord's agreement came up out of Jordan and their feet came out on to dry land, the waters of Jordan went back to their place, overflowing its edges as before.

正月初十日，百姓从约旦河里上来，就在吉甲，在耶利哥的东边安营。
So on the tenth day of the first month the people came up out of Jordan, and put up their tents in Gilgal, on the east side of Jericho.

他们从约旦河中取来的那十二块石头，约书亚就立在吉甲，
And the twelve stones which they took out of Jordan, Joshua put up in Gilgal.

对以色列人说，日后你们的子孙问他们的父亲说，这些石头是什么意思。
And he said to the children of Israel, When your children say to their fathers in time to come, What is the reason for these stones?

你们就告诉他们说，以色列人曾走干地过这约旦河。
Then give your children the story, and say, Israel came over this river Jordan on dry land.

因为耶和华你们的神在你们前面使约旦河的水干了，等着你们过来，就如耶和华你们的神从前在我们前面使红海干了，等着我们过来一样，
For the Lord your God made the waters of Jordan dry before you till you had gone across, as he did to the Red Sea, drying it up before us till we had gone across:

要使地上万民都知道，耶和华的手大有能力，也要使你们永远敬畏耶和华你们的神。
So that all the peoples of the earth may see that the hand of the Lord is strong; and that they may go in fear of the Lord your God for ever.

约旦河西亚摩利人的诸王和靠海迦南人的诸王，听见耶和华在以色列人前面使约旦河的水干了，等到我们过去，他们的心因以色列人的缘故就消化了，不再有胆气。
Now when the news came to all the kings of the Amorites on the west side of Jordan, and all the kings of the Canaanites living by the sea, how the Lord had made the waters of Jordan dry before the children of Israel, till they had gone across, their hearts became like water, and there was no more spirit in them, because of the children of Israel.

那时，耶和华吩咐约书亚说，你制造火石刀，第二次给以色列人行割礼。
At that time the Lord said to Joshua, Make yourself stone knives and give the children of Israel circumcision a second time.

约书亚就制造了火石刀，在除皮山那里给以色列人行割礼。
So Joshua made stone knives and gave the children of Israel circumcision at Gibeath-ha-araloth.

约书亚行割礼的缘故，是因为从埃及出来的众民，就是一切能打仗的男丁，出了埃及以后，都死在旷野的路上。
And this is the reason why Joshua did so: all the males of the people who came out of Egypt, all the fighting-men, had been overtaken by death in the waste land on the way, after they came out of Egypt.

因为出来的众民都受过割礼。惟独出埃及以后，在旷野的路上所生的众民都没有受过割礼。
All the people who came out had undergone circumcision; but all the people whose birth had taken place in the waste land on their journey from Egypt had not.

以色列人在旷野走了四十年，等到国民，就是出埃及的兵丁，都消灭了，因为他们没有听从耶和华的话。耶和华曾向他们起誓，必不容他们看见耶和华向他们列祖起誓，应许赐给我们的地，就是流奶与蜜之地。
For the children of Israel were wandering in the waste land for forty years, till all the nation, that is, all the fighting-men, who had come out of Egypt, were dead, because they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord: to whom the Lord said, with an oath, that he would not let them see the land which the Lord had given his word to their fathers to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.

他们的子孙，就是耶和华所兴起来接续他们的，都没有受过割礼。因为在路上没有给他们行割礼，约书亚这才给他们行了。
And their children, who came up in their place, now underwent circumcision by the hands of Joshua, not having had it before: for there had been no circumcision on the journey.

国民都受完了割礼，就住在营中自己的地方，等到痊愈了。
So when all the nation had undergone circumcision, they kept in their tents till they were well again.

耶和华对约书亚说，我今日将埃及的羞辱从你们身上滚去了。因此，那地方名叫吉甲，直到今日（吉甲就是滚的意思）。
And the Lord said to Joshua, Today the shame of Egypt has been rolled away from you. So that place was named Gilgal, to this day.

以色列人在吉甲安营。正月十四日晚上，在耶利哥的平原守逾越节。
So the children of Israel put up their tents in Gilgal; and they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, in the lowlands of Jericho.

逾越节的次日，他们就吃了那地的出产。正当那日吃无酵饼和烘的谷。
And on the day after the Passover, they had for their food the produce of the land, unleavened cakes and dry grain on the same day.

他们吃了那地的出产，第二日吗哪就止住了，以色列人也不再有吗哪了。那一年，他们却吃迦南地的出产。
And there was no more manna from the day after they had for their food the produce of the land; the children of Israel had manna no longer, but that year the produce of the land of Canaan was their food.

约书亚靠近耶利哥的时候，举目观看，不料，有一个人手里有拔出来的刀，对面站立。约书亚到他那里，问他说，你是帮助我们呢？是帮助我们敌人呢？
Now when Joshua was near Jericho, lifting up his eyes he saw a man in front of him, with his sword uncovered in his hand: and Joshua went up to him and said, Are you for us or against us?

他回答说，不是的，我来是要作耶和华军队的元帅。约书亚就俯伏在地下拜，说，我主有什么话吩咐仆人。
And he said, No; but I have come as captain of the armies of the Lord. Then Joshua, falling down with his face to the earth in worship, said, What has my lord to say to his servant?

耶和华军队的元帅对约书亚说，把你脚上的鞋脱下来，因为你所站的地方是圣的。约书亚就照着行了。
And the captain of the Lord's army said to Joshua, Take off your shoes from your feet, for the place where you are is holy. And Joshua did so.

耶利哥的城门因以色列人就关得严紧，无人出入。
(Now Jericho was all shut up because of the children of Israel: there was no going out or coming in.)

耶和华晓谕约书亚说，看哪，我已经把耶利哥和耶利哥的王，并大能的勇士，都交在你手中。
And the Lord said to Joshua, See, I have given into your hands Jericho with its king and all its men of war.

你们的一切兵丁要围绕这城，一日围绕一次，六日都要这样行。
Now let all your fighting-men make a circle round the town, going all round it once. Do this for six days.

七个祭司要拿七个羊角走在约柜前。到第七日，你们要绕城七次，祭司也要吹角。
And let seven priests go before the ark with seven loud-sounding horns in their hands: on the seventh day you are to go round the town seven times, the priests blowing their horns.

他们吹的角声拖长，你们听见角声，众百姓要大声呼喊，城墙就必塌陷，各人都要往前直上。
And at the sound of a long note on the horns, let all the people give a loud cry; and the wall of the town will come down flat, and all the people are to go straight forward.

嫩的儿子约书亚召了祭司来，吩咐他们说，你们抬起约柜来，要有七个祭司拿七个羊角走在耶和华的约柜前。
Then Joshua, the son of Nun, sent for the priests and said to them, Take up the ark of the agreement, and let seven priests take seven horns in their hands and go before the ark of the Lord.

又对百姓说，你们前去绕城，带兵器的要走在耶和华的约柜前。
And he said to the people, Go forward, circling the town, and let the armed men go before the ark of the Lord.

约书亚对百姓说完了话，七个祭司拿七个羊角走在耶和华面前吹角。耶和华的约柜在他们后面跟随。
So after Joshua had said this to the people, the seven priests with their seven horns went forward before the Lord, blowing on their horns: and the ark of the Lord's agreement went after them.

带兵器的走在吹角的祭司前面，后队随着约柜行。祭司一面走一面吹。
And the armed men went before the priests who were blowing the horns, and the mass of the people went after the ark, blowing their horns.

约书亚吩咐百姓说，你们不可呼喊，不可出声，连一句话也不可出你们的口，等到我吩咐你们呼喊的日子，那时才可以呼喊。
And to the people Joshua gave an order, saying, You will give no cry, and make no sound, and let no word go out of your mouth till the day when I say, Give a loud cry; then give a loud cry.

这样，他使耶和华的约柜绕城，把城绕了一次。众人回到营里，就在营里住宿。
So he made the ark of the Lord go all round the town once: then they went back to the tents for the night.

约书亚清早起来，祭司又抬起耶和华的约柜。
And early in the morning Joshua got up, and the priests took up the ark of the Lord.

七个祭司拿七个羊角在耶和华的约柜前，时常行走吹角。带兵器的在他们前面走，后队随着耶和华的约柜行。祭司一面走一面吹。
And the seven priests with their seven horns went on before the ark of the Lord, blowing their horns: the armed men went before them, and the mass of the people went after the ark of the Lord, blowing their horns.

第二日，众人把城绕了一次，就回营里去。六日都是这样行。
The second day they went all round the town once, and then went back to their tents: and so they did for six days.

第七日清早，黎明的时候，他们起来，照样绕城七次。惟独这日把城绕了七次。
Then on the seventh day they got up early, at the dawn of the day, and went round the town in the same way, but that day they went round it seven times.

到了第七次，祭司吹角的时候，约书亚吩咐百姓说，呼喊吧，因为耶和华已经把城交给你们了。
And the seventh time, at the sound of the priests' horns, Joshua said to the people, Now give a loud cry; for the Lord has given you the town.

这城和其中所有的都要在耶和华面前毁灭。只有妓女喇合与她家中所有的可以存活，因为她隐藏了我们所打发的使者。
And the town will be put to the curse, and everything in it will be given to the Lord: only Rahab, the loose woman, and all who are in the house with her, will be kept safe, because she kept secret the men we sent.

至于你们，务要谨慎，不可取那当灭的物，恐怕你们取了那当灭的物就连累以色列的全营，使全营受咒诅。
And as for you, keep yourselves from the cursed thing, for fear that you may get a desire for it and take some of it for yourselves, and so be the cause of a curse and great trouble on the tents of Israel.

惟有金子，银子，和铜铁的器皿都要归耶和华为圣，必入耶和华的库中。
But all the silver and gold and the vessels of brass and iron are holy to the Lord: they are to come into the store-house of the Lord.

于是百姓呼喊，祭司也吹角。百姓听见角声，便大声呼喊，城墙就塌陷，百姓便上去进城，各人往前直上，将城夺取。
So the people gave a loud cry, and the horns were sounded; and on hearing the horns the people gave a loud cry, and the wall came down flat, so that the people went up into the town, every man going straight before him, and they took the town.

又将城中所有的，不拘男女老少，牛羊和驴，都用刀杀尽。
And they put everything in the town to the curse; men and women, young and old, ox and sheep and ass, they put to death without mercy.

约书亚吩咐窥探地的两个人说，你们进那妓女的家，照着你们向她所起的誓，将那女人和她所有的都从那里带出来。
Then Joshua said to the two men who had been sent to make a search through the land, Go into the house of the loose woman, and get her out, and all who are with her, as you gave her your oath.

当探子的两个少年人就进去，将喇合与她的父母，弟兄，和她所有的，并她一切的亲眷，都带出来，安置在以色列的营外。
So the searchers went in and got out Rahab and her father and mother and her brothers and all she had, and they got out all her family; and they took them outside the tents of Israel.

众人就用火将城和其中所有的焚烧了。惟有金子，银子，和铜铁的器皿都放在耶和华殿的库中。
Then, after burning up the town and everything in it, they put the silver and gold and the vessels of brass and iron into the store-house of the Lord's house.

约书亚却把妓女喇合与她父家，并她所有的，都救活了。因为她隐藏了约书亚所打发窥探耶利哥的使者，她就住在以色列中，直到今日。
But Joshua kept Rahab, the loose woman, and her father's family and all she had, from death, and so she got a living-place among the children of Israel to this day; because she kept safe the men whom Joshua had sent to make a search through the land.

当时，约书亚叫众人起誓说，有兴起重修这耶利哥城的人，当在耶和华面前受咒诅。他立根基的时候，必丧长子，安门的时候，必丧幼子。
Then Joshua gave the people orders with an oath, saying, Let that man be cursed before the Lord who puts his hand to the building up of this town: with the loss of his first son will he put the first stone of it in place, and with the loss of his youngest son he will put up its doors.

耶和华与约书亚同在，约书亚的声名传扬遍地。
So the Lord was with Joshua; and news of him went through all the land.

以色列人在当灭的物上犯了罪。因为犹大支派中，谢拉的曾孙，撒底的孙子，迦米的儿子亚干取了当灭的物。耶和华的怒气就向以色列人发作。
But the children of Israel did wrong about the cursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the family of Judah, took of the cursed thing, moving the Lord to wrath against the children of Israel.

当下，约书亚从耶利哥打发人往伯特利东边，靠近伯亚文的艾城去，吩咐他们说，你们上去窥探那地。他们就上去窥探艾城。
Now Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is by the side of Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and said to them, Go up and make a search through the land. And the men went up and saw how Ai was placed.

他们回到约书亚那里，对他说，众民不必都上去，只要二三千人上去就能攻取艾城。不必劳累众民都去，因为那里的人少。
Then they came back to Joshua and said to him, Do not send all the people up, but let about two or three thousand men go up and make an attack on Ai; there is no need for all the people to be tired with the journey there, for it is only a small town.

于是民中约有三千人上那里去，竟在艾城人面前逃跑了。
So about three thousand of the people went up, and were sent in flight by the men of Ai.

艾城的人击杀了他们三十六人，从城门前追赶他们，直到示巴琳，在下坡杀败他们。众民的心就消化如水。
The men of Ai put to death about thirty-six of them, driving them from before the town as far as the stoneworks, and overcoming them on the way down: and the hearts of the people became like water.

约书亚便撕裂衣服。他和以色列的长老把灰撒在头上，在耶和华的约柜前俯伏在地，直到晚上。
Then Joshua, in great grief, went down on the earth before the ark of the Lord till the evening, and all the chiefs of Israel with him, and they put dust on their heads.

约书亚说，哀哉。主耶和华阿，你为什么竟领这百姓过约旦河，将我们交在亚摩利人的手中，使我们灭亡呢？我们不如住在约旦河那边倒好。
And Joshua said, O Lord God, why have you taken us over Jordan only to give us up into the hands of the Amorites for our destruction? If only it had been enough for us to keep on the other side of Jordan!

主阿，以色列人既在仇敌面前转背逃跑，我还有什么可说的呢？
O Lord, what am I to say now that Israel have given way before their attackers?

迦南人和这地一切的居民听见了就必围困我们，将我们的名从地上除灭。那时你为你的大名要怎样行呢？
For when the news comes to the Canaanites and all the people of the land, they will come up, shutting us in and cutting off our name from the earth: and what will you do for the honour of your great name?

耶和华吩咐约书亚说，起来。你为何这样俯伏在地呢？
Then the Lord said to Joshua, Get up; what are you doing with your face to the earth?

以色列人犯了罪，违背了我所吩咐他们的约，取了当灭的物。又偷窃，又行诡诈，又把那当灭的放在他们的家具里。
Israel has done wrong, sinning against the agreement which I made with them: they have even taken of the cursed thing; acting falsely like thieves they have put it among their goods.

因此，以色列人在仇敌面前站立不住。他们在仇敌面前转背逃跑，是因成了被咒诅的。你们若不把当灭的物从你们中间除掉，我就不再与你们同在了。
For this reason the children of Israel have given way, turning their backs in flight before their attackers, because they are cursed: I will no longer be with you, if you do not put the cursed thing away from among you.

你起来，叫百姓自洁，对他们说，你们要自洁，预备明天，因为耶和华以色列的神这样说，以色列阿，你们中间有当灭的物，你们若不除掉，在仇敌面前必站立不住。
Up! make the people holy; say to them, Make yourselves holy before tomorrow, for the Lord, the God of Israel, has said, There is a cursed thing among you, O Israel, and you will give way before your attackers in the fight till the cursed thing has been taken away from among you.

到了早晨，你们要按着支派近前来。耶和华所取的支派，要按着宗族近前来。耶和华所取的宗族，要按着家室近前来。耶和华所取的家室，要按着人丁，一个一个地近前来。
So in the morning you are to come near, tribe by tribe; and the tribe marked out by the Lord is to come near, family by family; and the family marked out by the Lord is to come near, house by house; and the house marked out by the Lord is to come near, man by man.

被取的人有当灭的物在他那里，他和他所有的必被火焚烧。因他违背了耶和华的约，又因他在以色列中行了愚妄的事。
Then the man who is taken with the cursed thing is to be burned, with everything which is his; because he has gone against the agreement of the Lord and has done an act of shame in Israel.

于是，约书亚清早起来，使以色列人按着支派近前来，取出来的是犹大支派。
So Joshua got up early in the morning, and made Israel come before him by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken;

使犹大支派（原文作宗族）近前来，就取了谢拉的宗族。使谢拉的宗族，按着家室人丁，一个一个地近前来，取出来的是撒底。
Then he made Judah come forward, and the family of the Zerahites was taken; and he made the family of the Zerahites come forward man by man; and Zabdi was taken;

使撒底的家室，按着人丁，一个一个地近前来，就取出犹大支派的人谢拉的曾孙，撒底的孙子，迦米的儿子亚干。
Then the house of Zabdi came forward man by man, and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.

约书亚对亚干说，我儿，我劝你将荣耀归给耶和华以色列的神，在他面前认罪，将你所作的事告诉我，不要向我隐瞒。
And Joshua said to Achan, My son, give glory and praise to the Lord, the God of Israel; give me word now of what you have done, and keep nothing back from me.

亚干回答约书亚说，我实在得罪了耶和华以色列的神。我所作的事如此如此，
And Achan, answering, said to Joshua, Truly I have done wrong against the Lord, the God of Israel, and this is what I have done:

我在所夺的财物中看见一件美好的示拿衣服，二百舍客勒银子，一条金子重五十舍客勒，我就贪爱这些物件，便拿去了。现今藏在我帐棚内的地里，银子在衣服底下。
When I saw among their goods a fair robe of Babylon and two hundred shekels of silver, and a mass of gold, fifty shekels in weight, I was overcome by desire and took them; and they are put away in the earth in my tent, and the silver is under it.

约书亚就打发人跑到亚干的帐棚里。那件衣服果然藏在他帐棚内，银子在底下。
So Joshua sent men quickly, and looking in his tent, they saw where the robe had been put away secretly with the silver under it.

他们就从帐棚里取出来，拿到约书亚和以色列众人那里，放在耶和华面前。
And they took them from the tent and came back with them to Joshua and the children of Israel, and put them before the Lord.

约书亚和以色列众人把谢拉的曾孙亚干和那银子，那件衣服，那条金子，并亚干的儿女，牛，驴，羊，帐棚，以及他所有的，都带到亚割谷去。
Then Joshua and all Israel took Achan, the son of Zerah, and the silver and the robe and the mass of gold, and his sons and his daughters and his oxen and his asses and his sheep and his tent and everything he had; and they took them up into the valley of Achor.

约书亚说，你为什么连累我们呢？今日耶和华必叫你受连累。于是以色列众人用石头打死他，将石头扔在其上，又用火焚烧他所有的（他所有的原文作他们）。
And Joshua said, Why have you been a cause of trouble to us? Today the Lord will send trouble on you. And all Israel took part in stoning him; they had him stoned to death and then burned with fire.

众人在亚干身上堆成一大堆石头，直存到今日。于是耶和华转意，不发他的烈怒。因此那地方名叫亚割谷，直到今日（亚割就是连累的意思）。
And over him they put a great mass of stones, which is there to this day; then the heat of the Lord's wrath was turned away. So that place was named, The Valley of Achor, to this day.

耶和华对约书亚说，不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。你起来，率领一切兵丁上艾城去，我已经把艾城的王和他的民，他的城，并他的地，都交在你手里。
Then the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear and do not be troubled: take with you all the fighting-men and go up against Ai: for I have given into your hands the king of Ai and his people and his town and his land:

你怎样待耶利哥和耶利哥的王，也当照样待艾城和艾城的王。只是城内所夺的财物和牲畜，你们可以取为自己的掠物。你要在城后设下伏兵。
And you are to do to Ai and its king as you did to Jericho and its king: but their goods and their cattle you may take for yourselves: let a secret force be stationed to make a surprise attack on the town from the back.

于是，约书亚和一切兵丁都起来，要上艾城去。约书亚选了三万大能的勇士，夜间打发他们前往，
So Joshua and the fighting-men got ready to go up against Ai; and Joshua took thirty thousand men of war, and sent them out by night.

吩咐他们说，你们要在城后埋伏，不可离城太远，都要各自准备。
And he gave them their orders, saying, Go and take up your position secretly at the back of the town: do not go very far away, and let all of you be ready:

我与我所带领的众民要向城前往。城里的人像初次出来攻击我们的时候，我们就在他们面前逃跑，
And I and all the people with me will come near the town, and when they come out against us as they did before, we will go in flight from them;

他们必出来追赶我们，直到我们引诱他们离开城。因为他们必说，这些人像初次在我们面前逃跑。所以我们要在他们面前逃跑，
And they will come out after us, till we have got them away from the town; for they will say, They have gone in flight from us as before; so we will go in flight before them;

你们就从埋伏的地方起来，夺取那城。因为耶和华你们的神，必把城交在你们手里。
Then you will get up from your secret position and take the town, for the Lord your God will give it up into your hands.

你们夺了城以后，就放火烧城，要照耶和华的话行。这是我吩咐你们的。
And when you have taken the town, put fire to it, as the Lord has said: see, I have given you your orders.

约书亚打发他们前往，他们就上埋伏的地方去，住在伯特利和艾城的中间，就是在艾城的西边。这夜约书亚却在民中住宿。
So Joshua sent them out: and they took up a secret position between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua kept with the people that night.

约书亚清早起来，点齐百姓，他和以色列的长老在百姓前面上艾城去。
And early in the morning Joshua got up, and put the people in order, and he and the chiefs of Israel went up before the people to Ai.

众民，就是他所带领的兵丁，都上去，向前直往，来到城前，在艾城北边安营。在约书亚和艾城中间有一山谷。
And all the fighting-men who were with him went up and came near the town, and took up a position on the north side of Ai facing the town, with a valley between him and the town.

他挑了约有五千人，使他们埋伏在伯特利和艾城的中间，就是在艾城的西边，
And taking about five thousand men, he put them in position for a surprise attack on the west side of Ai, between Beth-el and Ai.

于是安置了百姓，就是城北的全军和城西的伏兵。这夜约书亚进入山谷之中。
So all the people were in their places, the army on the north side of the town and the secret force on the west; and that night Joshua went down into the valley.

艾城的王看见这景况，就和全城的人，清早急忙起来，按所定的时候，出到亚拉巴前，要与以色列人交战。王却不知道在城后有伏兵。
Now when the king of Ai saw it, he got up quickly and went out to war against Israel, he and all his people, to the slope going down to the valley; but he had no idea that a secret force was waiting at the back of the town.

约书亚和以色列众人在他们面前装败，往那通旷野的路逃跑。
Then Joshua and all Israel, acting as if they were overcome before them, went in flight by way of the waste land.

城内的众民都被招聚，追赶他们。艾城人追赶的时候，就被引诱离开城。
And all the people in Ai came together to go after them; and they went after Joshua, moving away from the town.

艾城和伯特利城没有一人不出来追赶以色列人的，撇了敞开的城门，去追赶以色列人。
There was not a man in Ai and Beth-el who did not go out after Israel; and the town was open and unwatched while they went after Israel.

耶和华吩咐约书亚说，你向艾城伸出手里的短枪，因为我要将城交在你手里。约书亚就向城伸出手里的短枪。
And the Lord said to Joshua, Let your spear be stretched out against Ai; for I will give it into your hands. So Joshua took up his spear, stretching it out in the direction of the town.

他一伸手，伏兵就从埋伏的地方急忙起来，夺了城，跑进城去，放火焚烧。
Then the secret force came quickly from their place, and running forward when they saw his hand stretched out, went into the town and took it, and put fire to it straight away.

艾城的人回头一看，不料，城中烟气冲天，他们就无力向左向右逃跑。那往旷野逃跑的百姓便转身攻击追赶他们的人。
Then the men of Ai, looking back, saw the smoke of the town going up to heaven, and were unable to go this way or that: and the people who had gone in flight to the waste land were turned back on those who were coming after them.

约书亚和以色列众人见伏兵已经夺了城，城中烟气飞腾，就转身回去，击杀艾城的人。
And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the town had been taken by the surprise attack, and that the smoke of the town had gone up, turning round they overcame the men of Ai.

伏兵也出城迎击艾城人，艾城人就困在以色列人中间，前后都是以色列人。于是以色列人击杀他们，没有留下一个，也没有一个逃脱的，
Then the other force came out of the town against them, so that they were being attacked on this side and on that: and Israel overcame them and let not one of them get away with his life.

生擒了艾城的王，将他解到约书亚那里。
But the king of Ai they made prisoner, and took him to Joshua.

以色列人在田间和旷野杀尽所追赶一切艾城的居民。艾城人倒在刀下，直到灭尽。以色列众人就回到艾城，用刀杀了城中的人。
Then, after the destruction of all the people of Ai in the field and in the waste land where they went after them, and when all the people had been put to death without mercy, all Israel went back to Ai, and put to death all who were in it without mercy.

当日杀毙的人，连男带女共有一万二千，就是艾城所有的人。
On that day twelve thousand were put to death, men and women, all the people of Ai.

约书亚没有收回手里所伸出来的短枪，直到把艾城的一切居民尽行杀灭。
For Joshua did not take back his hand with the outstretched spear till the destruction of the people of Ai was complete.

惟独城中的牲畜和财物，以色列人都取为自己的掠物，是照耶和华所吩咐约书亚的话。
But the cattle and the goods from that town, Israel took for themselves, as the Lord had given orders to Joshua.

约书亚将艾城焚烧，使城永为高堆，荒场，直到今日。
So Joshua gave Ai to the flames, and made it a waste mass of stones for ever, as it is to this day.

又将艾城王挂在树上，直到晚上。日落的时候，约书亚吩咐人把尸首从树上取下来，丢在城门口，在尸首上堆成一大堆石头，直存到今日。
And he put the king of Ai to death, hanging him on a tree till evening: and when the sun went down, Joshua gave them orders to take his body down from the tree, and put it in the public place of the town, covering it with a great mass of stones, which is there to this day.

那时，约书亚在以巴路山上为耶和华以色列的神筑一座坛，
Then Joshua put up an altar to the Lord, the God of Israel, in Mount Ebal,

是用没有动过铁器的整石头筑的，照着耶和华仆人摩西所吩咐以色列人的话，正如摩西律法书上所写的。众人在这坛上给耶和华奉献燔祭和平安祭。
In the way ordered by Moses, the servant of the Lord, as it is recorded in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of uncut stones, untouched by any iron instrument: and on it they made burned offerings and peace-offerings to the Lord.

约书亚在那里，当着以色列人面前，将摩西所写的律法抄写在石头上。
And he made there on the stones a copy of the law of Moses, writing it before the eyes of the children of Israel.

以色列众人，无论是本地人，是寄居的，和长老，官长，并审判官，都站在约柜两旁，在抬耶和华约柜的祭司利未人面前，一半对着基利心山，一半对着以巴路山，为以色列民祝福，正如耶和华仆人摩西先前所吩咐的。
And all Israel, those who were Israelites by birth, as well as the men from other lands living with them, and their responsible men and their overseers and judges, took their places round the ark, in front of the priests, the Levites, whose work it was to take up the ark of the Lord's agreement; half of them were stationed in front of Mount Gerizim and half in front of Mount Ebal, in agreement with the orders for the blessing of the children of Israel which Moses, the servant of the Lord, had given.

随后，约书亚将律法上祝福，咒诅的话，照着律法书上一切所写的，都宣读了一遍。
And after, he gave them all the words of the law, the blessing and the curse, as it is all recorded in the book of the law;

摩西所吩咐的一切话，约书亚在以色列全会众和妇女，孩子，并他们中间寄居的外人面前，没有一句不宣读的。
Reading to all the meeting of Israel, with the women and the children and the men from other lands who were living among them, every word of the orders which Moses had given.

约旦河西，住山地，高原，并对着利巴嫩山沿大海一带的诸王，就是赫人，亚摩利人，迦南人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人的诸王，听见这事，
Now on hearing the news of these things, all the kings on the west side of Jordan, in the hill-country and the lowlands and by the Great Sea in front of Lebanon, the Hittites and the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites,

就都聚集，同心合意地要与约书亚和以色列人争战。
Came together with one purpose, to make war against Joshua and Israel.

基遍的居民听见约书亚向耶利哥和艾城所行的事，
And the men of Gibeon, hearing what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai,

就设诡计，假充使者，拿旧口袋和破裂缝补的旧皮酒袋驮在驴上，
Acting with deceit, got food together as if for a long journey; and took old food-bags for their asses, and old and cracked wine-skins kept together with cord;

将补过的旧鞋穿在脚上，把旧衣服穿在身上。他们所带的饼都是干的，长了霉了。
And put old stitched-up shoes on their feet, and old clothing on their backs; and all the food they had with them was dry and broken up.

他们到吉甲营中见约书亚，对他和以色列人说，我们是从远方来的，现在求你与我们立约。
And they came to Joshua to the tent-circle at Gilgal, and said to him and to the men of Israel, We have come from a far country: so now make an agreement with us.

以色列人对这些希未人说，只怕你们是住在我们中间的。若是这样，怎能和你们立约呢？
And the men of Israel said to the Hivites, It may be that you are living among us; how then may we make an agreement with you?

他们对约书亚说，我们是你的仆人。约书亚问他们说，你们是什么人。是从哪里来的。
And they said to Joshua, We are your servants. Then Joshua said to them, Who are you and where do you come from?

他们回答说，仆人从极远之地而来，是因听见耶和华你神的名声和他在埃及所行的一切事，
And they said to him, Your servants have come from a very far country, because of the name of the Lord your God: for the story of his great name, and of all he did in Egypt has come to our ears,

并他向约旦河东的两个亚摩利王，就是希实本王西宏和在亚斯他录的巴珊王噩一切所行的事。
And what he did to the two kings of the Amorites east of Jordan, to Sihon, king of Heshbon, and to Og, king of Bashan, at Ashtaroth.

我们的长老和我们那地的一切居民对我们说，你们手里要带着路上用的食物去迎接以色列人，对他们说，我们是你们的仆人。现在求你们与我们立约。
So the responsible men and all the people of our country said to us, Take food with you for the journey and go to them, and say to them, We are your servants: so now make an agreement with us.

我们出来要往你们这里来的日子，从家里带出来的这饼还是热的。看哪，现在都干了，长了霉了。
This bread which we have with us for our food, we took warm and new from our houses when starting on our journey to you; but now see, it has become dry and broken up.

这皮酒袋，我们盛酒的时候还是新的。看哪，现在已经破裂。我们这衣服和鞋，因为道路甚远，也都穿旧了。
And these wine-skins were new when we put the wine in them, and now they are cracked as you see; and our clothing and our shoes have become old because of our very long journey here.

以色列人受了他们些食物，并没有求问耶和华。
And the men took some of their food, without requesting directions from the Lord.

于是约书亚与他们讲和，与他们立约，容他们活着。会众的首领也向他们起誓。
So Joshua made peace with them, and made an agreement with them that they were not to be put to death: and the chiefs of the people took an oath to them.

以色列人与他们立约之后，过了三天才听见他们是近邻，住在以色列人中间的。
Now three days after, when they had made this agreement with them, they had word that these men were their neighbours, living near them.

以色列人起行，第三天到了他们的城邑，就是基遍，基非拉，比录，基列耶琳。
And the children of Israel went forward on their journey, and on the third day came to their towns. Now their towns were Gibeon and Chephirah and Beeroth and Kiriath-jearim.

因为会众的首领已经指着耶和华以色列的神向他们起誓，所以以色列人不击杀他们。全会众就向首领发怨言。
And the children of Israel did not put them to death, because the chiefs of the people had taken an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel. And all the people made an outcry against the chiefs.

众首领对全会众说，我们已经指着耶和华以色列的神向他们起誓，现在我们不能害他们。
But all the chiefs said to the people, We have taken an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel, and so we may not put our hands on them.

我们要如此待他们，容他们活着，免得有忿怒因我们所起的誓临到我们身上。
This is what we will do to them: we will not put them to death, for fear that wrath may come on us because of our oath to them.

首领又对会众说，要容他们活着。于是他们为全会众作了劈柴挑水的人，正如首领对他们所说的话。
Keep them living, and let them be servants, cutting wood and getting water for all the people. And all the people did as the chiefs had said to them.

约书亚召了他们来，对他们说，为什么欺哄我们说我们离你们甚远呢？其实你们是住在我们中间。
Then Joshua sent for them, and said to them, Why have you been false to us, saying, We are very far from you, when you are living among us?

现在你们是被咒诅的。你们中间的人必断不了作奴仆，为我神的殿作劈柴挑水的人。
Now because of this you are cursed, and you will for ever be our servants, cutting wood and getting water for the house of my God.

他们回答约书亚说，因为有人实在告诉你的仆人，耶和华你的神曾吩咐他的仆人摩西，把这全地赐给你们，并在你们面前灭绝这地的一切居民，所以我们为你们的缘故甚怕丧命，就行了这事。
And, answering Joshua, they said, Because it came to the ears of your servants that the Lord your God had given orders to his servant Moses to give you all this land, and to send destruction on all the people living in it, because of you; so, fearing greatly for our lives because of you, we have done this.

现在我们在你手中，你以怎样待我们为善为正，就怎样做吧。
And now we are in your hands: do to us whatever seems good and right to you.

于是约书亚这样待他们，救他们脱离以色列人的手，以色列人就没有杀他们。
So he kept them safe from the children of Israel, and did not let them be put to death.

当日约书亚使他们在耶和华所要选择的地方，为会众和耶和华的坛作劈柴挑水的人，直到今日。
And that day Joshua made them servants, cutting wood and getting water for the people and for the altar of the Lord, in the place marked out by him, to this day.

耶路撒冷王亚多尼洗德听见约书亚夺了艾城，尽行毁灭，怎样待耶利哥和耶利哥的王，也照样待艾城和艾城的王，又听见基遍的居民与以色列人立了和约，住在他们中间，
Now when it came to the ears of Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, that Joshua had taken Ai, and had given it up to the curse (for as he had done to Jericho and its king, so he had done to Ai and its king); and that the people of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were living among them;

就甚惧怕。因为基遍是一座大城，如都城一般，比艾城更大，并且城内的人都是勇士。
He was in great fear, because Gibeon was a great town, like one of the king's towns, greater than Ai, and all the men in it were men of war.

所以耶路撒冷王亚多尼洗德打发人去见希伯仑王何咸，耶末王毗兰，拉吉王雅非亚，和伊矶伦王底璧，说，
So Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, sent to Hoham, king of Hebron, and to Piram, king of Jarmuth, and to Japhia, king of Lachish, and to Debir, king of Eglon, saying,

求你们上来帮助我，我们好攻打基遍，因为他们与约书亚和以色列人立了和约。
Come up to me and give me help, and let us make an attack on Gibeon: for they have made peace with Joshua and the children of Israel.

于是五个亚摩利王，就是耶路撒冷王，希伯仑王，耶末王，拉吉王，伊矶伦王，大家聚集，率领他们的众军上去，对着基遍安营，攻打基遍。
So the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon, were banded together, and went up with all their armies and took up their position before Gibeon and made war against it.

基遍人就打发人往吉甲的营中去见约书亚，说，你不要袖手不顾你的仆人，求你速速上来拯救我们，帮助我们，因为住山地亚摩利人的诸王都聚集攻击我们。
And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua to the tent-circle at Gilgal, saying, Be not slow to send help to your servants; come up quickly to our support and keep us safe: for all the kings of the Amorites from the hill-country have come together against us.

于是约书亚和他一切兵丁，并大能的勇士，都从吉甲上去。
So Joshua went up from Gilgal with all his army and all his men of war.

耶和华对约书亚说，不要怕他们。因为我已将他们交在你手里，他们无一人能在你面前站立得住。
And the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear of them, for I have given them into your hands; they will all give way before you.

约书亚就终夜从吉甲上去，猛然临到他们那里。
So Joshua, having come up from Gilgal all night, made a sudden attack on them.

耶和华使他们在以色列人面前溃乱。约书亚在基遍大大地杀败他们，追赶他们，在伯和仑的上坡路击杀他们，直到亚西加和玛基大。
And the Lord made them full of fear before Israel, and they put great numbers of them to death at Gibeon, and went after them by the way going up to Beth-horon, driving them back to Azekah and Makkedah

他们在以色列人面前逃跑，正在伯和仑下坡的时候，耶和华从天上降大冰雹在他们身上（冰雹原文作石头），直降到亚西加，打死他们。被冰雹打死的，比以色列人用刀杀死的还多。
And in their flight before Israel, on the way down from Beth-horon, the Lord sent down great stones from heaven on them all the way to Azekah, causing their death: those whose death was caused by the stones were more than those whom the children of Israel put to death with the sword.

当耶和华将亚摩利人交付以色列人的日子，约书亚就祷告耶和华，在以色列人眼前说，日头阿，你要停在基遍。月亮阿，你要止在亚雅仑谷。
It was on the day when the Lord gave up the Amorites into the hands of the children of Israel that Joshua said to the Lord, before the eyes of Israel, Sun, be at rest over Gibeon; and you, O moon, in the valley of Aijalon.

于是日头停留，月亮止住，直等国民向敌人报仇。这事岂不是写在雅煞珥书上吗？日头在天当中停住，不急速下落，约有一日之久。
And the sun was at rest and the moon kept its place till the nation had given punishment to their attackers. (Is it not recorded in the book of Jashar?) So the sun kept its place in the middle of the heavens, and was waiting, and did not go down, for the space of a day.

在这日以前，这日以后，耶和华听人的祷告，没有像这日的，是因耶和华为以色列争战。
And there was no day like that, before it or after it, when the Lord gave ear to the voice of a man; for the Lord was fighting for Israel.

约书亚和以色列众人回到吉甲的营中。
And Joshua, with all Israel, went back to the tent-circle at Gilgal.

那五王逃跑，藏在玛基大洞里。
But these five kings went in flight secretly to a hole in the rock at Makkedah.

有人告诉约书亚说，那五王已经找到了，都藏在玛基大洞里。
And word was given to Joshua that the five kings had been taken in a hole in the rock at Makkedah.

约书亚说，你们把几块大石头滚到洞口，派人看守，
And Joshua said, Let great stones be rolled against the mouth of the hole, and let men keep watch by it:

你们却不可耽延，要追赶你们的仇敌，击杀他们尽后边的人，不容他们进自己的城邑，因为耶和华你们的神已经把他们交在你们手里。
But do you, without waiting, go after their army, attacking them from the back; do not let them get into their towns, for the Lord your God has given them into your hands.

约书亚和以色列人大大杀败他们，直到将他们灭尽。其中剩下的人都进了坚固的城。
Now when Joshua and the children of Israel had come to the end of their war of complete destruction, and had put to death all but a small band who had got safely into the walled towns,

众百姓就安然回玛基大营中，到约书亚那里。没有一人敢向以色列人饶舌。
All the people went back to Joshua to the tent-circle at Makkedah in peace: and no one said a word against the children of Israel.

约书亚说，打开洞口，将那五王从洞里带出来，领到我面前。
Then Joshua said, Take away the stones from the mouth of the hole in the rock, and make those five kings come out to me.

众人就这样行，将那五王，就是耶路撒冷王，希伯仑王，耶末王，拉吉王，伊矶伦王，从洞里带出来，领到约书亚面前。
And they did so, and made those five kings come out of the hole to him, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.

带出那五王到约书亚面前的时候，约书亚就召了以色列众人来，对那些和他同去的军长说，你们近前来，把脚踏在这些王的颈项上。他们就近前来，把脚踏在这些王的颈项上。
And when they had made those kings come out to Joshua, Joshua sent for all the men of Israel, and said to the chiefs of the men of war who had gone with him, Come near and put your feet on the necks of these kings. So they came near and put their feet on their necks.

约书亚对他们说，你们不要惧怕，也不要惊惶。应当刚强壮胆，因为耶和华必这样待你们所要攻打的一切仇敌。
And Joshua said to them, Have no fear and do not be troubled; be strong and take heart: for so will the Lord do to all against whom you make war.

随后约书亚将这五王杀死，挂在五棵树上。他们就在树上直挂到晚上。
Then Joshua had them put to death, hanging them on five trees, where they were till evening.

日头要落的时候，约书亚一吩咐，人就把尸首从树上取下来，丢在他们藏过的洞里，把几块大石头放在洞口，直存到今日。
And when the sun went down, they were taken down from the trees, by Joshua's orders, and put into the hole where they had gone to be safe; and great stones were placed at the mouth of the hole, where they are to this day.

当日，约书亚夺了玛基大，用刀击杀城中的人和王。将其中一切人口尽行杀灭，没有留下一个。他待玛基大王，像从前待耶利哥王一样。
That day Joshua took Makkedah, and put it and its king to the sword; every soul in it he gave up to the curse without mercy: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.

约书亚和以色列众人从玛基大往立拿去，攻打立拿。
Then Joshua and all Israel with him went on from Makkedah and came to Libnah, and made an attack on it;

耶和华将立拿和立拿的王也交在以色列人手里。约书亚攻打这城，用刀击杀了城中的一切人口，没有留下一个。他待立拿王，像从前待耶利哥王一样。
And again the Lord gave it and its king into the hands of Israel; and he put it and every person in it to the sword, till their destruction was complete; and he did to its king as he had done to the king of Jericho.

约书亚和以色列众人从立拿往拉吉去，对着拉吉安营，攻打这城。
Then Joshua and all Israel with him went on from Libnah to Lachish, and took up their position against it and made an attack on it,

耶和华将拉吉交在以色列人的手里。第二天约书亚就夺了拉吉，用刀击杀了城中的一切人口，是照他向立拿一切所行的。
And the Lord gave Lachish into the hands of Israel, and on the second day he took it, putting it and every person in it to the sword without mercy, as he had done to Libnah.

那时基色王荷兰上来帮助拉吉，约书亚就把他和他的民都击杀了，没有留下一个。
Then Horam, king of Gezer, came up to the help of Lachish; and Joshua overcame him and his people, putting all of them to death.

约书亚和以色列众人从拉吉往伊矶伦去，对着伊矶伦安营，攻打这城。
And Joshua and all Israel with him went on from Lachish to Eglon: and they took up their position against it and made an attack on it;

当日就夺了城，用刀击杀了城中的人。那日，约书亚将城中的一切人口尽行杀灭，是照他向拉吉一切所行的。
And that day they took it, putting it and every person in it to the sword, as he had done to Lachish.

约书亚和以色列众人从伊矶伦上希伯仑去，攻打这城，
And Joshua and all Israel with him went up from Eglon to Hebron, and made an attack on it;

就夺了希伯仑和属希伯仑的诸城邑，用刀将城中的人与王，并那些城邑中的人口，都击杀了，没有留下一个，是照他向伊矶伦所行的，把城中的一切人口尽行杀灭。
And took it, overcoming it and putting it and its king and its towns and every person in it to the sword: as he had done to Eglon, he put them all to death, and gave it up to the curse with every person in it.

约书亚和以色列众人回到底璧，攻打这城，
And Joshua and all Israel with him went on to make an attack on Debir;

就夺了底璧和属底璧的城邑，又擒获底璧的王，用刀将这些城中的人口尽行杀灭，没有留下一个。他待底璧和底璧王，像从前待希伯仑和立拿与立拿王一样。
And he took it, with its king and all its towns: and he put them to the sword, giving every person in it to the curse; all were put to death: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir and its king.

这样，约书亚击杀全地的人，就是山地，南地，高原，山坡的人，和那些地的诸王，没有留下一个。将凡有气息的尽行杀灭，正如耶和华以色列的神所吩咐的。
So Joshua overcame all the land, the hill-country and the South and the lowland and the mountain slopes, and all their kings; all were put to death: and every living thing he gave up to the curse, as the Lord, the God of Israel, had given him orders.

约书亚从加低斯巴尼亚攻击到迦萨，又攻击歌珊全地，直到基遍。
Joshua overcame them from Kadesh-barnea to Gaza, and all the land of Goshen as far as Gibeon.

约书亚一时杀败了这些王，并夺了他们的地，因为耶和华以色列的神为以色列争战。
And all these kings and their land Joshua took at the same time, because the Lord, the God of Israel, was fighting for Israel.

于是约书亚和以色列众人回到吉甲的营中。
Then Joshua and all Israel with him went back to their tents at Gilgal.

夏琐王耶宾听见这事，就打发人去见玛顿王约巴，伸仑王，押煞王，
Now Jabin, king of Hazor, hearing of these things, sent to Jobab, king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,

与北方山地，基尼烈南边的亚拉巴高原，并西边多珥山冈的诸王。
And to the kings on the north in the hill-country, and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the lowland, and in the highlands of Dor on the west,

又去见东方和西方的迦南人，与山地的亚摩利人，赫人，比利洗人，耶布斯人，并黑门山根米斯巴地的希未人。
And to the Canaanites on the east and on the west, and to the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites in the hill-country, and the Hivites under Hermon in the land of Mizpah.

这些王和他们的众军都出来，人数多如海边的沙，并有许多马匹车辆。
And they went out, they and all their armies with them, a great people, in number like the sand on the seaside, with horses and war-carriages in great number.

这诸王会合，来到米伦水边，一同安营，要与以色列人争战。
And all these kings came together, and put their forces in position at the waters of Merom, to make war on Israel.

耶和华对约书亚说，你不要因他们惧怕。明日这时，我必将他们交付以色列人全然杀了。你要砍断他们马的蹄筋，用火焚烧他们的车辆。
And the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear of them: for tomorrow at this time I will give them all up dead before Israel; you are to have the leg-muscles of their horses cut and their war-carriages burned with fire.

于是约书亚率领一切兵丁，在米伦水边突然向前攻打他们。
So Joshua and all the men of war with him came against them suddenly at the waters of Merom, and made an attack on them.

耶和华将他们交在以色列人手里，以色列人就击杀他们，追赶他们到西顿大城，到米斯利弗玛音，直到东边米斯巴的平原，将他们击杀，没有留下一个。
And the Lord gave them up into the hands of Israel, and they overcame them driving them back to great Zidon and to Misrephoth-maim and into the valley of Mizpeh to the east; and they put them all to death, no man got away safely.

约书亚就照耶和华所吩咐他的去行，砍断他们马的蹄筋，用火焚烧他们的车辆。
And Joshua did to them as the Lord had said to him; he had the leg-muscles of their horses cut and their war-carriages burned with fire.

当时，约书亚转回夺了夏琐，用刀击杀夏琐王。素来夏琐在这诸国中是为首的。
At that time, Joshua went on to take Hazor and put its king to the sword: for in earlier times Hazor was the chief of all those kingdoms.

以色列人用刀击杀城中的人口，将他们尽行杀灭。凡有气息的没有留下一个。约书亚又用火焚烧夏琐。
And they put every person in it to death without mercy, giving every living thing up to the curse, and burning Hazor.

约书亚夺了这些王的一切城邑，擒获其中的诸王，用刀击杀他们，将他们尽行杀灭，正如耶和华仆人摩西所吩咐的。
And all the towns of these kings, and all the kings, Joshua took, and put them to the sword: he gave them up to the curse, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had said.

至于造在山冈上的城，除了夏琐以外，以色列人都没有焚烧。约书亚只将夏琐焚烧了。
As for the towns made on hills of earth, not one was burned by Israel but Hazor, which was burned by Joshua.

那些城邑所有的财物和牲畜，以色列人都取为自己的掠物。惟有一切人口都用刀击杀，直到杀尽。凡有气息的没有留下一个。
And all the goods taken from these towns, and their cattle, the children of Israel kept for themselves; but every man they put to death without mercy, till their destruction was complete, and there was no one living.

耶和华怎样吩咐他仆人摩西，摩西就照样吩咐约书亚，约书亚也照样行。凡耶和华所吩咐摩西的，约书亚没有一件懈怠不行的。
As the Lord had given orders to Moses his servant, so Moses gave orders to Joshua, and so Joshua did; every order which the Lord had given to Moses was done.

约书亚夺了那全地，就是山地，一带南地，歌珊全地，高原，亚拉巴，以色列的山地，和山下的高原。
So Joshua took all that land, the hill-country and all the South, and all the land of Goshen, and the lowland and the Arabah, the hill-country of Israel and its lowland;

从上西珥的哈拉山，直到黑门山下利巴嫩平原的巴力迦得，并且擒获那些地的诸王，将他们杀死。
From Mount Halak, which goes up to Seir, as far as Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under Mount Hermon: and all their kings he overcame and put to death.

约书亚和这诸王争战了许多年日。
For a long time Joshua made war on all those kings.

除了基遍的希未人之外，没有一城与以色列人讲和的，都是以色列人争战夺来的。
Not one town made peace with the children of Israel, but only the Hivites of Gibeon: they took them all in war.

因为耶和华的意思是要使他们心里刚硬，来与以色列人争战，好叫他们尽被杀灭，不蒙怜悯，正如耶和华所吩咐摩西的。
For the Lord made them strong in heart to go to war against Israel, so that he might give them up to the curse without mercy, and that destruction might come on them, as the Lord had given orders to Moses.

当时约书亚来到，将住山地，希伯仑，底璧，亚拿伯，犹大山地，以色列山地所有的亚衲族人剪除了。约书亚将他们和他们的城邑尽都毁灭。
And Joshua came at that time and put an end to the Anakim in the hill-country, in Hebron, in Debir, in Anab, and in all the hill-country of Judah and Israel: Joshua gave them and their towns to the curse.

在以色列人的地没有留下一个亚衲族人，只在迦萨，迦特，和亚实突有留下的。
Not one of the Anakim was to be seen in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, some were still living.

这样，约书亚照着耶和华所吩咐摩西的一切话夺了那全地，就按着以色列支派的宗族将地分给他们为业。于是国中太平，没有争战了。
So Joshua took all the land, as the Lord had said to Moses; and Joshua gave it to the children of Israel as their heritage, making division of it among them by their tribes. And the land had rest from war.

以色列人在约旦河外向日出之地击杀二王，得他们的地，就是从亚嫩谷直到黑门山，并东边的全亚拉巴之地。
Now these are the kings of the land whom the children of Israel overcame, taking as their heritage their land on the east side of Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon, and all the Arabah to the east:

这二王，有住希实本，亚摩利人的王西宏。他所管之地是从亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥和谷中的城，并基列一半，直到亚扪人的境界，雅博河
Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was living in Heshbon, ruling from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley, and half Gilead, as far as the river Jabbok, the limits of the children of Ammon;

与约旦河东边的亚拉巴，直到基尼烈海，又到亚拉巴的海，就是盐海，通伯耶西末的路，以及南方，直到毗斯迦的山根。
And the Arabah to the sea of Chinneroth, to the east, and to the sea of the Arabah, that is the Salt Sea, to the east, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and on the south, under the slopes of Pisgah:

又有巴珊王噩。他是利乏音人所剩下的，住在亚斯他录和以得来。
And the land of Og, king of Bashan, of the rest of the Rephaim, who was living at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,

他所管之地是黑门山，撒迦，巴珊全地，直到基述人和玛迦人的境界，并基列一半，直到希实本王西宏的境界。
Ruling in the mountain of Hermon, and in Salecah, and in all Bashan, as far as the limits of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and half Gilead, to the land of Sihon, king of Heshbon.

这二王是耶和华仆人摩西和以色列人所击杀的。耶和华仆人摩西将他们的地赐给流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人为业。
Moses, the servant of the Lord, and the children of Israel overcame them; and Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave their land for a heritage to the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

约书亚和以色列人在约旦河西击杀了诸王。他们的地是从利巴嫩平原的巴力迦得，直到上西珥的哈拉山。约书亚就将那地按着以色列支派的宗族分给他们为业，
And these are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the children of Israel overcame on the west side of Jordan, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which goes up to Seir; and Joshua gave the land to the tribes of Israel for a heritage, in keeping with their divisions;

就是赫人，亚摩利人，迦南人，比利洗人，希未人，耶布斯人的山地，高原亚拉巴，山坡，旷野，和南地。
In the hill-country, and in the lowland, and in the Arabah, and on the mountain slopes, and in the waste land, and in the South; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

他们的王，一个是耶利哥王，一个是靠近伯特利的艾城王，
The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is near Beth-el, one;

一个是耶路撒冷王，一个是希伯仑王，
The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;

一个是耶末王，一个是拉吉王，
The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;

一个是伊矶伦王，一个是基色王，
The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;

一个是底璧王，一个是基德王，
The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;

一个是何珥玛王，一个是亚拉得王，
The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;

一个是立拿王，一个是亚杜兰王，
The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;

一个是玛基大王，一个是伯特利王，
The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth-el, one;

一个是他普亚王，一个是希弗王，
The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;

一个是亚弗王，一个是拉沙仑王，
The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lassharon, one;

一个是玛顿王，一个是夏琐王，
The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;

一个是伸仑米仑王，一个是押煞王，
The king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;

一个是他纳王，一个是米吉多王，
The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;

一个是基低斯王，一个是靠近迦密的约念王，
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one;

一个是多珥山冈的多珥王，一个是吉甲的戈印王，
The king of Dor on the hill of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one;

一个是得撒王。共计三十一个王。
The king of Tirzah, one; all the kings together were thirty-one.

约书亚年纪老迈，耶和华对他说，你年纪老迈了，还有许多未得之地，
Now Joshua was old and full of years; and the Lord said to him, You are old and full of years, and there is still very much land to be taken.

就是非利士人的全境和基述人的全地。
This is the land which is still to be taken: all the country of the Philistines, and all the Geshurites;

从埃及前的西曷河往北，直到以革伦的境界，就算属迦南人之地。有非利士人五个首领所管的迦萨人，亚实突人，亚实基伦人，迦特人，以革伦人之地，并有南方亚卫人之地。
From the Shihor, which is before Egypt, to the edge of Ekron to the north, which is taken to be Canaanite property: the five chiefs of the Philistines; the Gazites, and the Ashdodites, the Ashkelonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites, as well as the Avvim;

又有迦南人的全地，并属西顿人的米亚拉到亚弗，直到亚摩利人的境界。
On the south: all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah which is the property of the Zidonians, to Aphek, as far as the limit of the Amorites:

还有迦巴勒人之地，并向日出的全利巴嫩，就是从黑门山根的巴力迦得，直到哈马口。
And the land of the Gebalites, and all Lebanon, looking east, from Baal-gad under Mount Hermon as far as Hamath:

山地的一切居民，从利巴嫩直到米斯利弗玛音，就是所有的西顿人，我必在以色列人面前赶出他们去。你只管照我所吩咐的，将这地拈阄分给以色列人为业。
All the people of the hill-country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, all the Zidonians; them will I send out from before the children of Israel: only make division of it to Israel for a heritage, as I have given you orders to do.

现在你要把这地分给九个支派和玛拿西半个支派为业。
So now make division of this land for a heritage to the nine tribes, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

玛拿西那半支派和流便，迦得二支派已经受了产业，就是耶和华的仆人摩西在约旦河东所赐给他们的，
With him the Reubenites and the Gadites have been given their heritage, which Moses gave them, on the east side of Jordan, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave them;

是从亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥和谷中的城，并米底巴的全平原，直到底本，
From Aroer, on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley, and all the table-land from Medeba to Dibon;

和在希实本作王亚摩利王西宏的诸城，直到亚扪人的境界。
And all the towns of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was ruling in Heshbon, to the limits of the children of Ammon;

又有基列地，基述人，玛迦人的地界，并黑门全山，巴珊全地，直到撒迦。
And Gilead, and the land of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan to Salecah;

又有巴珊王噩的全国。他在亚斯他录和以得来作王（利乏音人所存留的只剩下他）。这些地的人都是摩西所击杀，所赶逐的。
All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who was ruling in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (he was one of the last of the Rephaim); these did Moses overcome, driving them out of their country.

以色列人却没有赶逐基述人，玛迦人。这些人仍住在以色列中，直到今日。
However, the people of Israel did not send out the Geshurites, or the Maacathites: but Geshur and Maacath are living among Israel to this day.

只是利未支派，摩西（原文作他）没有把产业分给他们。他们的产业乃是献与耶和华以色列神的火祭，正如耶和华所应许他们的。
Only to the tribe of Levi he gave no heritage; the offerings of the Lord, the God of Israel, made by fire are his heritage, as he said to him.

摩西按着流便支派的宗族分给他们产业。
And Moses gave their heritage to the tribe of Reuben by their families.

他们的境界是亚嫩谷边的亚罗珥和谷中的城，靠近米底巴的全平原。
Their limit was from Aroer, on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley, and all the table-land by Medeba;

希实本并属希实本平原的各城，底本，巴末巴力，伯巴力勉，
Heshbon and all her towns in the table-land; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon;

雅杂，基底莫，米法押，
And Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath;

基列亭，西比玛，谷中山的细列哈沙辖，
And Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and Zereth-shahar in the mountain of the valley;

伯毗珥，毗斯迦山坡，伯耶西末。
And Beth-peor, and the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth;

平原的各城，并亚摩利王西宏的全国。这西宏曾在希实本作王，摩西把他和米甸的族长以未，利金，苏珥，户珥，利巴击杀了。这都是住那地属西宏为首领的。
And all the towns of the table-land, and all the kingdom of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was ruling in Heshbon, whom Moses overcame, together with the chiefs of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the chiefs of Sihon, who were living in the land.

那时以色列人在所杀的人中，也用刀杀了比珥的儿子术士巴兰。
And Balaam, the son of Beor, the prophet, the children of Israel put to death with the sword.

流便人的境界就是约旦河与靠近约旦河的地。以上是流便人按着宗族所得为业的诸城，并属城的村庄。
And the limit of the children of Reuben was the edge of Jordan. This was the heritage of the children of Reuben by their families, with its towns and its unwalled places.

摩西按着迦得支派的宗族分给他们产业。
And Moses gave their heritage to the tribe of Gad by their families.

他们的境界是雅谢和基列的各城，并亚扪人的一半地，直到拉巴前的亚罗珥。
And their limit was Jazer, and all the towns of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, to Aroer before Rabbah;

从希实本到拉抹米斯巴和比多宁，又从玛哈念到底璧的境界，
And from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim to the edge of Debir;

并谷中的伯亚兰，伯宁拉，疏割，撒分，就是希实本王西宏国中的余地，以及约旦河与靠近约旦河的地，直到基尼烈海的极边，都在约旦河东。
And in the valley, Beth-haram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon, king of Heshbon, having Jordan for its limit, to the end of the sea of Chinnereth on the east side of Jordan.

以上是迦得人按着宗族所得为业的诸城，并属城的村庄。
This is the heritage of the children of Gad by their families, with its towns and its unwalled places

摩西把产业分给玛拿西半支派，是按着玛拿西半支派的宗族所分的。
And Moses gave their heritage to the half-tribe of Manasseh by their families.

他们的境界是从玛哈念起，包括巴珊全地，就是巴珊王噩的全国，并在巴珊，睚珥的一切城邑，共六十个。
And their limit was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, and all Havvoth-Jair, in Bashan, sixty towns;

基列的一半，并亚斯他录，以得来，就是属巴珊王噩国的二城，是按着宗族给玛拿西的儿子玛吉的一半子孙。
And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, towns of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh, for half of the children of Machir by their families.

以上是摩西在约旦河东对着耶利哥的摩押平原所分给他们的产业。
These are the heritages of which Moses made distribution in the lowlands of Moab, on the other side of Jordan in Jericho, to the east.

只是利未支派，摩西没有把产业分给他们。耶和华以色列的神是他们的产业，正如耶和华所应许他们的。
But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no heritage: the Lord, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as he said to them.

以色列人在迦南地所得的产业，就是祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚，并以色列各支派的族长所分给他们的，都记在下面，
And these are the heritages which the children of Israel took in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar, the priest, and Joshua, the son of Nun, and the heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, gave out to them;

是照耶和华借摩西所吩咐的，把产业拈阄分给九个半支派。
Their heritage by the Lord's decision, as he gave orders by Moses, for the nine tribes and the half-tribe.

原来，摩西在约旦河东已经把产业分给那两个半支派，只是在他们中间没有把产业分给利未人。
For Moses had given their heritage to the two tribes and the half-tribe on the other side of Jordan, but to the Levites he gave no heritage among them.

因为约瑟的子孙是两个支派，就是玛拿西和以法莲，所以没有把地分给利未人，但给他们城邑居住，并城邑的郊野，可以牧养他们的牲畜，安置他们的财物。
Because the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim; and they gave the Levites no part in the land, only towns for their living-places, with the grass-lands for their cattle and for their property.

耶和华怎样吩咐摩西，以色列人就照样行，把地分了。
As the Lord had given orders to Moses, so the people of Israel did, and they made division of the land.

那时，犹大人来到吉甲见约书亚，有基尼洗族耶孚尼的儿子迦勒对约书亚说，耶和华在加低斯巴尼亚指着我与你对神人摩西所说的话，你都知道了。
Then the children of Judah went to Joshua in Gilgal; and Caleb, the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, said to him, You have knowledge of what the Lord said to Moses, the man of God, about me and about you in Kadesh-barnea.

耶和华的仆人摩西从加低斯巴尼亚打发我窥探这地，那时我正四十岁。我按着心意回报他。
I was forty years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh-barnea to make a search through the land; and the account which I gave him was in keeping with his desire.

然而，同我上去的众弟兄使百姓的心消化。但我专心跟从耶和华我的神。
My brothers, however, who went up with me, made the heart of the people like water: but I was true to the Lord with all my heart.

当日摩西起誓说，你脚所踏之地定要归你和你的子孙永远为业，因为你专心跟从耶和华我的神。
And on that day Moses took an oath, saying, Truly the land where your feet have been placed will become a heritage for you and your children for ever, because you have been true to the Lord your God with all your heart.

自从耶和华对摩西说这话的时候，耶和华照他所应许的使我存活这四十五年。其间以色列人在旷野行走。看哪，现今我八十五岁了，
And now, as you see, the Lord has kept me safe these forty-five years, from the time when the Lord said this to Moses, while Israel was wandering in the waste land: and now I am eighty-five years old.

我还是强壮，像摩西打发我去的那天一样。无论是争战，是出入，我的力量那时如何，现在还是如何。
And still, I am as strong today as I was when Moses sent me out: as my strength was then, so is it now, for war and for all the business of life.

求你将耶和华那日应许我的这山地给我。那里有亚衲族人，并宽大坚固的城，你也曾听见了。或者耶和华照他所应许的与我同在，我就把他们赶出去。
So now, give me this hill-country named by the Lord at that time; for you had an account of it then, how the Anakim were there, and great walled towns: it may be that the Lord will be with me, and I will be able to take their land, as the Lord said.

于是约书亚为耶孚尼的儿子迦勒祝福，将希伯仑给他为业。
And Joshua gave him his blessing; and he gave Hebron to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, for his heritage.

所以希伯仑作了基尼洗族耶孚尼的儿子迦勒的产业，直到今日，因为他专心跟从耶和华以色列的神。
So Hebron became the heritage of Caleb, the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, to this day, because with all his heart he was true to the Lord, the God of Israel.

希伯仑从前名叫基列亚巴。亚巴是亚衲族中最尊大的人。于是国中太平，没有争战了。
In earlier times the name of Hebron had been Kiriath-arba, named after Arba, the greatest of the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.

犹大支派按着宗族拈阄所得之地是在尽南边，到以东的交界，向南直到寻的旷野。
Now the part of the land marked out for the children of Judah by families, went up to the edge of Edom, as far as the waste land of Zin to the south, to the farthest point of it on the south.

他们的南界是从盐海的尽边，就是从朝南的海汊起，
Their south limit was from the farthest part of the Salt Sea, from the inlet looking to the south:

通到亚克拉滨坡的南边，接连到寻，上到加低斯巴尼亚的南边，又过希斯仑，上到亚达珥，绕到甲加，
From there it goes south of the slope up to Akrabbim, and on to Zin, then south past Kadesh-barnea, and on by Hezron and up to Addar, turning in the direction of Karka:

接连到押们，通到埃及小河，直通到海为止。这就是他们的南界。
Then on to Azmon, ending at the stream of Egypt: and the end of the limit is at the sea; this will be your limit on the south.

东界是从盐海南边到约旦河口。北界是从约旦河口的海汊起，
And the east limit is the Salt Sea as far as the end of Jordan. And the limit of the north part of the land is from the inlet of the sea at the end of Jordan:

上到伯曷拉，过伯亚拉巴的北边，上到流便之子波罕的磐石。
Then the line goes up to Beth-hoglah, past the north of Beth-arabah, and up to the stone of Bohan, the son of Reuben;

从亚割谷往北，上到底璧，直向河南亚都冥坡对面的吉甲。又接连到隐示麦泉，直通到隐罗结，
Then the line goes up to Debir from the valley of Achor, and so to the north, in the direction of Gilgal, which is opposite the slope up to Adummim, on the south side of the river: and the line goes on to the waters of En-shemesh, ending at En-rogel:

上到欣嫩子谷，贴近耶布斯的南界（耶布斯就是耶路撒冷）。又上到欣嫩谷西边的山顶，就是在利乏音谷极北的边界。
Then the line goes up by the valley of the son of Hinnom to the south side of the Jebusite (which is Jerusalem): then up to the top of the mountain in front of the valley of Hinnom to the west, which is at the farthest point of the valley of Rephaim on the north:

又从山顶延到尼弗多亚的水源，通到以弗仑山的城邑，又延到巴拉（巴拉就是基列耶琳）。
And the limit is marked out from the top of the mountain to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah, and out to the towns of Mount Ephron, as far as Baalah (which is Kiriath-jearim):

又从巴拉往西绕到西珥山，接连到耶琳山的北边（耶琳就是基撒仑）。又下到伯示麦过亭纳，
Then turning west, the line goes from Baalah to Mount Seir, and on to the side of Mount Jearim (which is Chesalon) on the north, then down to Beth-shemesh, and on past Timnah:

通到以革伦北边，延到施基仑，接连到巴拉山。又通到雅比聂，直通到海为止。
And out to the side of Ekron to the north: then it is marked out to Shikkeron and on to Mount Baalah, ending at Jabneel; the end of the line is at the sea.

西界就是大海和靠近大海之地。这是犹大人按着宗族所得之地四围的交界。
And the limit on the west is the edge of the Great Sea. This is the line going round the land marked out for the children of Judah, by their families.

约书亚照耶和华所吩咐的，将犹大人中的一段地，就是基列亚巴，分给耶孚尼的儿子迦勒。亚巴是亚衲族的始祖（基列亚巴就是希伯仑）。
And to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, he gave a part among the children of Judah, as the Lord had given orders to Joshua, that is, Kiriath-arba, named after Arba, the father of Anak which is Hebron.

迦勒就从那里赶出亚衲族的三个族长，就是示筛，亚希幔，挞买。
And the three sons of Anak, Sheshai and Ahiman and Talmai, the children of Anak, were forced out from there by Caleb.

又从那里上去，攻击底璧的居民，这底璧从前名叫基列西弗。
From there he went up against the people of Debir: (now the name of Debir before that was Kiriath-sepher.)

迦勒说，谁能攻打基列西弗将城夺取，我就把我女儿押撒给他为妻。
And Caleb said, I will give Achsah, my daughter, as wife to the man who overcomes Kiriath-sepher and takes it.

迦勒兄弟基纳斯的儿子俄陀聂夺取了那城，迦勒就把女儿押撒给他为妻。
And Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's brother, took it: so he gave him his daughter Achsah for his wife.

押撒过门的时候，劝丈夫向她父亲求一块田，押撒一下驴，迦勒问她说，你要什么。
Now when she came to him, he put into her mind the idea of requesting a field from her father: and she got down from her ass; and Caleb said to her, What is it?

她说，求你赐福给我，你既将我安置在南地，求你也给我水泉。她父亲就把上泉下泉赐给她。
And she said, Give me a blessing; because you have put me in dry south-land, now give me springs of water. So he gave her the higher spring and the lower spring.

以下是犹大支派按着宗族所得的产业。
This is the heritage of the tribe of Judah, by their families.

犹大支派尽南边的城邑，与以东交界相近的，就是甲薛，以得，雅姑珥，
The farthest towns of the tribe of Judah in the direction of the limits of Edom to the south, were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur;

基拿，底摩拿，亚大达，
And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah;

基低斯，夏琐，以提楠，
And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan;

西弗，提链，比亚绿，
Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth;

夏琐哈大他，加略希斯仑（加略希斯仑就是夏琐），
And Hazor-hadattah, and Kerioth-hezron (which is Hazor);

亚曼，示玛，摩拉大，
Amam, and Shema, and Moladah;

哈萨迦大，黑实门，伯帕列，
And Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-pelet;

哈萨书亚，别是巴，比斯约他，
And Hazar-shual, and Beer-sheba, and Biziothiah;

巴拉，以因，以森，
Baalah, and Iim, and Ezem;

伊勒多腊，基失，何珥玛，
And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah;

洗革拉，麦玛拿，三撒拿，
And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah;

利巴勿，实忻，亚因，临门，共二十九座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon; all the towns are twenty-nine, with their unwalled places.

在高原有以实陶，琐拉，亚实拿，
In the lowland, Eshtaol, and Zorah, and Ashnah;

撒挪亚，隐干宁，他普亚，以楠，
And Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam;

耶末，亚杜兰，梭哥，亚西加，
Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah;

沙拉音，亚底他音，基底拉，基底罗他音，共十四座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Shaaraim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen towns with their unwalled places.

又有洗楠，哈大沙，麦大迦得，
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-gad;

底连，米斯巴，约帖，
And Dilan, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel;

拉吉，波斯加，伊矶伦，
Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon;

迦本，拉幔，基提利，
And Cabbon, and Lahmas, and Chithlish;

基低罗，伯大衮，拿玛，玛基大，共十六座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen towns with their unwalled places.

又有立拿，以帖，亚珊，
Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan;

益弗他，亚实拿，尼悉，
And Iphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib;

基伊拉，亚革悉，玛利沙，共九座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine towns with their unwalled places.

又有以革伦和属以革伦的镇市村庄。
Ekron, with her daughter-towns and her unwalled places;

从以革伦直到海，一切靠近亚实突之地，并属其地的村庄。
From Ekron to the sea, all the towns by the side of Ashdod, with their unwalled places.

亚实突和属亚实突的镇市村庄。迦萨和属迦萨的镇市村庄。直到埃及小河，并大海和靠近大海之地。
Ashdod, with her daughter-towns and her unwalled places; Gaza, with her daughter-towns and her unwalled places, to the stream of Egypt, with the Great Sea as a limit.

在山地有沙密，雅提珥，梭哥，
And in the hill-country, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh;

大拿，基列萨拿（基列萨拿就是底璧），
And Dannah, and Kiriath-sannah (which is Debir);

亚拿伯，以实提莫，亚念，
And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim;

歌珊，何伦，基罗，共十一座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven towns with their unwalled places.

又有亚拉，度玛，以珊，
Arab, and Dumah, and Eshan;

雅农，伯他普亚，亚非加，
And Janim, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah;

宏他，基列亚巴（基列亚巴就是希伯仑），洗珥，共九座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Humtah, and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron), and Zior; nine towns with their unwalled places.

又有玛云，迦密，西弗，淤他，
Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Jutah;

耶斯列，约甸，撒挪亚，
And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah;

该隐，基比亚，亭纳，共十座城，还有属城的村庄。
Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten towns with their unwalled places.

又有哈忽，伯夙，基突，
Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor;

玛腊，伯亚诺，伊勒提君，共六座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six towns with their unwalled places.

又有基列巴力（基列巴力就是基列耶琳），拉巴，共两座城，还有属城的村庄。
Kiriath-baal (which is Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah; two towns with their unwalled places.

在旷野有伯亚拉巴，密丁，西迦迦，
In the waste land, Beth-arabah, Middin, and Secacah;

匿珊，盐城，隐基底，共六座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Nibshan, and the Town of Salt, and En-gedi; six towns with their unwalled places.

至于住耶路撒冷的耶布斯人，犹大人不能把他们赶出去，耶布斯人却在耶路撒冷与犹大人同住，直到今日。
And as for the Jebusites living in Jerusalem, the children of Judah were unable to make them go out; but the Jebusites are living with the children of Judah at Jerusalem, to this day.

约瑟的子孙拈阄所得之地是从靠近耶利哥的约旦河起，以耶利哥东边的水为界，从耶利哥上去，通过山地的旷野，到伯特利。
And the limit of the land marked out for the children of Joseph went out from Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of Jericho on the east, in the waste land, going up from Jericho through the hill-country to Beth-el;

又从伯特利到路斯，接连到亚基人的境界，至亚他绿。
And it goes out from Beth-el to Luz, and on as far as the limit of the Archites to Ataroth;

又往西下到押利提人的境界，到下伯和仑的境界，直到基色，通到海为止。
And it goes down to the west to the limit of the Japhletites, to the limit of Beth-horon the lower, as far as Gezer; ending at the sea.

约瑟的儿子玛拿西，以法莲就得了他们的地业。
And the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their heritage.

以法莲子孙的境界，按着宗族所得的，记在下面，他们地业的东界是亚他绿亚达到上伯和仑。
And the limit of the land of the children of Ephraim by their families was marked out in this way: the limit of their heritage to the east was Ataroth-addar, to Beth-horon the higher;

往西通到北边的密米他，又向东绕到他纳示罗，又接连到雅挪哈的东边。
The line goes out to the west at Michmethath on the north; then turning to the east to Taanath-shiloh, going past it on the east of Janoah;

从雅挪哈下到亚他绿，又到拿拉，达到耶利哥，通到约旦河为止。
And from Janoah down to Ataroth, and to Naarah, and touching Jericho, it goes on to Jordan.

从他普亚往西，到加拿河，直通到海为止。这就是以法莲支派按着宗族所得的地业。
From Tappuah the line goes on to the west to the river of Kanah; ending at the sea. This is the heritage of the children of Ephraim by their families;

另外在玛拿西人地业中得了些城邑和属城的村庄。这都是分给以法莲子孙的。
Together with the towns marked out for the children of Ephraim in the heritage of Manasseh, all the towns with their unwalled places.

他们没有赶出住基色的迦南人。迦南人却住在以法莲人中间，成为作苦工的仆人，直到今日。
And the Canaanites who were living in Gezer were not forced out; but the Canaanites have been living among Ephraim, to this day, as servants, doing forced work.

玛拿西是约瑟的长子，他的支派拈阄所得之地记在下面。至于玛拿西的长子基列之父（父或作主）玛吉，因为是勇士就得了基列和巴珊。
And this was the part marked out for the tribe of Manasseh, because he was the oldest son of Joseph. As for Machir, the oldest son of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, because he was a man of war he had Gilead and Bashan.

玛拿西其余的子孙，按着宗族拈阄分地，就是亚比以谢子孙，希勒子孙，亚斯列子孙，示剑子孙，希弗子孙，示米大子孙。这些按着宗族，都是约瑟儿子玛拿西子孙的男丁。
And as for the rest of the children of Manasseh, their heritage was given to them by families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh, the son of Joseph, by their families.

玛拿西的玄孙，玛吉的曾孙，基列的孙子，希弗的儿子西罗非哈没有儿子，只有女儿。他的女儿名叫玛拉，挪阿，曷拉，密迦，得撒。
But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but only daughters; and these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

她们来到祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚并众首领面前，说，耶和华曾吩咐摩西在我们弟兄中分给我们产业。于是约书亚照耶和华所吩咐的，在她们伯叔中，把产业分给她们。
And they came before Eleazar the priest, and Joshua, the son of Nun, and before the chiefs, saying, The Lord gave orders to Moses to give us a heritage among our brothers: so in agreement with the orders of the Lord he gave them a heritage among their father's brothers.

除了约旦河东的基列和巴珊地之外，还有十分地归玛拿西，
And ten parts were given to Manasseh, in addition to the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is on the other side of Jordan;

因为玛拿西的孙女们在玛拿西的孙子中得了产业。基列地是属玛拿西其余的子孙。
Because the daughters of Manasseh had a heritage among his sons, and the land of Gilead was the property of the other sons of Manasseh.

玛拿西的境界，从亚设起，到示剑前的密米他，往北到隐他普亚居民之地。
And the limit of Manasseh's land was from Asher to Michmethath, which is before Shechem; the line goes on to the right hand, to the people of En-tappuah.

他普亚地归玛拿西，只是玛拿西境界上的他普亚城归以法莲子孙。
The land of Tappuah was the property of Manasseh; but Tappuah on the edge of Manasseh was the property of the children of Ephraim.

其界下到加拿河的南边。在玛拿西城邑中的这些城邑都归以法莲。玛拿西的地界是在河北直通到海为止。
And the limit goes down to the stream Kanah, to the south of the stream: these towns were Ephraim's among the towns of Manasseh; Manasseh's limit was on the north side of the stream, ending at the sea:

南归以法莲，北归玛拿西，以海为界。北边到亚设，东边到以萨迦。
To the south it is Ephraim's, and to the north it is Manasseh's, and the sea is his limit; and they are touching Asher on the north, and Issachar on the east.

玛拿西在以萨迦和亚设境内，有伯善和属伯善的镇市，以伯莲和属以伯莲的镇市，多珥的居民和属多珥的镇市。又有三处山冈，就是隐多珥和属隐多珥的镇市。他纳的居民和属他纳的镇市，米吉多的居民和属米吉多的镇市。
In Issachar and Asher, Manasseh had Beth-shean and its daughter-towns, and Ibleam and its daughter-towns, and the people of Dor and its daughter-towns, and the people of En-dor and its daughter-towns, and the people of Taanach and its daughter-towns, and the people of Megiddo and its daughter-towns, that is, the three hills.

只是玛拿西子孙不能赶出这些城的居民，迦南人偏要住在那地。
But the children of Manasseh were not able to make the people of those towns go out; but the Canaanites would go on living in that land.

及至以色列人强盛了，就使迦南人作苦工，没有把他们全然赶出。
And when the children of Israel had become strong, they put the Canaanites to forced work, in place of driving them out.

约瑟的子孙对约书亚说，耶和华到如今既然赐福与我们，我们也族大人多，你为什么仅将一阄一段之地分给我们为业呢？
Then the children of Joseph said to Joshua, Why have you given me only one part and one stretch of land for my heritage? For through the blessing given to me by the Lord up to now, I am a great people.

约书亚说，你们如果族大人多，嫌以法莲山地窄小，就可以上比利洗人，利乏音人之地，在树林中砍伐树木。
Then Joshua said to them, If you are such a great people, go up into the woodlands, clearing a place there for yourselves in the land of the Perizzites and the Rephaim, if the hill-country of Ephraim is not wide enough for you.

约瑟的子孙说，那山地容不下我们，并且住平原的迦南人，就是住伯善和属伯善的镇市，并住耶斯列平原的人，都有铁车。
And the children of Joseph said, The hill-country is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites living in the valley have iron war-carriages, those in Beth-shean and its towns as well as those in the valley of Jezreel.

约书亚对约瑟家，就是以法莲和玛拿西人，说，你是族大人多，并且强盛，不可仅有一阄之地，
Then Joshua said to the children of Joseph, to Ephraim and Manasseh, You are a great people, and have great power: you are not to have one property only,

山地也要归你，虽是树林，你也可以砍伐。靠近之地必归你。迦南人虽有铁车，虽是强盛，你也能把他们赶出去。
For the hill-country of Gilead will be yours ... the woodland and cut down ... its outskirts will be yours ... get the Canaanites out, for they have iron war-carriages ... strong.

以色列的全会众都聚集在示罗，把会幕设立在那里，那地已经被他们制伏了。
And all the meeting of the children of Israel came together at Shiloh and put up the Tent of meeting there: and the land was crushed before them.

以色列人中其余的七个支派还没有分给他们地业。
But there were still seven tribes among the children of Israel who had not taken up their heritage.

约书亚对以色列人说，耶和华你们列祖的神所赐给你们的地，你们耽延不去得，要到几时呢？
Then Joshua said to the children of Israel, Why are you so slow to go in and take up your heritage in the land which the Lord, the God of your fathers, has given you?

你们每支派当选举三个人，我要打发他们去，他们就要起身走遍那地，按着各支派应得的地业写明（或作画图），就回到我这里来。
Take from among you three men from every tribe; and I will send them to go through the land and make a record of it for distribution as their heritage; then let them come back to me.

他们要将地分作七分。犹大仍在南方，住在他的境内。约瑟家仍在北方，住在他的境内。
And let them make division of it into seven parts: let Judah keep inside his limit on the south, and let the children of Joseph keep inside their limit on the north.

你们要将地分作七分，写明了拿到我这里来。我要在耶和华我们神面前，为你们拈阄。
And you are to have the land marked out in seven parts, and come back to me with the record; and I will make the distribution for you here by the decision of the Lord our God.

利未人在你们中间没有分，因为供耶和华祭司的职任就是他们的产业。迦得支派，流便支派，和玛拿西半支派已经在约旦河东得了地业，就是耶和华仆人摩西所给他们的。
For the Levites have no part among you; to be the Lord's priests is their heritage; and Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have had their heritage on the east side of Jordan, given to them by Moses, the servant of the Lord.

划地势的人起身去的时候，约书亚嘱咐他们说，你们去走遍那地，划明地势，就回到我这里来。我要在示罗这里，耶和华面前，为你们拈阄。
So the men got up and went; and Joshua gave orders to those who went, to make a record of the land, saying, Go up and down through the land, and make a record of it and come back here to me, and I will make the distribution for you here by the decision of the Lord in Shiloh.

他们就去了，走遍那地，按着城邑分作七分，写在册子上，回到示罗营中见约书亚。
So the men went, travelling through the land, and made a record of it by towns in seven parts in a book, and came back to Joshua to the tent-circle at Shiloh.

约书亚就在示罗，耶和华面前，为他们拈阄。约书亚在那里，按着以色列人的支派，将地分给他们。
And Joshua made the distribution for them in Shiloh by the decision of the Lord, marking out the land for the children of Israel by their divisions.

便雅悯支派，按着宗族拈阄所得之地，是在犹大，约瑟子孙中间。
And the first heritage came out for the tribe of Benjamin by their families: and the limit of their heritage went between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.

他们的北界是从约旦河起，往上贴近耶利哥的北边。又往西通过山地，直到伯亚文的旷野。
And their limit on the north was from the Jordan, and the line goes up to the side of Jericho on the north and through the hill-country to the west, ending at the waste land of Beth-aven.

从那里往南接连到路斯，贴近路斯（路斯就是伯特利），又下到亚他绿亚达，靠近下伯和仑南边的山。
And from there the line goes south to Luz, to the side of Luz (which is Beth-el), then down to Ataroth-addar, by the mountain to the south of Beth-horon the lower.

从那里往西，又转向南，从伯和仑南对面的山，直达到犹大人的城基列巴力（基列巴力就是基列耶琳）。这是西界。
And the limit is marked as coming round to the south on the west side from the mountain which is south of Beth-horon, and ending at Kiriath-baal (which is Kiriath-jearim), a town of the children of Judah: this is the west part.

南界是从基列耶琳的尽边起，往西达到尼弗多亚的水源。
And the south part is from the farthest point of Kiriath-jearim, and the line goes out to the west to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah:

又下到欣嫩子谷对面山的尽边，就是利乏音谷北边的山。又下到欣嫩谷，贴近耶布斯的南边。又下到隐罗结。
And the line goes down to the farthest part of the mountain facing the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is on the north of the valley of Rephaim: from there it goes down to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite on the south as far as En-rogel;

又往北通到隐示麦，达到亚都冥坡对面的基利绿。又下到流便之子波罕的磐石。
And it goes to En-shemesh and on to Geliloth, opposite the way up to Adummim, and it goes down to the stone of Bohan, the son of Reuben;

又接连到亚拉巴对面，往北下到亚拉巴。
And it goes on to the side facing the Arabah to the north, and down to the Arabah;

又接连到伯曷拉的北边，直通到盐海的北汊，就是约旦河的南头。这是南界。
And on to the north side of Beth-hoglah, ending at the north inlet of the Salt Sea at the south end of Jordan; this is their limit on the south.

东界是约旦河。这是便雅悯人按着宗族，照他们四围的交界所得的地业。
And the limit of the east part is the Jordan. This is the heritage of the children of Benjamin, marked out for their families by these limits on all sides.

便雅悯支派按着宗族所得的城邑就是，耶利哥，伯曷拉，伊麦基悉，
And the towns of the children of Benjamin, given to them in the order of their families, are Jericho and Beth-hoglah and Emek-kezziz

伯亚拉巴，洗玛脸，伯特利，
And Beth-arabah and Zemaraim and Beth-el

亚文，巴拉，俄弗拉，
And Avvim and Parah and Ophrah

基法阿摩尼，俄弗尼，迦巴，共十二座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Chephar-Ammoni and Ophni and Geba; twelve towns with their unwalled places;

又有基遍，拉玛，比录，
Gibeon and Ramah and Beeroth

米斯巴，基非拉，摩撒，
And Mizpeh and Chephirah and Mozah

利坚，伊利毗勒，他拉拉，
And Rekem and Irpeel and Taralah

洗拉，以利弗，耶布斯（耶布斯就是耶路撒冷），基比亚，基列，共十四座城，还有属城的村庄。这是便雅悯人按着宗族所得的地业。
And Zela, Eleph and the Jebusite (which is Jerusalem), Gibeath and Kiriath; fourteen towns with their unwalled places. This is the heritage of the children of Benjamin by their families.

为西缅支派的人，按着宗族，拈出第二阄。他们所得的地业是在犹大人地业中间。
And the second heritage came out for the tribe of Simeon by their families; and their heritage was in the middle of the heritage of the children of Judah.

他们所得为业之地就是，别是巴（或名示巴），摩拉大，
And they had for their heritage Beer-sheba and Shema and Moladah

哈萨书亚，巴拉，以森，
And Hazar-shual and Balah and Ezem

伊利多拉，比土力，何珥玛，
And Eltolad and Bethul and Hormah

洗革拉，伯玛加博，哈萨苏撒，
And Ziklag and Beth-marcaboth and Hazar-susah

伯利巴勿，沙鲁险，共十三座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Beth-lebaoth and Sharuhen; thirteen towns with their unwalled places;

又有亚因，利门，以帖，亚珊，共四座城，还有属城的村庄。
Ain, Rimmon, and Ether and Ashan; four towns with their unwalled places;

并有这些城邑四围一切的村庄，直到巴拉比珥，就是南地的拉玛。这是西缅支派按着宗族所得的地业。
And all the unwalled places round about these towns as far as Baalath-beer-ramah to the south. This is the heritage of the tribe of Simeon by their families.

西缅人的地业是从犹大人地业中得来的。因为犹大人的分过多，所以西缅人在他们的地业中得了地业。
The heritage of Simeon was taken out of Judah's stretch of land, for Judah's part was more than they had need of, so the heritage of the children of Simeon was inside their heritage.

为西布伦人，按着宗族，拈出第三阄。他们地业的境界是到撒立。
And the third heritage came out for Zebulun by their families; the limit of their heritage was as far as Sarid;

往西上到玛拉拉，达到大巴设，又达到约念前的河。
And their limit goes up to the west to Maralah, stretching to Dabbesheth, and to the stream in front of Jokneam;

又从撒立往东转向日出之地，到吉斯绿他泊的境界，又通到大比拉，上到雅非亚。
Then turning east from Sarid to the limit of Chisloth-tabor, it goes out to Daberath, and up to Japhia;

从那里往东，接连到迦特希弗，至以特加汛，通到临门，临门延到尼亚。
And from there it goes on east to Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin; ending at Rimmon which goes as far as Neah;

又绕过尼亚的北边，转到哈拿顿，通到伊弗他伊勒谷。
And the line goes round it on the north to Hannathon, ending at the valley of Iphtah-el;

还有加他，拿哈拉，伸仑，以大拉，伯利恒，共十二座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Kattath and Nahalal and Shimron and Idalah and Beth-lehem; twelve towns with their unwalled places.

这些城并属城的村庄就是西布伦人按着宗族所得的地业。
This is the heritage of the children of Zebulun by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

为以萨迦人，按着宗族，拈出第四阄。
For Issachar the fourth heritage came out, for the children of Issachar by their families;

他们的境界是到耶斯列，基苏律，书念，
And their limit was to Jezreel and Chesulloth and Shunem

哈弗连，示按，亚拿哈拉，
And Hapharaim and Shion and Anaharath

拉璧，基善，亚别，
And Rabbith and Kishion and Ebez

利篾，隐干宁，隐哈大，伯帕薛。
And Remeth and En-gannim and En-haddah and Beth-pazzez;

又达到他泊，沙哈洗玛，伯示麦，直通到约旦河为止，共十六座城，还有属城的村庄。
And their limit goes as far as Tabor and Shahazimah and Beth-shemesh, ending at Jordan; sixteen towns with their unwalled places.

这些城并属城的村庄就是以萨迦支派按着宗族所得的地业。
This is the heritage of the tribe of the children of Issachar by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

为亚设支派，按着宗族，拈出第五阄。
And the fifth heritage came out for the tribe of Asher by their families.

他们的境界是黑甲，哈利，比田，押煞，
And their limit was Helkath and Hali and Beten and Achshaph

亚拉米勒，亚末，米沙勒。往西达到迦密，又到希曷立纳，
And Alammelech and Amad and Mishal, stretching to Carmel on the west and Shihor-libnath;

转向日出之地，到伯大衮，达到细步纶往北到伊弗他伊勒谷，到伯以墨和尼业，也通到迦步勒的左边。
Turning to the east to Beth-dagon and stretching to Zebulun and the valley of Iphtah-el as far as Beth-emek and Neiel to the north; on the left it goes as far as Cabul

又到义伯仑，利合，哈们，加拿，直到西顿大城。
And Ebron and Rehob and Hammon and Kanah, to great Zidon;

转到拉玛和坚固城推罗。又转到何萨，靠近亚革悉一带地方，直通到海。
And the limit goes round to Ramah and the walled town of Tyre and Hosah, ending at the sea by Heleb and Achzib;

又有乌玛，亚弗，利合，共二十二座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Ummah and Aphek and Rehob; twenty-two towns with their unwalled places.

这些城并属城的村庄就是亚设支派按着宗族所得的地业。
This is the heritage of the tribe of the children of Asher by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

为拿弗他利人，按着宗族，拈出第六阄。
For the children of Naphtali the sixth heritage came out, for the children of Naphtali by their families;

他们的境界是从希利弗从撒拿音的橡树，从亚大米尼吉和雅比聂，直到拉共，通到约旦河。
And their limit was from Heleph, from the oak-tree in Zaanannim, and Adami-hannekeb and Jabneel, as far as Lakkum, ending at Jordan;

又转向西到亚斯纳他泊，从那里通到户割，南边到西布伦，西边到亚设，又向日出之地，达到约旦河那里的犹大。
And turning west to Aznoth-tabor, the limit goes out from there to Hukkok, stretching to Zebulun on the south, and Asher on the west, and Judah at Jordan on the east.

坚固的城就是，西丁，侧耳，哈末，拉甲，基尼烈，
And the walled towns are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth

亚大玛，拉玛，夏琐，
And Adamah and Ramah and Hazor

基低斯，以得来，隐夏琐，
And Kedesh and Edrei and En-Hazor

以利稳，密大伊勒，和琏，伯亚纳，伯示麦，共十九座城，还有属城的村庄。
And Iron and Migdal-el, Horem and Beth-anath and Beth-shemesh; nineteen towns with their unwalled places.

这些城并属城的村庄就是拿弗他利支派按着宗族所得的地业。
This is the heritage of the tribe of the children of Naphtali by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

为但支派，按着宗族，拈出第七阄。
For the tribe of Dan by their families the seventh heritage came out;

他们地业的境界是琐拉，以实陶，伊珥示麦，
And the limit of their heritage was Zorah and Eshtaol and Ir-shemesh

沙拉宾，亚雅仑，伊提拉，
And Shaalabbin and Aijalon and Ithlah

以伦，亭拿他，以革伦，
And Elon and Timnah and Ekron

伊利提基，基比顿，巴拉，
And Eltekeh and Gibbethon and Baalath

伊胡得，比尼比拉，迦特临门，
And Jehud and Bene-berak and Gath-rimmon;

美耶昆，拉昆，并约帕对面的地界。
And on the west was ... opposite Joppa.

但人的地界越过原得的地界。因为但人上去攻取利善，用刀击杀城中的人，得了那城，住在其中，以他们先祖但的名将利善改名为但。
(But the limit of the children of Dan was not wide enough for them; so the children of Dan went up and made war on Leshem and took it, putting it to the sword without mercy, and they took it for their heritage and made a place for themselves there, giving it the name of Leshem-dan, after the name of their father, Dan.)

这些城并属城的村庄就是但支派按着宗族所得的地业。
This is the heritage of the tribe of the children of Dan by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

以色列人按着境界分完了地业，就在他们中间将地给嫩的儿子约书亚为业，
So the distribution of the land and its limits was complete; and the children of Israel gave Joshua, the son of Nun, a heritage among them;

是照耶和华的吩咐，将约书亚所求的城，就是以法莲山地的亭拿西拉城，给了他。他就修那城，住在其中。
By the orders of the Lord they gave him the town for which he made request, Timnath-serah in the hill-country of Ephraim: there, after building the town, he made his living-place.

这就是祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚，并以色列各支派的族长，在示罗会幕门口，耶和华面前，拈阄所分的地业。这样，他们把地分完了。
These are the heritages which Eleazar the priest and Joshua, the son of Nun, and the heads of families of the tribes of the children of Israel gave out at Shiloh, by the decision of the Lord, at the door of the Tent of meeting. So the distribution of the land was complete.

耶和华晓谕约书亚说，
And the Lord said to Joshua,

你吩咐以色列人说，你们要照着我借摩西所晓谕你们的，为自己设立逃城，
Say to the children of Israel, Let certain towns be marked out as safe places, as I said to you by the mouth of Moses,

使那无心而误杀人的，可以逃到那里。这些城可以作你们逃避报血仇人的地方。
So that any man who in error and without design has taken the life of another, may go in flight to them: and they will be safe places for you from him who has the right of punishment for blood.

那杀人的要逃到这些城中的一座城，站在城门口，将他的事情说给城内的长老们听。他们就把他收进城里，给他地方，使他住在他们中间。
And if anyone goes in flight to one of those towns, and comes into the public place of the town, and puts his cause before the responsible men of the town, they will take him into the town and give him a place among them where he may be safe.

若是报血仇的追了他来，长老不可将他交在报血仇的手里。因为他是素无仇恨，无心杀了人的。
And if the one who has the right of punishment comes after him, they are not to give the taker of life up to him; because he was the cause of his neighbour's death without designing it and not in hate.

他要住在那城里，站在会众面前听审判，等到那时的大祭司死了，杀人的才可以回到本城本家，就是他所逃出来的那城。
And he is to go on living in that town till he has to come before the meeting of the people to be judged; (till the death of him who is high priest at that time:) then the taker of life may come back to his town and to his house, to the town from which he had gone in flight.

于是，以色列人在拿弗他利山地分定加利利的基低斯。在以法莲山地分定示剑。在犹大山地分定基列亚巴（基列亚巴就是希伯仑）。
So they made selection of Kedesh in Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron) in the hill-country of Judah.

又在约旦河外耶利哥东，从流便支派中，在旷野的平原，设立比悉。从迦得支派中设立基列的拉末。从玛拿西支派中设立巴珊的哥兰。
And on the east side of Jordan at Jericho, they made selection of Bezer in the waste land, in the table-land, out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.

这都是为以色列众人和在他们中间寄居的外人所分定的地邑，使误杀人的都可以逃到那里，不死在报血仇人的手中，等他站在会众面前听审判。
These were the towns marked out for all the children of Israel and for the man from a strange country living among them, so that anyone causing the death of another in error, might go in flight there, and not be put to death by him who has the right of punishment for blood till he had come before the meeting of the people.

那时，利未人的众族长来到祭司以利亚撒和嫩的儿子约书亚，并以色列各支派的族长面前，
Then the heads of the families of the Levites came to Eleazar the priest and Joshua, the son of Nun, and to the heads of families of the tribes of the children of Israel;

在迦南地的示罗对他们说，从前耶和华借着摩西吩咐给我们城邑居住，并城邑的郊野可以牧养我们的牲畜。
And said to them in Shiloh in the land of Canaan, The Lord gave orders by Moses that we were to have towns for living in, with their grass-lands for our cattle.

于是以色列人照耶和华所吩咐的，从自己的地业中，将以下所记的城邑和城邑的郊野给了利未人。
And the children of Israel out of their heritage gave to the Levites these towns with their grass-lands, by the order of the Lord.

为哥辖族拈阄，利未人的祭司，亚伦的子孙，从犹大支派，西缅支派，便雅悯支派的地业中，按阄得了十三座城。
And the heritage came out for the families of the Kohathites: the children of Aaron the priest, who were of the Levites, were given thirteen towns from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.

哥辖其余的子孙，从以法莲支派，但支派，玛拿西半支派的地业中，按阄得了十座城。
The rest of the children of Kohath by their families were given ten towns from the tribes of Ephraim and Dan and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

革顺的子孙，从以萨迦支派，亚设支派，拿弗他利支派，住巴珊的玛拿西半支派的地业中，按阄得了十三座城。
The children of Gershon by their families were given thirteen towns from the tribes of Issachar and Asher and Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh which was in Bashan.

米拉利的子孙，按着宗族，从流便支派，迦得支派，西布伦支派的地业中，按阄得了十二座城。
The children of Merari by their families were given twelve towns from the tribes of Reuben and Gad and Zebulun.

以色列人照着耶和华借摩西所吩咐的，将这些城邑和城邑的郊野，按阄分给利未人。
All these towns with their grass-lands the children of Israel gave by the decision of the Lord to the Levites, as the Lord had given orders by Moses.

从犹大支派，西缅支派的地业中，将以下所记的城给了利未支派哥辖宗族亚伦的子孙。因为给他们拈出头一阄，
From the tribes of the children of Judah and the children of Simeon they gave these towns, listed here by name:


These were for the children of Aaron among the families of the Kohathites, of the children of Levi: for they came first in the distribution.

将犹大山地的基列亚巴和四围的郊野给了他们。亚巴是亚衲族的始祖。（基列亚巴就是希伯仑）。
They gave them Kiriath-arba, the town of Arba, the father of Anak, (which is Hebron) in the hill-country of Judah, with its grass-lands.

惟将属城的田地和村庄给了耶孚尼的儿子迦勒为业。
But the open country round the town, and its unwalled places, they gave to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, as his property.

以色列人将希伯仑，就是误杀人的逃城和属城的郊野，给了祭司亚伦的子孙。又给他们立拿和属城的郊野，
And to the children of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Libnah with its grass-lands;

雅提珥和属城的郊野，以实提莫和属城的郊野，
And Jattir with its grass-lands, and Eshtemoa with its grass-lands;

何仑和属城的郊野，底璧和属城的郊野，
And Holon with its grass-lands, and Debir with its grass-lands;

亚因和属城的郊野，淤他和属城的郊野，伯示麦和属城的郊野，共九座城，都是从这二支派中分出来的。
And Ain, and Juttah, and Beth-shemesh, with their grass-lands; nine towns from those two tribes.

又从便雅悯支派的地业中给了他们基遍和属城的郊野，迦巴和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Benjamin they gave Gibeon and Geba with their grass-lands;

亚拿突和属城的郊野，亚勒们和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Anathoth and Almon with their grass-lands, four towns.

亚伦子孙作祭司的共有十三座城，还有属城的郊野。
Thirteen towns with their grass-lands were given to the children of Aaron, the priests.

利未支派中哥辖的宗族，就是哥辖其余的子孙，拈阄所得的城有从以法莲支派中分出来的。
The rest of the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites, were given towns from the tribe of Ephraim.

以色列人将以法莲山地的示剑，就是误杀人的逃城和属城的郊野，给了他们。又给他们基色和属城的郊野，
And they gave them Shechem with its grass-lands in the hill-country of Ephraim, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Gezer with its grass-lands;

基伯先和属城的郊野，伯和仑和属城的郊野，共四座城。
And Kibzaim and Beth-horon with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从但支派的地业中给了他们伊利提基和属城的郊野，基比顿和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Dan, Elteke and Gibbethon with their grass-lands;

亚雅仑和属城的郊野，迦特临门和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Aijalon and Gath-rimmon with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从玛拿西半支派的地业中给了他们他纳和属城的郊野，迦特临门和属城的郊野，共两座城。
And from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach and Gath-rimmon with their grass-lands, two towns.

哥辖其余的子孙共有十座城，还有属城的郊野。
All the towns of the rest of the families of the children of Kohath were ten with their grass-lands.

以色列人又从玛拿西半支派的地业中将巴珊的哥兰，就是误杀人的逃城和属城的郊野，给了利未支派革顺的子孙。又给他们比施提拉和属城的郊野，共两座城。
And to the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, they gave from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Ashtaroth with its grass-lands, two towns.

又从以萨迦支派的地业中给了他们基善和属城的郊野，大比拉和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Issachar, Kishion and Daberath with their grass-lands;

耶末和属城的郊野，隐干宁和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Jarmuth and En-gannim with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从亚设支派的地业中给了他们米沙勒和属城的郊野，押顿和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Asher, Mishal and Abdon, with their grass-lands:

黑甲和属城的郊野，利合和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Helkath and Rehob with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从拿弗他利支派的地业中将加利利的基低斯，就是误杀人的逃城和属城的郊野，给了他们。又给他们哈末多珥和属城的郊野，加珥坦和属城的郊野，共三座城。
And from the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Hammoth-dor and Kartan with their grass-lands, three towns.

革顺人按着宗族所得的城，共十三座，还有属城的郊野。
All the towns of the Gershonites with their families were thirteen with their grass-lands.

其余利未支派米拉利子孙，从西布伦支派的地业中所得的，就是约念和属城的郊野，加珥他和属城的郊野，
And to the rest of the Levites, that is, the families of the children of Merari, they gave from the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam and Kartah with their grass-lands;

丁拿和属城的郊野，拿哈拉和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Dimnah and Nahalal with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从流便支派的地业中给了他们比悉和属城的郊野，雅杂和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Reuben, Bezer and Jahaz with their grass-lands;

基底莫和属城的郊野，米法押和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Kedemoth and Mephaath with their grass-lands, four towns.

又从迦得支派的地业中，将基列的拉末，就是误杀人的逃城和属城的郊野，给了他们。又给他们玛哈念和属城的郊野，
And from the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Mahanaim with their grass-lands;

希实本和属城的郊野，雅谢和属城的郊野，共四座城。
Heshbon and Jazer with their grass-lands, four towns.

其余利未支派的人，就是米拉利的子孙，按着宗族拈阄所得的，共十二座城。
All these towns were given to the children of Merari by their families, that is, the rest of the families of the Levites; and their heritage was twelve towns.

利未人在以色列人的地业中所得的城，共四十八座，并有属城的郊野。
All the towns of the Levites, among the heritage of the children of Israel, were forty-eight towns with their grass-lands.

这些城四围都有属城的郊野，城城都是如此。
Every one of these towns had grass-lands round it.

这样，耶和华将从前向他们列祖起誓所应许的全地赐给以色列人，他们就得了为业，住在其中。
So the Lord gave to Israel all the land which he gave by oath to their fathers; so it became their heritage and their living-place.

耶和华照着向他们列祖起誓所应许的一切话，使他们四境平安。他们一切仇敌中，没有一人在他们面前站立得住。耶和华把一切仇敌都交在他们手中。
And the Lord gave them peace on every side, as he had said to their fathers: all those who were against them gave way before them, for the Lord gave them all up into their hands.

耶和华应许赐福给以色列家的话一句也没有落空，都应验了。
The Lord kept faith with the house of Israel about all the good which he said he would do for them, and all his words came true.

当时，约书亚召了流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人来，
Then Joshua sent for the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh,

对他们说，耶和华仆人摩西所吩咐你们的，你们都遵守了。我所吩咐你们的，你们也都听从了。
And said to them, You have kept all the orders of Moses, the Lord's servant, and have done everything I gave you orders to do:

你们这许多日子，总没有撇离你们的弟兄，直到今日，并守了耶和华你们神所吩咐你们当守的。
You have now been with your brothers for a long time; till this day you have been doing the orders of the Lord your God.

如今耶和华你们神照着他所应许的，使你们弟兄得享平安，现在可以转回你们的帐棚，到耶和华的仆人摩西在约旦河东所赐你们为业之地。
And now the Lord your God has given your brothers rest, as he said: so now you may go back to your tents, to the land of your heritage, which Moses, the Lord's servant, gave to you on the other side of Jordan.

只要切切地谨慎遵行耶和华仆人摩西所吩咐你们的诫命律法，爱耶和华你们的神，行他一切的道，守他的诫命，专靠他，尽心尽性事奉他。
Only take great care to do the orders and the law which Moses, the Lord's servant, gave you; to have love for the Lord your God and to go in all his ways; and to keep his laws and to be true to him and to be his servants with all your heart and with all your soul.

于是约书亚为他们祝福，打发他们去，他们就回自己的帐棚去了。
Then Joshua gave them his blessing and sent them away: and they went back to their tents.

玛拿西那半支派，摩西早已在巴珊分给他们地业。这半支派，约书亚在约旦河西，在他们弟兄中，分给他们地业。约书亚打发他们回帐棚的时候为他们祝福，
Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh, Moses had given a heritage in Bashan; but to the other half, Joshua gave a heritage among their brothers on the west side of Jordan. Now when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he gave them his blessing,

对他们说，你们带许多财物，许多牲畜和金，银，铜，铁，并许多衣服，回你们的帐棚去，要将你们从仇敌夺来的物，与你们众弟兄同分。
And said to them, Go back with much wealth to your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver and gold and brass and iron, and with a very great store of clothing; give your brothers a part of the goods taken in the war.

于是流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人从迦南地的示罗起行，离开以色列人，回往他们得为业的基列地，就是照耶和华借摩西所吩咐的得了为业之地。
So Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh went back, parting from the children of Israel at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their heritage which had been given to them by the Lord's order to Moses.

流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人到了靠近约旦河的一带迦南地，就在约旦河那里筑了一座坛。那坛看着高大。
Now when they came to the country by Jordan in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh put up there, by Jordan, a great altar, seen from far.

以色列人听说流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人靠近约旦河边，在迦南地属以色列人的那边筑了一座坛。
And news came to the children of Israel, See, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have put up an altar opposite the land of Canaan, in the country by Jordan on the side which is Israel's.

全会众一听见，就聚集在示罗，要上去攻打他们。
Then all the meeting of the children of Israel, hearing this, came together at Shiloh to go up against them to war.

以色列人打发祭司以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈，往基列地去见流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人。
And the children of Israel sent Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, to the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead,

又打发十个首领与非尼哈同去，就是以色列每支派的一个首领，都是以色列军中的统领。
And with him they sent ten chiefs, one for every tribe of the children of Israel, every one of them the head of his house among the families of Israel.

他们到了基列地，见流便人，迦得人，和玛拿西半支派的人，对他们说，
And they came to the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead, and said to them,

耶和华全会众这样说，你们今日转去不跟从耶和华，干犯以色列的神，为自己筑一座坛，悖逆了耶和华，这犯的是什么罪呢？
This is what all the meeting of the people of the Lord has said, What is this wrong which you have done against the God of Israel, turning back this day from the Lord and building an altar for yourselves, and being false to the Lord?

从前拜毗珥的罪孽还算小吗？虽然瘟疫临到耶和华的会众，到今日我们还没有洗净这罪。
Was not the sin of Baal-peor great enough, from which we are not clear even to this day, though punishment came on the people of the Lord,

你们今日竟转去不跟从耶和华吗？你们今日既悖逆耶和华，明日他必向以色列全会众发怒。
That now you are turned back from the Lord? and, because you are false to him today, tomorrow his wrath will be let loose on all the people of Israel.

你们所得为业之地，若嫌不洁净，就可以过到耶和华之地，就是耶和华的帐幕所住之地，在我们中间得地业。只是不可悖逆耶和华，也不可得罪我们，在耶和华我们神的坛以外为自己筑坛。
But if the land you now have is unclean, come over into the Lord's land where his House is, and take up your heritage among us: but do not be false to the Lord and to us by building yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of the Lord our God.

从前谢拉的曾孙亚干岂不是在那当灭的物上犯了罪，就有忿怒临到以色列全会众吗？那人在所犯的罪中不独一人死亡。
Did not Achan, the son of Zerah, do wrong about the cursed thing, causing wrath to come on all the people of Israel? And not on him only came the punishment of death.

于是流便人，迦得人，玛拿西半支派的人回答以色列军中的统领说，
Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh said in answer to the heads of the families of Israel,

大能者神耶和华。大能者神耶和华。他是知道的。以色列人也必知道。我们若有悖逆的意思，或是干犯耶和华（愿你今日不保佑我们），
God, even God the Lord, God, even God the Lord, he sees, and Israel will see--if it is in pride or in sin against the Lord,

为自己筑坛，要转去不跟从耶和华，或是要将燔祭，素祭，平安祭献在坛上，愿耶和华亲自讨我们的罪。
That we have made ourselves an altar, being false to the Lord, keep us not safe from death this day; and if for the purpose of offering burned offerings on it and meal offerings, or peace-offerings, let the Lord himself send punishment for it;

我们行这事并非无故，是特意作的，说，恐怕日后你们的子孙对我们的子孙说，你们与耶和华以色列的神有何关涉呢？
And if we have not, in fact, done this designedly and with purpose, having in our minds the fear that in time to come your children might say to our children, What have you to do with the Lord, the God of Israel?

因为耶和华把约旦河定为我们和你们这流便人，迦得人的交界，你们与耶和华无分了。这样，你们的子孙就使我们的子孙不再敬畏耶和华了。
For the Lord has made Jordan a line of division between us and you, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad; you have no part in the Lord: so your children will make our children give up fearing the Lord.

因此我们说，不如为自己筑一座坛，不是为献燔祭，也不是为献别的祭，
So we said, Let us now make an altar for ourselves, not for burned offerings or for the offerings of beasts:

乃是为你我中间和你我后人中间作证据，好叫我们也在耶和华面前献燔祭，平安祭，和别的祭事奉他，免得你们的子孙日后对我们的子孙说，你们与耶和华无分了。
But to be a witness between us and you, and between the future generations, that we have the right of worshipping the Lord with our burned offerings and our offerings of beasts and our peace-offerings; so that your children will not be able to say to our children in time to come, You have no part in the Lord.

所以我们说，日后你们对我们，或对我们的后人这样说，我们就可以回答说，你们看我们列祖所筑的坛是耶和华坛的样式。这并不是为献燔祭，也不是为献别的祭，乃是为作你我中间的证据。
For we said to ourselves, If they say this to us or to future generations, then we will say, See this copy of the Lord's altar which our fathers made, not for burned offerings or offerings of beasts, but for a witness between us and you.

我们在耶和华我们神帐幕前的坛以外，另筑一座坛，为献燔祭，素祭，和别的祭，悖逆耶和华，今日转去不跟从他，我们断没有这个意思。
Never let it be said that we were false to the Lord, turning back this day from him and building an altar for burned offerings and meal offerings and offerings of beasts, in addition to the altar of the Lord our God which is before his House.

祭司非尼哈与会中的首领，就是与他同来以色列军中的统领，听见流便人，迦得人，玛拿西人所说的话，就都以为美。
Then Phinehas the priest and the chiefs of the meeting and the heads of the families of Israel who were with him, hearing what the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh said, were pleased.

祭司以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈对流便人，迦得人，玛拿西人说，今日我们知道耶和华在我们中间，因为你们没有向他犯了这罪。现在你们救以色列人脱离耶和华的手了。
And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, said to the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh, Now we are certain that the Lord is among us, because you have not done this wrong against the Lord: and you have kept us from falling into the hands of the Lord.

祭司以利亚撒的儿子非尼哈与众首领离了流便人，迦得人，从基列地回往迦南地，到了以色列人那里，便将这事回报他们。
Then Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, and the chiefs went back from the land of Gilead, from the children of Reuben and the children of Gad, and came to the children of Israel in Canaan and gave them the news.

以色列人以这事为美，就称颂神，不再提上去攻打流便人，迦得人，毁坏他们所住的地了。
And the children of Israel were pleased about this; and they gave praise to God, and had no more thought of going to war against the children of Reuben and the children of Gad for the destruction of their land.

流便人，迦得人给坛起名叫证坛，意思说，这坛在我们中间证明耶和华是神。
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad gave to that altar the name of Ed. For, they said, It is a witness between us that the Lord is God.

耶和华使以色列人安静，不与四围的一切仇敌争战，已经多日。约书亚年纪老迈，
Now after a long time, when the Lord had given Israel rest from wars on every side, and Joshua was old and full of years,

就把以色列众人的长老，族长，审判官，并官长都召了来，对他们说，我年纪已经老迈。
Joshua sent for all Israel, for their responsible men and their chiefs and their judges and their overseers, and said to them, I am old, and full of years:

耶和华你们的神因你们的缘故向那些国所行的一切事，你们亲眼看见了，因那为你们争战的是耶和华你们的神。
You have seen everything the Lord your God has done to all these nations because of you; for it is the Lord your God who has been fighting for you.

我所剪除和所剩下的各国，从约旦河起到日落之处的大海，我已经拈阄分给你们各支派为业。
Now I have given to you, as the heritage of your tribes, all these nations which are still in the land, together with those cut off by me, from Jordan as far as the Great Sea on the west.

耶和华你们的神必将他们从你们面前赶出去，使他们离开你们，你们就必得他们的地为业，正如耶和华你们的神所应许的。
The Lord your God will send them away by force, driving them out before you; and you are to take their land for your heritage, as the Lord your God said to you.

所以，你们要大大壮胆，谨守遵行写在摩西律法书上的一切话，不可偏离左右。
So be very strong to keep and do whatever is recorded in the book of the law of Moses, not turning away from it to the right or to the left;

不可与你们中间所剩下的这些国民搀杂。他们的神，你们不可提他的名，不可指着他起誓，也不可事奉，叩拜。
Have nothing to do with these nations who still are living among you; let not their gods be named by you or used in your oaths; do not be their servants or give them worship:

只要照着你们到今日所行的，专靠耶和华你们的神。
But be true to the Lord your God as you have been till this day.

因为耶和华已经把又大又强的国民从你们面前赶出。直到今日，没有一人在你们面前站立得住。
For the Lord has sent out from before you nations great and strong: and they have all given way before you till this day.

你们一人必追赶千人，因耶和华你们的神照他所应许的，为你们争战。
One man of you is able to put to flight a thousand; for it is the Lord your God who is fighting for you, as he has said to you.

你们要分外谨慎，爱耶和华你们的神。
So keep watch on yourselves, and see that you have love for the Lord your God.

你们若稍微转去，与你们中间所剩下的这些国民联络，彼此结亲，互相往来，
For if you go back, joining yourselves to the rest of these nations who are still among you, getting married to them and living with them and they with you:

你们要确实知道，耶和华你们的神必不再将他们从你们眼前赶出。他们却要成为你们的网罗，机槛，肋上的鞭，眼中的刺，直到你们在耶和华你们神所赐的这美地上灭亡。
Then you may be certain that the Lord your God will not go on driving these nations out from before you; but they will become a danger and a cause of sin to you, a whip for your sides and thorns in your eyes, till you are cut off from this good land which the Lord your God has given you.

我现在要走世人必走的路。你们是一心一意地知道，耶和华你们神所应许赐福与你们的话没有一句落空，都应验在你们身上了。
Now I am about to go the way of all the earth: and you have seen and are certain, all of you, in your hearts and souls, that in all the good things which the Lord said about you, he has kept faith with you; everything has come true for you.

耶和华你们神所应许的一切福气怎样临到你们身上，耶和华也必照样使各样祸患临到你们身上，直到把你们从耶和华你们神所赐的这美地上除灭。
And you will see that, as all the good things which the Lord your God undertook to do for you, have come to you, so the Lord will send down on you all the evil things till he has made your destruction complete, and you are cut off from the good land which the Lord your God has given you.

你们若违背耶和华你们神吩咐你们所守的约，去事奉别神，叩拜他，耶和华的怒气必向你们发作，使你们在他所赐的美地上速速灭亡。
If the agreement of the Lord your God, which was given to you by his orders, is broken, and you become the servants of other gods and give them worship, then the wrath of the Lord will be burning against you, and you will quickly be cut off from the good land which he has given you.

约书亚将以色列的众支派聚集在示剑，召了以色列的长老，族长，审判官，并官长来，他们就站在神面前。
Then Joshua got all the tribes of Israel together at Shechem; and he sent for the responsible men of Israel and their chiefs and their judges and their overseers; and they took their place before God.

约书亚对众民说，耶和华以色列的神如此说，古时你们的列祖，就是亚伯拉罕和拿鹤的父亲他拉，住在大河那边事奉别神，
And Joshua said to all the people, These are the words of the Lord, the God of Israel: In the past your fathers, Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor, were living on the other side of the River: and they were worshipping other gods.

我将你们的祖宗亚伯拉罕从大河那边带来，领他走遍迦南全地，又使他的子孙众多，把以撒赐给他。
And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the River, guiding him through all the land of Canaan; I made his offspring great in number, and gave him Isaac.

又把雅各和以扫赐给以撒，将西珥山赐给以扫为业。后来雅各和他的子孙下到埃及去了。
And to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau: to Esau I gave Mount Seir, as his heritage; but Jacob and his children went down to Egypt.

我差遣摩西，亚伦，并照我在埃及中所行的降灾与埃及，然后把你们领出来。
And I sent Moses and Aaron, troubling Egypt by all the signs I did among them: and after that I took you out.

我领你们列祖出埃及，他们就到了红海。埃及人带领车辆马兵追赶你们列祖到红海。
I took your fathers out of Egypt: and you came to the Red Sea; and the Egyptians came after your fathers to the Red Sea, with their war-carriages and their horsemen.

你们列祖哀求耶和华，他就使你们和埃及人中间黑暗了，又使海水淹没埃及人。我在埃及所行的事，你们亲眼见过。你们在旷野也住了许多年日。
And at their cry, the Lord made it dark between you and the Egyptians, and made the sea go over them, covering them with its waters; your eyes have seen what I did in Egypt: then for a long time you were living in the waste land.

我领你们到约旦河东亚摩利人所住之地。他们与你们争战，我将他们交在你们手中，你们便得了他们的地为业。我也在你们面前将他们灭绝。
And I took you into the lands of the Amorites on the other side of Jordan; and they made war on you, and I gave them into your hands and you took their land; and I sent destruction on them before you.

那时，摩押王西拨的儿子巴勒起来攻击以色列人，打发人召了比珥的儿子巴兰来咒诅你们。
Then Balak, the son of Zippor, king of Moab, went up to war against Israel; and he sent for Balaam, the son of Beor, to put a curse on you:

我不肯听巴兰的话，所以他倒为你们连连祝福。这样，我便救你们脱离巴勒的手。
But I did not give ear to Balaam; and so he went on blessing you; and I kept you safe from him.

你们过了约旦河，到了耶利哥。耶利哥人，亚摩利人，比利洗人，迦南人，赫人，革迦撒人，希未人，耶布斯人都与你们争战。我把他们交在你们手里。
Then you went over Jordan and came to Jericho: and the men of Jericho made war on you, the Amorites and the Perizzites and the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Girgashites and the Hivites and the Jebusites: and I gave them up into your hands.

我打发黄蜂飞在你们前面，将亚摩利人的二王从你们面前撵出，并不是用你的刀，也不是用你的弓。
And I sent the hornet before you, driving out the two kings of the Amorites before you, not with your sword and your bow.

我赐给你们地土，非你们所修治的。我赐给你们城邑，非你们所建造的。你们就住在其中，又得吃非你们所栽种的葡萄园，橄榄园的果子。
And I gave you a land on which you had done no work, and towns not of your building, and you are now living in them; and your food comes from vine-gardens and olive-gardens not of your planting.

现在你们要敬畏耶和华，诚心实意地事奉他，将你们列祖在大河那边和在埃及所事奉的神除掉，去事奉耶和华。
So now, go in fear of the Lord, and be his servants with true hearts: put away the gods worshipped by your fathers across the River and in Egypt, and be servants of the Lord.

若是你们以事奉耶和华为不好，今日就可以选择所要事奉的，是你们列祖在大河那边所事奉的神呢？是你们所住这地的亚摩利人的神呢？至于我和我家，我们必定事奉耶和华。
And if it seems evil to you to be the servants of the Lord, make the decision this day whose servants you will be: of the gods whose servants your fathers were across the River, or of the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living: but I and my house will be the servants of the Lord.

百姓回答说，我们断不敢离弃耶和华去事奉别神。
Then the people in answer said, Never will we give up the Lord to be the servants of other gods;

因耶和华我们的神曾将我们和我们列祖从埃及地的为奴之家领出来，在我们眼前行了那些大神迹，在我们所行的道上，所经过的诸国，都保护了我们。
For it is the Lord our God who has taken us and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the prison-house, and who did all those great signs before our eyes, and kept us safe on all our journeys, and among all the peoples through whom we went:

耶和华又把住此地的亚摩利人都从我们面前赶出去。所以，我们必事奉耶和华，因为他是我们的神。
And the Lord sent out from before us all the peoples, the Amorites living in the land: so we will be the servants of the Lord, for he is our God.

约书亚对百姓说，你们不能事奉耶和华。因为他是圣洁的神，是忌邪的神，必不赦免你们的过犯罪恶。
And Joshua said to the people, You are not able to be the servants of the Lord, for he is a holy God, a God who will not let his honour be given to another: he will have no mercy on your wrongdoing or your sins.

你们若离弃耶和华去事奉外邦神，耶和华在降福之后，必转而降祸与你们，把你们灭绝。
If you are turned away from the Lord and become the servants of strange gods, then turning against you he will do you evil, cutting you off, after he has done you good.

百姓回答约书亚说，不然，我们定要事奉耶和华。
And the people said to Joshua, No! But we will be the servants of the Lord.

约书亚对百姓说，你们选定耶和华，要事奉他，你们自己作见证吧。他们说，我们愿意作见证。
And Joshua said to the people, You are witnesses against yourselves that you have made the decision to be the servants of the Lord. And they said, We are witnesses.

约书亚说，你们现在要除掉你们中间的外邦神，专心归向耶和华以色列的神。
Then, he said, put away the strange gods among you, turning your hearts to the Lord, the God of Israel.

百姓回答约书亚说，我们必事奉耶和华我们的神，听从他的话。
And the people said to Joshua, We will be the servants of the Lord our God, and we will give ear to his voice.

当日，约书亚就与百姓立约，在示剑为他们立定律例典章。
So Joshua made an agreement with the people that day, and gave them a rule and a law in Shechem.

约书亚将这些话都写在神的律法书上，又将一块大石头立在橡树下耶和华的圣所旁边。
And Joshua put these words on record, writing them in the book of the law of God; and he took a great stone, and put it up there under the oak-tree which was in the holy place of the Lord.

约书亚对百姓说，看哪，这石头可以向我们作见证。因为是听见了耶和华所吩咐我们的一切话，倘或你们背弃你们的神，这石头就可以向你们作见证（倘或云云或作所以要向你们作见证，免得你们背弃耶和华你们的神）。
And Joshua said to all the people, See now, this stone is to be a witness against us; for all the words of the Lord have been said to us in its hearing: so it will be a witness against you if you are false to the Lord your God.

于是约书亚打发百姓各归自己的地业去了。
Then Joshua let the people go away, every man to his heritage.

这些事以后，耶和华的仆人嫩的儿子约书亚，正一百一十岁，就死了。
Now after these things, the death of Joshua, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, took place, he being then a hundred and ten years old.

以色列人将他葬在他地业的境内，就是在以法莲山地的亭拿西拉，在迦实山的北边。
And they put his body in the earth in the land of his heritage in Timnath-serah, in the hill-country of Ephraim, to the north of Mount Gaash.

约书亚在世和约书亚死后，那些知道耶和华为以色列人所行诸事的长老还在的时候，以色列人事奉耶和华。
And Israel was true to the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the older men who were still living after Joshua's death, and had seen what the Lord had done for Israel.

以色列人从埃及所带来约瑟的骸骨，葬埋在示剑，就是在雅各从前用一百块银子向示剑的父亲，哈抹的子孙所买的那块地里。这就作了约瑟子孙的产业。
And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel had taken up from Egypt, they put in the earth in Shechem, in the property which Jacob had got from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred shekels: and they became the heritage of the children of Joseph.

亚伦的儿子以利亚撒也死了，就把他葬在他儿子非尼哈，以法莲山地所得的小山上。
Then the death of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, took place; and his body was put in the earth in the hill of Phinehas his son, which had been given to him in the hill-country of Ephraim.

a said to all the people, See now, this stone is to be a witness against us; for all the words of the Lord have been said to us in its hearing: so it will be a witness against you if you are false to the Lord your God.

于是约书亚打发百姓各归自己的地业去了。
Then Joshua let the people go away, every man to his heritage.

这些事以后，耶和华的仆人嫩的儿子约书亚，正一百一十岁，就死了。
Now after these things, the death of Joshua, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, took place, he being then a hundred and ten years old.

以色列人将他葬在他地业的境内，就是在以法莲山地的亭拿西拉，在迦实山的北边。
And they put his body in the earth in the land of his heritage in Timnath-serah, in the hill-country of Ephraim, to the north of Mount Gaash.

约书亚在世和约书亚死后，那些知道耶和华为以色列人所行诸事的长老还在的时候，以色列人事奉耶和华。
And Israel was true to the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the older men who were still living after Joshua's death, and had seen what the Lord had done for Israel.

以色列人从埃及所带来约瑟的骸骨，葬埋在示剑，就是在雅各从前用一百块银子向示剑的父亲，哈抹的子孙所买的那块地里。这就作了约瑟子孙的产业。
And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel had taken up from Egypt, they put in the earth in Shechem, in the property which Jacob had got from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem, for a hundred shekels: and they became the heritage of the children of Joseph.

亚伦的儿子以利亚撒也死了，就把他葬在他儿子非尼哈，以法莲山地所得的小山上。
Then the death of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, took place; and his body was put in the earth in the hill of Phinehas his son, which had been given to him in the hill-country of Ephraim.

