约拿书 Jonah


耶和华的话临到亚米太的儿子约拿，说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jonah, the son of Amittai, saying,

你起来往尼尼微大城去，向其中的居民呼喊。因为他们的恶达到我面前。
Up! go to Nineveh, that great town, and let your voice come to it; for their evil-doing has come up before me.

约拿却起来，逃往他施去躲避耶和华。下到约帕，遇见一只船，要往他施去。他就给了船价，上了船，要与船上的人同往他施去躲避耶和华。
And Jonah got up to go in flight to Tarshish, away from the Lord; and he went down to Joppa, and saw there a ship going to Tarshish: so he gave them the price of the journey and went down into it to go with them to Tarshish, away from the Lord.

然而耶和华使海中起大风，海就狂风大作，甚至船几乎破坏。
And the Lord sent out a great wind on to the sea and there was a violent storm in the sea, so that the ship seemed in danger of being broken.

水手便惧怕，各人哀求自己的神。他们将船上的货物抛在海中，为要使船轻些。约拿已下到底舱，躺卧沉睡。
Then the sailors were full of fear, every man crying to his god; and the goods in the ship were dropped out into the sea to make the weight less. But Jonah had gone down into the inmost part of the ship where he was stretched out in a deep sleep.

船主到他那里对他说，你这沉睡的人哪，为何这样呢？起来，求告你的神，或者神顾念我们，使我们不至灭亡。
And the ship's captain came to him and said to him, What are you doing sleeping? Up! say a prayer to your God, if by chance God will give a thought to us, so that we may not come to destruction.

船上的人彼此说，来吧，我们掣签，看看这灾临到我们是因谁的缘故。于是他们掣签，掣出约拿来。
And they said to one another, Come, let us put this to the decision of chance and see on whose account this evil has come on us. So they did so, and Jonah was seen to be the man.

众人对他说，请你告诉我们，这灾临到我们是因谁的缘故。你以何事为业。你从哪里来。你是哪一国，属哪一族的人。
Then they said to him, Now make clear to us what is your work, and where you come from? what is your country, and who are your people?

他说，我是希伯来人。我敬畏耶和华，那创造沧海旱地之天上的神。
And he said to them, I am a Hebrew, a worshipper of the Lord, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.

他们就大大惧怕，对他说，你做的是什么事呢？他们已经知道他躲避耶和华，因为他告诉了他们。
And the men were in great fear, and they said to him, What is this you have done? For the men had knowledge of his flight from the Lord because he had not kept it from them.

他们问他说，我们当向你怎样行，使海浪平静呢？这话是因海浪越发翻腾。
And they said to him, What are we to do to you so that the sea may become calm for us? For the sea was getting rougher and rougher.

他对他们说，你们将我抬起来，抛在海中，海就平静了。我知道你们遭这大风，是因我的缘故。
And he said to them, Take me up and put me into the sea, and the sea will become calm for you: for I am certain that because of me this great storm has come on you.

然而那些人竭力荡桨，要把船拢岸，却是不能。因为海浪越发向他们翻腾。
And the men were working hard to get back to the land, but they were not able to do so: for the sea got rougher and rougher against them.

他们便求告耶和华说，耶和华阿，我们恳求你，不要因这人的性命使我们死亡，不要使流无辜血的罪归与我们。因为你耶和华是随自己的意旨行事。
So, crying to the Lord, they said, Give ear to our prayer, O Lord, give ear, and do not let destruction overtake us because of this man's life; do not put on us the sin of taking life without cause: for you, O Lord, have done what seemed good to you.

他们遂将约拿抬起，抛在海中，海的狂浪就平息了。
So they took Jonah up and put him into the sea: and the sea was no longer angry.

那些人便大大敬畏耶和华，向耶和华献祭，并且许愿。
Then great was the men's fear of the Lord; and they made an offering to the Lord and took oaths to him.

耶和华安排一条大鱼吞了约拿，他在鱼腹中三日三夜。
And the Lord made ready a great fish to take Jonah into its mouth; and Jonah was inside the fish for three days and three nights.

约拿在鱼腹中祷告耶和华他的神，
Then Jonah made prayer to the Lord his God from the inside of the fish, and said,

说，我遭遇患难求告耶和华，你就应允我。从阴间的深处呼求，你就俯听我的声音。
In my trouble I was crying to the Lord, and he gave me an answer; out of the deepest underworld I sent up a cry, and you gave ear to my voice.

你将我投下深渊，就是海的深处。大水环绕我。你的波浪洪涛都漫过我身。
For you have put me down into the deep, into the heart of the sea; and the river was round about me; all your waves and your rolling waters went over me.

我说，我从你眼前虽被驱逐，我仍要仰望你的圣殿。
And I said, I have been sent away from before your eyes; how may I ever again see your holy Temple?

诸水环绕我，几乎淹没我。深渊围住我，海草缠绕我的头。
The waters were circling round me, even to the neck; the deep was about me; the sea-grass was twisted round my head.

我下到山根。地的门将我永远关住。耶和华我的神阿，你却将我的性命，从坑中救出来。
I went down to the bases of the mountains; as for the earth, her walls were about me for ever: but you have taken up my life from the underworld, O Lord my God.

我心在我里面发昏的时候，我就想念耶和华。我的祷告进入你的圣殿，达到你的面前。
When my soul in me was overcome, I kept the memory of the Lord: and my prayer came in to you, into your holy Temple.

那信奉虚无之神的人，离弃怜爱他们的主。
The worshippers of false gods have given up their only hope.

但我必用感谢的声音献祭与你。我所许的愿，我必偿还。救恩出于耶和华。
But I will make an offering to you with the voice of praise; I will give effect to my oaths. Salvation is the Lord's.

耶和华吩咐鱼，鱼就把约拿吐在旱地上。
And at the Lord's order, the fish sent Jonah out of its mouth on to the dry land.

耶和华的话，二次临到约拿说，
And the word of the Lord came to Jonah a second time, saying,

你起来，往尼尼微大城去，向其中的居民宣告我所吩咐你的话。
Up! go to Nineveh, that great town, and give it the word which I have given you.

约拿便照耶和华的话起来，往尼尼微去。这尼尼微是极大的城，有三日的路程。
So Jonah got up and went to Nineveh as the Lord had said. Now Nineveh was a very great town, three days' journey from end to end.

约拿进城走了一日，宣告说，再等四十日，尼尼微必倾覆了。
And Jonah first of all went a day's journey into the town, and crying out said, In forty days destruction will overtake Nineveh.

尼尼微人信服神，便宣告禁食，从最大的到至小的，都穿麻衣（或作披上麻布）。
And the people of Nineveh had belief in God; and a time was fixed for going without food, and they put on haircloth, from the greatest to the least.

这信息传到尼尼微王的耳中，他就下了宝座，脱下朝服，披上麻布，坐在灰中。
And the word came to the king of Nineveh, and he got up from his seat of authority, and took off his robe, and covering himself with haircloth, took his seat in the dust.

他又使人遍告尼尼微通城，说，王和大臣有令，人不可尝什么，牲畜，牛羊不可吃草，也不可喝水。
And he had it given out in Nineveh, By the order of the king and his great men, no man or beast, herd or flock, is to have a taste of anything; let them have no food or water:

人与牲畜都当披上麻布，人要切切求告神。各人回头离开所行的恶道，丢弃手中的强暴。
And let man and beast be covered with haircloth, and let them make strong prayers to God: and let everyone be turned from his evil way and the violent acts of their hands.

或者神转意后悔，不发烈怒，使我们不至灭亡，也未可知。
Who may say that God will not be turned, changing his purpose and turning away from his burning wrath, so that destruction may not overtake us?

于是神察看他们的行为，见他们离开恶道，他就后悔，不把所说的灾祸降与他们了。
And God saw what they did, how they were turned from their evil way; and God's purpose was changed as to the evil which he said he would do to them, and he did it not.

这事约拿大大不悦，且甚发怒。
But this seemed very wrong to Jonah, and he was angry.

就祷告耶和华说，耶和华阿，我在本国的时候，岂不是这样说吗？我知道你是有恩典，有怜悯的神，不轻易发怒，有丰盛的慈爱，并且后悔不降所说的灾，所以我急速逃往他施去。
And he made prayer to the Lord and said, O Lord, is this not what I said when I was still in my country? This is why I took care to go in flight to Tarshish: for I was certain that you were a loving God, full of pity, slow to be angry and great in mercy, and ready to be turned from your purpose of evil.

耶和华阿，现在求你取我的命吧。因为我死了比活着还好。
So now, O Lord, give ear to my prayer and take my life from me; for death is better for me than life.

耶和华说，你这样发怒合乎理吗？
And the Lord said, Have you any right to be angry?

于是约拿出城，坐在城的东边，在那里为自己搭了一座棚，坐在棚的荫下，要看看那城究竟如何。
Then Jonah went out of the town, and took his seat on the east side of the town and made himself a roof of branches and took his seat under its shade till he saw what would become of the town.

耶和华神安排一棵蓖麻，使其发生高过约拿，影儿遮盖他的头，救他脱离苦楚。约拿因这棵蓖麻大大喜乐。
And the Lord God made a vine come up over Jonah to give him shade over his head. And Jonah was very glad because of the vine.

次日黎明，神却安排一条虫子咬这蓖麻，以致枯槁。
But early on the morning after, God made ready a worm for the destruction of the vine, and it became dry and dead.

日头出来的时候，神安排炎热的东风。日头曝晒约拿的头，使他发昏，他就为自己求死，说，我死了比活着还好。
Then when the sun came up, God sent a burning east wind: and so great was the heat of the sun on his head that Jonah was overcome, and, requesting death for himself, said, Death is better for me than life.

神对约拿说，你因这棵蓖麻发怒合乎理吗？他说，我发怒以至于死都合乎理。
And the Lord said to Jonah, Have you any right to be angry about the vine? And he said, I have a right to be truly angry.

耶和华说，这蓖麻不是你栽种的，也不是你培养的。一夜发生，一夜干死，你尚且爱惜。
And the Lord said, You had pity on the vine, for which you did no work and for the growth of which you were not responsible; which came up in a night and came to an end in a night;

何况这尼尼微大城，其中不能分辨左手右手的有十二万多人，并有许多牲畜。我岂能不爱惜呢？
And am I not to have mercy on Nineveh, that great town, in which there are more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons without the power of judging between right and left, as well as much cattle?

ore than a hundred and twenty thousand persons without the power of judging between right and left, as well as much cattle?

