耶和华的话临到毗土珥的儿子约珥。
The word of the Lord which came to Joel, the son of Pethuel.

老年人哪，当听我的话。国中的居民哪，都要侧耳而听。在你们的日子，或你们列祖的日子，曾有这样的事吗？
Give ear to this, you old men, and take note, you people of the land. Has this ever been in your days, or in the days of your fathers?

你们要将这事传与子，子传与孙，孙传与后代。
Give the story of it to your children, and let them give it to their children, and their children to another generation.

剪虫剩下的，蝗虫来吃。蝗虫剩下的，蝻子来吃。蝻子剩下的，蚂蚱来吃。
What the worm did not make a meal of, has been taken by the locust; and what the locust did not take, has been food for the plant-worm; and what the plant-worm did not take, has been food for the field-fly.

酒醉的人哪，要清醒哭泣。好酒的人哪，都要为甜酒哀号。因为从你们的口中断绝了。
Come out of your sleep, you who are overcome with wine, and give yourselves to weeping; give cries of sorrow, all you drinkers of wine, because of the sweet wine; for it has been cut off from your mouths.

有一队蝗虫（原文是民）又强盛又无数，侵犯我的地。它的牙齿如狮子的牙齿，大牙如母狮的大牙。
For a nation has come up over my land, strong and without number; his teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he has the back teeth of a great lion.

它毁坏我的葡萄树，剥了我无花果树的皮，剥尽而丢弃，使枝条露白。
By him my vine is made waste and my fig-tree broken: he has taken all its fruit and sent it down to the earth; its branches are made white.

我的民哪，你当哀号，像处女腰束麻布，为幼年的丈夫哀号。
Make sounds of grief like a virgin dressed in haircloth for the husband of her early years.

素祭和奠祭从耶和华的殿中断绝。事奉耶和华的祭司都悲哀。
The meal offering and the drink offering have been cut off from the house of the Lord; the priests, the Lord's servants, are sorrowing.

田荒凉，地悲哀，因为五谷毁坏，新酒干竭，油也缺乏。
The fields are wasted, the land has become dry; for the grain is wasted, the new wine is kept back, the oil is poor.

农夫阿，你们要惭愧，修理葡萄园的阿，你们要哀号，因为大麦小麦，与田间的庄稼，都灭绝了。
The farmers are shamed, the workers in the vine-gardens give cries of grief, for the wheat and the barley; for the produce of the fields has come to destruction.

葡萄树枯干，无花果树衰残。石榴树，棕树，苹果树，连田野一切的树木，也都枯干。众人的喜乐尽都消灭。
The vine has become dry and the fig-tree is feeble; the pomegranate and the palm-tree and the apple-tree, even all the trees of the field, are dry: because joy has gone from the sons of men.

祭司阿，你们当腰束麻布痛哭。伺候祭坛的阿，你们要哀号。事奉我神的阿，你们要来披上麻布过夜。因为素祭，和奠祭，从你们神的殿中断绝了。
Put haircloth round you and give yourselves to sorrow, you priests; give cries of grief, you servants of the altar: come in, and, clothed in haircloth, let the night go past, you servants of my God: for the meal offering and the drink offering have been kept back from the house of your God.

你们要分定禁食的日子，宣告严肃会，招聚长老，和国中的一切居民，到耶和华你们神的殿，向耶和华哀求。
Let a time be fixed for going without food, have a holy meeting, let the old men, even all the people of the land, come together to the house of the Lord your God, crying out to the Lord.

哀哉，耶和华的日子临近了。这日来到，好像毁灭从全能者来到。
Sorrow for the day! for the day of the Lord is near, and as destruction from the Ruler of all it will come.

粮食不是在我们眼前断绝了吗？欢喜快乐不是从我们神的殿中止息了吗？
Is not food cut off before our eyes? joy and delight from the house of our God?

谷种在土块下朽烂。仓也荒凉，廪也破坏。因为五谷枯干了。
The grains have become small and dry under the spade; the store-houses are made waste, the grain-stores are broken down; for the grain is dry and dead.

牲畜哀鸣，牛群混乱，因为无草。羊群也受了困苦。
What sounds of pain come from the beasts! the herds of cattle are at a loss because there is no grass for them; even the flocks of sheep are no longer to be seen.

耶和华阿，我向你求告。因为火烧灭旷野的草场，火焰烧尽田野的树木。
O Lord, my cry goes up to you: for fire has put an end to the grass-lands of the waste, and all the trees of the field are burned with its flame.

田野的走兽向你发喘。因为溪水干涸，火也烧灭旷野的草场。
The beasts of the field are turning to you with desire: for the water-streams are dry and fire has put an end to the grass-lands of the waste.

你们要在锡安吹角，在我圣山吹出大声。国中的居民，都要发颤。因为耶和华的日子将到，已经临近。
Let the horn be sounded in Zion, and a war-cry in my holy mountain; let all the people of the land be troubled: for the day of the Lord is coming;

那日是黑暗，幽冥，密云，乌黑的日子，好像晨光铺满山岭。有一队蝗虫（原文作民）又大又强。从来没有这样的，以后直到万代，也必没有。
For a day of dark and deep shade is near, a day of cloud and black night: like a black cloud a great and strong people is covering the mountains; there has never been any like them and will not be after them again, from generation to generation.

他们前面如火烧灭，后面如火焰烧尽。未到以前，地如伊甸园，过去以后，成了荒凉的旷野。没有一样能躲避他们的。
Before them fire sends destruction, and after them flame is burning: the land is like the garden of Eden before them, and after them an unpeopled waste; truly, nothing has been kept safe from them.

他们的形状如马，奔跑如马兵。
Their form is like the form of horses, and they are running like war-horses.

在山顶蹦跳的响声，如车辆的响声，又如火焰烧碎秸的响声，好像强盛的民摆阵预备打仗。
Like the sound of war-carriages they go jumping on the tops of the mountains; like the noise of a flame of fire burning up the grain-stems, like a strong people lined up for the fight.

他们一来，众民伤恸，脸都变色。
At their coming the people are bent with pain: all faces become red together.

他们如勇士奔跑，像战士爬城，各都步行，不乱队伍。
They are running like strong men, they go over the wall like men of war; every man goes straight on his way, their lines are not broken.

彼此并不拥挤，向前各行其路。直闯兵器，不偏左右。
No one is pushing against another; everyone goes straight on his way: bursting through the sword points, their order is not broken.

他们蹦上城，蹿上墙，爬上房屋，进入窗户如同盗贼。
They make a rush on the town, running on the wall; they go up into the houses and in through the windows like a thief.

他们一来地震天动，日月昏暗，星宿无光。
The earth is troubled before them and the heavens are shaking: the sun and the moon have become dark, and the stars keep back their shining:

耶和华在他军旅前发声。他的队伍甚大。成就他命的，是强盛者。因为耶和华的日子大而可畏。谁能当得起呢？
And the Lord is thundering before his forces; for very great is his army; for he is strong who gives effect to his word: for the day of the Lord is great and greatly to be feared, and who has strength against it?

耶和华说，虽然如此。你们应当禁食，哭泣，悲哀，一心归向我。
But even now, says the Lord, come back to me with all your heart, keeping from food, with weeping and with sorrow:

你们要撕裂心肠，不撕裂衣服。归向耶和华你们的神。因为他有恩典。有怜悯，不轻易发怒，有丰盛的慈爱，并且后悔不降所说的灾。
Let your hearts be broken, and not your clothing, and come back to the Lord your God: for he is full of grace and pity, slow to be angry and great in mercy, ready to be turned from his purpose of punishment.

或者他转意后悔，留下余福，就是留下献给耶和华你们神的素祭，和奠祭，也未可知。
May it not be that he will again let his purpose be changed and let a blessing come after him, even a meal offering and a drink offering for the Lord your God?

你们要在锡安吹角，分定禁食的日子，宣告严肃会。
Let a horn be sounded in Zion, let a time be fixed for going without food, have a holy meeting:

聚集众民，使会众自洁，招聚老者，聚集孩童，和吃奶的。使新郎出离洞房，新妇出离内室。
Get the people together, make the mass of the people holy, send for the old men, get together the children and babies at the breast: let the newly married man come out of his room and the bride from her tent.

事奉耶和华的祭司，要在廊子和祭坛中间哭泣，说，耶和华阿，求你顾惜你的百姓，不要使你的产业受羞辱，列邦管辖他们。为何容列国的人说，他们的神在哪里呢？
Let the priests, the servants of the Lord, be weeping between the covered way and the altar, and let them say, Have mercy on your people, O Lord, do not give up your heritage to shame, so that the nations become their rulers: why let them say among the peoples, Where is their God?

耶和华就为自己的地发热心，怜恤他的百姓。
Then the Lord had a care for the honour of his land and had pity on his people.

耶和华应允他的百姓，说，我必赐给你们五谷，新酒，和油，使你们饱足。我也不再使你们受列国的羞辱。
And the Lord made answer and said to his people, See, I will send you grain and wine and oil in full measure: and I will no longer let you be shamed among the nations:

却要使北方来的军队远离你们，将他们赶到干旱荒废之地，前队赶入东海，后队赶入西海。因为他们所行的大恶（原文是事），臭气上升，腥味腾空。
I will send the one from the north far away from you, driving him into a dry and waste land, with his front to the sea of the east and his back to the sea of the west, and the smell of him will go up, even his evil smell will go up.

地土阿，不要惧怕，要欢喜快乐。因为耶和华行了大事。
Have no fear, O land; be glad with great joy; for the Lord has done great things.

田野的走兽阿，不要惧怕。因为旷野的草发生，树木结果，无花果树。葡萄树也都效力。
Have no fear, you beasts of the field, for the grass-lands of the waste are becoming green, for the trees are producing fruit, the fig-tree and the vine give out their strength.

锡安的民哪，你们要快乐，为耶和华你们的神欢喜。因他赐给你们合宜的秋雨，为你们降下甘霖，就是秋雨，春雨，和先前一样。
Be glad, then, you children of Zion, and have joy in the Lord your God: for he gives you food in full measure, making the rain come down for you, the early and the late rain as at the first.

禾场必满了麦子，酒榨与油榨必有新酒和油盈溢。
And the floors will be full of grain, and the crushing-places overflowing with wine and oil.

我打发到你们中间的大军队，就是蝗虫，蝻子，蚂蚱，剪虫，那些年所吃的，我要补还你们。
I will give back to you the years which were food for the locust, the plant-worm, the field-fly, and the worm, my great army which I sent among you.

你们必多吃，而得饱足，就赞美为你们行奇妙事之耶和华你们神的名。我的百姓，必永远不至羞愧。
You will have food in full measure, and give praise to the name of the Lord your God, who has done wonders for you:

你们必知道我是在以色列中间，又知道我是耶和华你们的神，在我以外并无别神。我的百姓必永远不至羞愧。
And you will be certain that I am in Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and there is no other: and my people will never be shamed.

以后，我要将我的灵浇灌凡有血气的。你们的儿女要说预言。你们的老年人要作异梦。少年人要见异象。
And after that, it will come about, says the Lord, that I will send my spirit on all flesh; and your sons and your daughters will be prophets, your old men will have dreams, your young men will see visions:

在那些日子，我要将我的灵浇灌我的仆人和使女。
And on the servants and the servant-girls in those days I will send my spirit.

在天上地下，我要显出奇事，有血有火，有烟柱。
And I will let wonders be seen in the heavens and on the earth, blood and fire and pillars of smoke.

日头要变为黑暗，月亮要变为血，这都在耶和华大而可畏的日子未到以前。
The sun will be made dark and the moon turned to blood, before the great day of the Lord comes, a day to be feared.

到那时候，凡求告耶和华名的就必得救。因为照耶和华所说的，在锡安山耶路撒冷必有逃脱的人，在剩下的人中必有耶和华所召的。
And it will be that whoever makes his prayer to the name of the Lord will be kept safe: for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem some will be kept safe, as the Lord has said, and will be among the small band marked out by the Lord.

到那日，我使犹大和耶路撒冷被掳之人归回的时候，
For in those days and in that time, when I let the fate of Judah and Jerusalem be changed,

我要聚集万民，带他们下到约沙法谷。在那里施行审判，因为他们将我的百姓，就是我的产业以色列，分散在列国中，又分取我的地土，
I will get together all the nations, and make them come down into the valley of Jehoshaphat; and there I will take up with them the cause of my people and of my heritage Israel, whom they have sent wandering among the nations, and of my land which has been parted by them.

且为我的百姓拈阄，将童子换妓女，卖童女买酒喝。
And they have put the fate of my people to the decision of chance: giving a boy for the price of a loose woman and a girl for a drink of wine.

推罗，西顿，和非利士四境的人哪，你们与我何干。你们要报复我吗？若报复我，我必使报应速速归到你们的头上。
And further, what are you to me, O Tyre and Zidon and all the circle of Philistia? will you give me back any payment? and if you do, quickly and suddenly I will send it back on your head,

你们既然夺取我的金银，又将我可爱的宝物带入你们宫殿，（或作庙中），
For you have taken my silver and my gold, putting in the houses of your gods my beautiful and pleasing things.

并将犹大人，和耶路撒冷人，卖给希腊人（原文是雅完人），使他们远离自己的境界。
And the children of Judah and the children of Jerusalem you have given for a price to the sons of the Greeks, to send them far away from their land:

我必激动他们离开你们所卖到之地，又必使报应归到你们的头上。
See, I will have them moved from the place where you have sent them, and will let what you have done come back on your head;

我必将你们的儿女卖在犹大人的手中，他们必卖给远方示巴国的人。这是耶和华说的。
I will give your sons and your daughters into the hands of the children of Judah for a price, and they will give them for a price to the men of Sheba, a nation far off: for the Lord has said it.

当在万民中宣告说，要预备打仗。激动勇士。使一切战士上前来。
Give this out among the nations; make ready for war: get the strong men awake; let all the men of war come near, let them come up.

要将犁头打成刀剑，将镰刀打成戈矛。软弱的要说，我有勇力。
Get your plough-blades hammered into swords, and your vine-knives into spears: let the feeble say, I am strong.

四围的列国阿，你们要速速地来，一同聚集。耶和华阿，求你使你的大能者降临。
Come quickly, all you nations round about, and get yourselves together there: make your strong ones come down, O Lord.

万民都当兴起，上到约沙法谷。因为我必坐在那里，审判四围的列国。
Let the nations be awake, and come to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there I will be seated as judge of all the nations round about.

开镰吧。因为庄稼熟了。践踏吧。因为酒榨满了，酒池盈溢。他们的罪恶甚大。
Put in the blade, for the grain is ready: come, get you down, for the wine-crusher is full, the vessels are overflowing; for great is their evil-doing.

许多许多的人在断定谷。因为耶和华的日子临近断定谷。
Masses on masses in the valley of decision! for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.

日月昏暗，星宿无光。
The sun and the moon have become dark, and the stars keep back their shining.

耶和华必从锡安吼叫，从耶路撒冷发声。天地就震动。耶和华却要作他百姓的避难所，作以色列人的保障。
And the Lord will be thundering from Zion, and his voice will be sounding from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth will be shaking: but the Lord will be a breastplate for his people and a strong place for the children of Israel.

你们就知道我是耶和华你们的神，且又住在锡安我的圣山。那时，耶路撒冷必成为圣，外邦人不再从其中经过。
And you will be certain that I am the Lord your God, living in Zion, my holy mountain: and Jerusalem will be holy, and no strange person will ever again go through her.

到那日，大山要滴甜酒。小山要流奶子，犹大溪河都有水流。必有泉源从耶和华的殿中流出来，滋润什亭谷。
And it will come about in that day that the mountains will be dropping sweet wine, and the hills will be flowing with milk, and all the streams of Judah will be flowing with water; and a fountain will come out from the house of the Lord, watering the valley of acacia-trees.

埃及必然荒凉，以东变为凄凉的旷野，都因向犹大人所行的强暴，又因在本地流无辜人的血。
Egypt will be a waste and Edom a land of destruction, because of the evil done to the children of Judah, because they have let blood be drained out in their land without cause.

但犹大必存到永远，耶路撒冷必存到万代。
But Judah will be peopled for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.

我未曾报复（或作洗除下同）流血的罪，现在我要报复。因为耶和华住在锡安。
And I will send punishment for their blood, for which punishment has not been sent, for the Lord is living in Zion.