先前满有人民的城，现在何竟独坐。先前在列国中为大的，现在竟如寡妇。先前在诸省中为王后的，现在成为进贡的。
See her seated by herself, the town which was full of people! She who was great among the nations has become like a widow! She who was a princess among the countries has come under the yoke of forced work!

她夜间痛哭，泪流满腮。在一切所亲爱的中间没有一个安慰她的。她的朋友都以诡诈待她，成为她的仇敌。
She is sorrowing bitterly in the night, and her face is wet with weeping; among all her lovers she has no comforter: all her friends have been false to her, they have become her haters.

犹大因遭遇苦难，又因多服劳苦就迁到外邦。她住在列国中，寻不着安息。追逼她的都在狭窄之地将她追上。
Judah has been taken away as a prisoner because of trouble and hard work; her living-place is among the nations, there is no rest for her: all her attackers have overtaken her in a narrow place.

锡安的路径因无人来守圣节就悲伤。她的城门凄凉。她的祭司叹息。她的处女受艰难，自己也愁苦。
The ways of Zion are sad, because no one comes to the holy meeting; all her doorways are made waste, her priests are breathing out sorrow: her virgins are troubled, and it is bitter for her.

她的敌人为首。她的仇敌亨通。因耶和华为她许多的罪过使她受苦。她的孩童被敌人掳去。
Those who are against her have become the head, everything goes well for her haters; for the Lord has sent sorrow on her because of the great number of her sins: her young children have gone away as prisoners before the attacker.

锡安城的威荣（城原文作女子下同）全都失去。她的首领像找不着草场的鹿。在追赶的人前无力行走。
And all her glory has gone from the daughter of Zion: her rulers have become like harts with no place for food, and they have gone in flight without strength before the attacker.

耶路撒冷在困苦窘迫之时，就追想古时一切的乐境。她百姓落在敌人手中，无人救济。敌人看见，就因她的荒凉嗤笑。
Jerusalem keeps in mind, in the days of her sorrow and of her wanderings, all the desired things which were hers in days gone by; when her people came into the power of her hater and she had no helper, her attackers saw their desire effected on her and made sport of her destruction.

耶路撒冷大大犯罪，所以成为不洁之物。素来尊敬她的，见她赤露就都藐视她。她自己也叹息退后。
Great is the sin of Jerusalem; for this cause she has become an unclean thing: all those who gave her honour are looking down on her, because they have seen her shame: now truly, breathing out grief, she is turned back.

她的污秽是在衣襟上。她不思想自己的结局，所以非常地败落，无人安慰她。她说，耶和华阿，求你看我的苦难，因为仇敌夸大。
In her skirts were her unclean ways; she gave no thought to her end; and her fall has been a wonder; she has no comforter: see her sorrow, O Lord; for the attacker is lifted up.

敌人伸手，夺取她的美物。她眼见外邦人进入她的圣所论这外邦人，你曾吩咐不可入你的会中。
The hand of her hater is stretched out over all her desired things; for she has seen that the nations have come into her holy place, about whom you gave orders that they were not to come into the meeting of your people.

她的民都叹息，寻求食物。他们用美物换粮食，要救性命。他们说，耶和华阿，求你观看，因为我甚是卑贱。
Breathing out grief all her people are looking for bread; they have given their desired things for food to give them life: see, O Lord, and take note; for she has become a thing of shame.

你们一切过路的人哪，这事你们不介意吗？你们要观看，有像这临到我的痛苦没有就是耶和华在他发烈怒的日子使我所受的苦。
Come to me, all you who go by! Keep your eyes on me, and see if there is any pain like the pain of my wound, which the Lord has sent on me in the day of his burning wrath.

他从高天使火进入我的骨头，克制了我。他铺下网罗，绊我的脚，使我转回。他使我终日凄凉发昏。
From on high he has sent fire into my bones, and it has overcome them: his net is stretched out for my feet, I am turned back by him; he has made me waste and feeble all the day.

我罪过的轭是他手所绑的，犹如轭绳缚在我颈项上。他使我的力量衰败。主将我交在我所不能敌挡的人手中。
A watch is kept on my sins; they are joined together by his hand, they have come on to my neck; he has made my strength give way: the Lord has given me up into the hands of those against whom I have no power.

主轻弃我中间的一切勇士，招聚多人（原文作大会）攻击我，要压碎我的少年人。主将犹大居民踹下，像在酒榨中一样。
The Lord has made sport of all my men of war in me, he has got men together against me to send destruction on my young men: the virgin daughter of Judah has been crushed like grapes under the feet of the Lord.

我因这些事哭泣。我眼泪汪汪。因为那当安慰我，救我性命的，离我甚远。我的儿女孤苦，因为仇敌得了胜。
For these things I am weeping; my eye is streaming with water; because the comforter who might give me new life is far from me: my children are made waste, because the hater is strong.

锡安举手，无人安慰。耶和华论雅各已经出令，使四围的人作他仇敌。耶路撒冷在他们中间像不洁之物。
Zion's hands are outstretched; she has no comforter; the Lord has given orders to the attackers of Jacob round about him: Jerusalem has become like an unclean thing among them.

耶和华是公义的。他这样待我，是因我违背他的命令。众民哪，请听我的话，看我的痛苦。我的处女和少年人都被掳去。
The Lord is upright; for I have gone against his orders: give ear, now, all you peoples, and see my pain, my virgins and my young men have gone away as prisoners.

我招呼我所亲爱的，他们却愚弄我。我的祭司和长老正寻求食物，救性命的时候，就在城中绝气。
I sent for my lovers, but they were false to me: my priests and my responsible men were breathing their last breath in the town, while they were looking for food to give them new life.

耶和华阿，求你观看，因为我在急难中。我心肠扰乱。我心在我里面翻转，因我大大悖逆。在外，刀剑使人丧子。在家，犹如死亡。
See, O Lord, for I am in trouble; the inmost parts of my body are deeply moved; my heart is turned in me; for I have been uncontrolled: outside the children are put to the sword, and in the house there is death.

听见我叹息的有人。安慰我的却无人。我的仇敌都听见我所遭的患难。因你作这事，他们都喜乐。你必使你报告的日子来到，他们就像我一样。
Give ear to the voice of my grief; I have no comforter; all my haters have news of my troubles, they are glad because you have done it: let the day of fate come when they will be like me.

愿他们的恶行都呈在你面前。你怎样因我的一切罪过待我，求你照样待他们。因我叹息甚多，心中发昏。
Let all their evil-doing come before you; do to them as you have done to me for all my sins: for loud is the sound of my grief, and the strength of my heart is gone.

主何竟发怒，使黑云遮蔽锡安城。他将以色列的华美从天扔在地上。在他发怒的日子并不记念自己的脚凳。
How has the daughter of Zion been covered with a cloud by the Lord in his wrath! he has sent down from heaven to earth the glory of Israel, and has not kept in memory the resting-place of his feet in the day of his wrath.

主吞灭雅各一切的住处，并不顾惜。他发怒倾覆犹大民的保障，使这保障坍倒在地。他辱没这国和其中的首领。
The Lord has given up to destruction all the living-places of Jacob without pity; pulling down in his wrath the strong places of the daughter of Judah, stretching out on the earth the wounded, even her king and her rulers.

他发烈怒，把以色列的角全然砍断，在仇敌面前收回右手。他像火焰四围吞灭，将雅各烧毁。
In his burning wrath every horn of Israel has been cut off; his right hand has been turned back before the attacker: he has put a fire in Jacob, causing destruction round about.

他张弓好像仇敌。他站着举起右手，如同敌人将悦人眼目的，尽行杀戮。在锡安百姓的帐棚上倒出他的忿怒，像火一样。
His bow has been bent for the attack, he has taken his place with his hand ready, in his hate he has put to death all who were pleasing to the eye: on the tent of the daughter of Zion he has let loose his passion like fire.

主如仇敌吞灭以色列和锡安的一切宫殿，拆毁百姓的保障。在犹大民中加增悲伤哭号。
The Lord has become like one fighting against her, sending destruction on Israel; he has sent destruction on all her great houses, making waste his strong places: increasing the grief and the sorrow of the daughter of Judah.

他强取自己的帐幕，好像是园中的窝棚，毁坏他的聚会之处。耶和华使圣节和安息日在锡安都被忘记，又在怒气的愤恨中藐视君王和祭司。
And he has violently taken away his tent, as from a garden; he has made waste his meeting-place: the Lord has taken away the memory of feast and Sabbath in Zion, and in the passion of his wrath he is against king and priest.

耶和华丢弃自己的祭坛，憎恶自己的圣所，将宫殿的墙垣交付仇敌。他们在耶和华的殿中喧嚷，像在圣会之日一样。
The Lord has given up his altar and has been turned in hate from his holy place; he has given up into the hands of the attacker the walls of her great houses: their voices have been loud in the house of the Lord as in the day of a holy meeting.

耶和华定意拆毁锡安的城墙。他拉了准绳，不将手收回，定要毁灭。他使外郭和城墙都悲哀，一同衰败。
It is the Lord's purpose to make waste the wall of the daughter of Zion; his line has been stretched out, he has not kept back his hand from destruction: he has sent sorrow on tower and wall, they have become feeble together.

锡安的门都陷入地内。主将她的门闩毁坏，折断。她的君王和首领落在没有律法的列国中。她的先知不得见耶和华的异象。
Her doors have gone down into the earth; he has sent destruction on her locks: her king and her princes are among the nations where the law is not; even her prophets have had no vision from the Lord.

锡安城的长老坐在地上默默无声。他们扬起尘土落在头上，腰束麻布。耶路撒冷的处女垂头至地。
The responsible men of the daughter of Zion are seated on the earth without a word; they have put dust on their heads, they are clothed in haircloth: the heads of the virgins of Jerusalem are bent down to the earth.

我眼中流泪，以致失明，我的心肠扰乱，肝胆涂地，都因我众民遭毁灭，又因孩童和吃奶的在城内街上发昏。
My eyes are wasted with weeping, the inmost parts of my body are deeply moved, my inner parts are drained out on the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because of the young children and babies at the breast who are falling without strength in the open squares of the town.

那时，他们在城内街上发昏，好像受伤的，在母亲的怀里，将要丧命。对母亲说，谷酒在哪里呢？
They say to their mothers, Where is grain and wine? when they are falling like the wounded in the open squares of the town, when their life is drained out on their mother's breast.

耶路撒冷的民哪，我可用什么向你证明呢？我可用什么与你相比呢？锡安的民哪，我可拿什么和你比较，好安慰你呢？因为你的裂口大如海，谁能医治你呢？
What example am I to give you? what comparison am I to make for you, O daughter of Jerusalem? what am I to make equal to you, so that I may give you comfort, O virgin daughter of Zion? for your destruction is great like the sea: who is able to make you well?

你的先知为你见虚假和愚昧的异象，并没有显露你的罪孽，使你被掳的归回。却为你见虚假的默示和使你被赶出本境的缘故。
The visions which your prophets have seen for you are false and foolish; they have not made clear to you your sin so that your fate might be changed: but they have seen for you false words, driving you away.

凡过路的都向你拍掌。他们向耶路撒冷城嗤笑，摇头，说，难道人所称为全美的，称为全地所喜悦的，就是这城吗？
All who go by make a noise with their hands at you; they make hisses, shaking their heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, and saying, Is this the town which was the crown of everything beautiful, the joy of all the earth?

你的仇敌都向你大大张口。他们嗤笑，又切齿说，我们吞灭她。这真是我们所盼望的日子临到了。我们亲眼看见了。
All your haters are opening their mouths wide against you; making hisses and whistling through their teeth, they say, We have made a meal of her: certainly this is the day we have been looking for; it has come, we have seen it.

耶和华成就了他所定的，应验了他古时所命定的。他倾覆了，并不顾惜，使你的仇敌向你夸耀。使你敌人的角也被高举。
The Lord has done that which was his purpose; he has put into force the orders which he gave in the days which are past; pulling down without pity, he has made your hater glad over you, lifting up the horn of those who were against you.

锡安民的心哀求主。锡安的城墙阿，愿你流泪如河，昼夜不息。愿你眼中的瞳人泪流不止。
Let your cry go up to the Lord: O wall of the daughter of Zion, let your weeping be flowing down like a stream day and night; give yourself no rest, let not your eyes keep back the drops of sorrow.

夜间，每逢交更的时候要起来呼喊，在主面前倾心如水。你的孩童在各市口上受饿发昏。你要为他们的性命向主举手祷告。
Up! give cries in the night, at the starting of the night-watches; let your heart be flowing out like water before the face of the Lord, lifting up your hands to him for the life of your young children who are falling down, feeble for need of food, at the top of every street.

耶和华阿，求你观看。见你向谁这样行。妇人岂可吃自己所生育手里所摇弄的婴孩吗？祭司和先知岂可在主的圣所中被杀戮吗？
Look! O Lord, see to whom you have done this! Are the women to take as their food the fruit of their bodies, the children who are folded in their arms? are the priest and the prophet to be put to death in the holy place of the Lord?

少年人和老年人都在街上躺卧。我的处女和壮丁都倒在刀下。你发怒的日子杀死他们。你杀了，并不顾惜。
The young men and the old are stretched on the earth in the streets; my virgins and my young men have been put to the sword: you have sent death on them in the day of your wrath, causing death without pity.

你招聚四围惊吓我的，像在大会的日子招聚人一样。耶和华发怒的日子，无人逃脱，无人存留。我所摇弄所养育的婴孩，仇敌都杀净了。
As in the day of a holy meeting you have made fears come round me on every side, and no one got away or was kept safe in the day of the Lord's wrath: those who were folded in my arms, whom I took care of, have been sent to their destruction by my hater.

我是因耶和华忿怒的杖，遭遇困苦的人。
I am the man who has seen trouble by the rod of his wrath.

他引导我，使我行在黑暗中，不行在光明里。
By him I have been made to go in the dark where there is no light.

他真是终日再三反手攻击我。
Truly against me his hand has been turned again and again all the day.

他使我的皮肉枯干。他折断（或作压伤）我的骨头。
My flesh and my skin have been used up by him and my bones broken.

他筑垒攻击我，用苦楚（原文作苦胆）和艰难围困我。
He has put up a wall against me, shutting me in with bitter sorrow.

他使我住在幽暗之处，像死了许久的人一样。
He has kept me in dark places, like those who have been long dead.

他用篱笆围住我，使我不能出去。他使我的铜链沉重。
He has put a wall round me, so that I am not able to go out; he has made great the weight of my chain.

我哀号求救。他使我的祷告不得上达。
Even when I send up a cry for help, he keeps my prayer shut out.

他用凿过的石头挡住我的道。他使我的路弯曲。
He has put up a wall of cut stones about my ways, he has made my roads twisted.

他向我如熊埋伏，如狮子在隐密处。
He is like a bear waiting for me, like a lion in secret places.

他使我转离正路，将我撕碎，使我凄凉。
By him my ways have been turned on one side and I have been pulled in bits; he has made me waste.

他张弓将我当作箭靶子。
With his bow bent, he has made me the mark for his arrows.

他把箭袋中的箭射入我的肺腑。
He has let loose his arrows into the inmost parts of my body.

我成了众民的笑话。他们终日以我为歌曲。
I have become the sport of all the peoples; I am their song all the day.

他用苦楚充满我，使我饱用茵陈。
He has made my life nothing but pain, he has given me the bitter root in full measure.

他又用沙石碜断我的牙，用灰尘将我蒙蔽。
By him my teeth have been broken with crushed stones, and I am bent low in the dust.

你使我远离平安，我忘记好处。
My soul is sent far away from peace, I have no more memory of good.

我就说，我的力量衰败。我在耶和华那里毫无指望。
And I said, My strength is cut off, and my hope from the Lord.

耶和华阿，求你记念我如茵陈和苦胆的困苦窘迫。
Keep in mind my trouble and my wandering, the bitter root and the poison.

我心想念这些，就在里面忧闷。
My soul still keeps the memory of them; and is bent down in me.

我想起这事，心里就有指望。
This I keep in mind, and because of this I have hope.

我们不至消灭，是出于耶和华诸般的慈爱。是因他的怜悯不至断绝。
It is through the Lord's love that we have not come to destruction, because his mercies have no limit.

每早晨，这都是新的。你的诚实极其广大。
They are new every morning; great is your good faith.

我心里说，耶和华是我的分，因此，我要仰望他。
I said to myself, The Lord is my heritage; and because of this I will have hope in him.

凡等候耶和华，心里寻求他的，耶和华必施恩给他。
The Lord is good to those who are waiting for him, to the soul which is looking for him.

人仰望耶和华，静默等候他的救恩，这原是好的。
It is good to go on hoping and quietly waiting for the salvation of the Lord.

人在幼年负轭，这原是好的。
It is good for a man to undergo the yoke when he is young.

他当独坐无言，因为这是耶和华加在他身上的。
Let him be seated by himself, saying nothing, because he has put it on him.

他当口贴尘埃，或者有指望。
Let him put his mouth in the dust, if by chance there may be hope.

他当由人打他的腮颊，要满受凌辱。
Let his face be turned to him who gives him blows; let him be full of shame.

因为主必不永远丢弃人。
For the Lord does not give a man up for ever.

主虽使人忧愁，还要照他诸般的慈爱发怜悯。
For though he sends grief, still he will have pity in the full measure of his love.

因他并不甘心使人受苦，使人忧愁。
For he has no pleasure in troubling and causing grief to the children of men.

人将世上被囚的踹（原文作压）在脚下，
In a man's crushing under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,

或在至高者面前屈枉人，
In his turning away the right of a man before the face of the Most High.

或在人的讼事上颠倒是非，这都是主看不上的。
In his doing wrong to a man in his cause, the Lord has no pleasure.

除非主命定，谁能说成就成呢？
Who is able to say a thing, and give effect to it, if it has not been ordered by the Lord?

祸福不都出于至高者的口吗？
Do not evil and good come from the mouth of the Most High?

活人因自己的罪受罚，为何发怨言呢？
What protest may a living man make, even a man about the punishment of his sin?

我们当深深考察自己的行为，再归向耶和华。
Let us make search and put our ways to the test, turning again to the Lord;

我们当诚心向天上的神举手祷告。
Lifting up our hearts with our hands to God in the heavens.

我们犯罪背逆，你并不赦免。
We have done wrong and gone against your law; we have not had your forgiveness.

你自被怒气遮蔽，追赶我们。你施行杀戮，并不顾惜。
Covering yourself with wrath you have gone after us, cutting us off without pity;

你以黑云遮蔽自己，以致祷告不得透入。
Covering yourself with a cloud, so that prayer may not get through.

你使我们在万民中成为污秽和渣滓。
You have made us like waste and that for which there is no use, among the peoples.

我们的仇敌都向我们大大张口。
The mouths of all our haters are open wide against us.

恐惧和陷坑，残害和毁灭，都临近我们。
Fear and deep waters have come on us, wasting and destruction.

因我众民遭的毁灭，我就眼泪下流如河。
Rivers of water are running down from my eyes, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

我的眼多多流泪，总不止息，
My eyes are streaming without stopping, they have no rest,

直等耶和华垂顾，从天观看。
Till the Lord's eye is turned on me, till he sees my trouble from heaven.

因我本城的众民，我的眼，使我的心伤痛。
The Lord is unkind to my soul, more than all the daughters of my town.

无故与我为仇的追逼我，像追雀鸟一样。
They who are against me without cause have gone hard after me as if I was a bird;

他们使我的命在牢狱中断绝，并将一块石头抛在我身上。
They have put an end to my life in the prison, stoning me with stones.

众水流过我头，我说，我命断绝了。
Waters were flowing over my head; I said, I am cut off.

耶和华阿，我从深牢中求告你的名。
I was making prayer to your name, O Lord, out of the lowest prison.

你曾听见我的声音。我求你解救，你不要掩耳不听。
My voice came to you; let not your ear be shut to my breathing, to my cry.

我求告你的日子，你临近我，说，不要惧怕。
You came near in the day when I made my prayer to you: you said, Have no fear.

主阿，你伸明了我的冤。你救赎了我的命。
O Lord, you have taken up the cause of my soul, you have made my life safe.

耶和华阿，你见了我受的委屈。求你为我伸冤。
O Lord, you have seen my wrong; be judge in my cause.

他们仇恨我，谋害我，你都看见了。
You have seen all the evil rewards they have sent on me, and all their designs against me.

耶和华阿，你听见他们辱骂我的话，知道他们向我所设的计，
Their bitter words have come to your ears, O Lord, and all their designs against me;

并那些起来攻击我的人口中所说的话，以及终日向我所设的计谋。
The lips of those who came up against me, and their thoughts against me all the day.

求你观看，他们坐下，起来，都以我为歌曲。
Take note of them when they are seated, and when they get up; I am their song.

耶和华阿，你要按着他们手所作的向他们施行报应。
You will give them their reward, O Lord, answering to the work of their hands.

你要使他们心里刚硬，使你的咒诅临到他们。
You will let their hearts be covered over with your curse on them.

你要发怒追赶他们，从耶和华的天下除灭他们。
You will go after them in wrath, and put an end to them from under the heavens of the Lord.

黄金何其失光；纯金何其变色。圣所的石头倒在各市口上。
How dark has the gold become! how changed the best gold! the stones of the holy place are dropping out at the top of every street.

锡安宝贵的众子好比精金，现在何竟算为窑匠手所作的瓦瓶。
The valued sons of Zion, whose price was the best gold, are looked on as vessels of earth, the work of the hands of the potter!

野狗尚且把奶乳哺其子，我民的妇人倒成为残忍，好像旷野的鸵鸟一般。
Even the beasts of the waste land have full breasts, they give milk to their young ones: the daughter of my people has become cruel like the ostriches in the waste land.

吃奶孩子的舌头因干渴贴住上膛。孩童求饼，无人掰给他们。
The tongue of the child at the breast is fixed to the roof of his mouth for need of drink: the young children are crying out for bread, and no man gives it to them.

素来吃美好食物的，现今在街上变为孤寒。素来卧朱红褥子的，现今躺卧粪堆。
Those who were used to feasting on delicate food are wasted in the streets: those who as children were dressed in purple are stretched out on the dust.

都因我众民的罪孽比所多玛的罪还大。所多玛虽然无人加手于她，还是转眼之间被倾覆。
For the punishment of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of Sodom, which was overturned suddenly without any hand falling on her.

锡安的贵胄素来比雪纯净，比奶更白。他们的身体比红宝玉（或作珊瑚）更红，像光润的蓝宝石一样。
Her holy ones were cleaner than snow, they were whiter than milk, their bodies were redder than corals, their form was as the sapphire:

现在他们的面貌比煤炭更黑，以致在街上无人认识。他们的皮肤紧贴骨头，枯干如同槁木。
Their face is blacker than night; in the streets no one has knowledge of them: their skin is hanging on their bones, they are dry, they have become like wood.

饿死的不如被刀杀的，因为这是缺了田间的土产，就身体衰弱，渐渐消灭。
Those who have been put to the sword are better off than those whose death is caused by need of food; for these come to death slowly, burned up like the fruit of the field.

慈悲的妇人，当我众民被毁灭的时候，亲手煮自己的儿女作为食物。
The hands of kind-hearted women have been boiling their children; they were their food in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

耶和华发怒成就他所定的，倒出他的烈怒。在锡安使火着起，烧毁锡安的根基。
The Lord has given full effect to his passion, he has let loose his burning wrath; he has made a fire in Zion, causing the destruction of its bases.

地上的君王和世上的居民都不信敌人和仇敌能进耶路撒冷的城门。
To the kings of the earth and to all the people of the world it did not seem possible that the attackers and the haters would go into the doors of Jerusalem.

这都因她先知的罪恶和祭司的罪孽。他们在城中流了义人的血。
It is because of the sins of her prophets and the evil-doing of her priests, by whom the blood of the upright has been drained out in her.

他们在街上如瞎子乱走，又被血玷污，以致人不能摸他们的衣服。
They are wandering like blind men in the streets, they are made unclean with blood, so that their robes may not be touched by men.

人向他们喊着说，不洁净的，躲开，躲开。不要挨近我。他们逃走飘流的时候，列国中有人说，他们不可仍在这里寄居。
Away! unclean! they were crying out to them, Away! away! let there be no touching: when they went away in flight and wandering, men said among the nations, There is no further resting-place for them.

耶和华发怒，将他们分散，不再眷顾他们。人不重看祭司，也不厚待长老。
The face of the Lord has sent them in all directions; he will no longer take care of them: they had no respect for the priests, they gave no honour to the old men.

我们仰望人来帮助，以致眼目失明，还是枉然。我们所盼望的，竟盼望一个不能救人的国。
Our eyes are still wasting away in looking for our false help: we have been watching for a nation unable to give salvation.

仇敌追赶我们的脚步像打猎的，以致我们不敢在自己的街上行走。我们的结局临近。我们的日子满足。我们的结局来到了。
They go after our steps so that we may not go in our streets: our end is near, our days are numbered; for our end has come.

追赶我们的比空中的鹰更快。他们在山上追逼我们，在旷野埋伏，等候我们。
Those who went after us were quicker than the eagles of the heaven, driving us before them on the mountains, waiting secretly for us in the waste land.

耶和华的受膏者好比我们鼻中的气，在他们的坑中被捉住。我们曾论到他说，我们必在他荫下，在列国中存活。
Our breath of life, he on whom the holy oil was put, was taken in their holes; of whom we said, Under his shade we will be living among the nations.

住乌斯地的以东民哪，只管欢喜快乐。苦杯也必传到你那里。你必喝醉，以致露体。
Have joy and be glad, O daughter of Edom, living in the land of Uz: the cup will be given to you in your turn, and you will be overcome with wine and your shame will be seen.

锡安的民哪，你罪孽的刑罚受足了，耶和华必不使你再被掳去。以东的民哪，他必追讨你的罪孽，显露你的罪恶。
The punishment of your evil-doing is complete, O daughter of Zion; never again will he take you away as a prisoner: he will give you the reward of your evil-doing, O daughter of Edom; he will let your sin be uncovered.

耶和华阿，求你记念我们所遭遇的事，观看我们所受的凌辱。
Keep in mind, O Lord, what has come to us: take note and see our shame.

我们的产业归与外邦人。我们的房屋归与外路人。
Our heritage is given up to men of strange lands, our houses to those who are not our countrymen.

我们是无父的孤儿。我们的母亲好像寡妇。
We are children without fathers, our mothers are like widows.

我们出钱才得水喝。我们的柴是人卖给我们的。
We give money for a drink of water, we get our wood for a price.

追赶我们的，到了我们的颈项上。我们疲乏不得歇息。
Our attackers are on our necks: overcome with weariness, we have no rest.

我们投降埃及人和亚述人，为要得粮吃饱。
We have given our hands to the Egyptians and to the Assyrians so that we might have enough bread.

我们列祖犯罪，而今不在了。我们担当他们的罪孽。
Our fathers were sinners and are dead; and the weight of their evil-doing is on us.

奴仆辖制我们，无人救我们脱离他们的手。
Servants are ruling over us, and there is no one to make us free from their hands.

因为旷野的刀剑，我们冒着险才得粮食。
We put our lives in danger to get our bread, because of the sword of the waste land.

因饥饿燥热，我们的皮肤就黑如炉。
Our skin is heated like an oven because of our burning heat from need of food.

敌人在锡安玷污妇人，在犹大的城邑玷污处女。
They took by force the women in Zion, the virgins in the towns of Judah.

他们吊起首领的手，也不尊敬老人的面。
Their hands put princes to death by hanging: the faces of old men were not honoured.

少年人扛磨石，孩童背木柴，都绊跌了。
The young men were crushing the grain, and the boys were falling under the wood.

老年人在城门口断绝。少年人不再作乐。
The old men are no longer seated in the doorway, and the music of the young men has come to an end.

我们心中的快乐止息，跳舞变为悲哀。
The joy of our hearts is ended; our dancing is changed into sorrow.

冠冕从我们的头上落下。我们犯罪了，我们有祸了。
The crown has been taken from our head: sorrow is ours, for we are sinners.

这些事我们心里发昏，我们的眼睛昏花。
Because of this our hearts are feeble; for these things our eyes are dark;

锡安山荒凉，野狗（或作狐狸）行在其上。
Because of the mountain of Zion which is a waste; jackals go over it.

耶和华阿，你存到永远。你的宝座存到万代。
You, O Lord, are seated as King for ever; the seat of your power is eternal.

你为何永远忘记我们。为何许久离弃我们。
Why have we gone from your memory for ever? why have you been turned away from us for so long?

耶和华阿，求你使我们向你回转，我们便得回转。求你复新我们的日子，像古时一样。
Make us come back to you, O Lord, and let us be turned; make our days new again as in the past.

你竟全然弃绝我们，向我们大发烈怒。
But you have quite given us up; you are full of wrath against us.