西番雅书 Zephaniah


当犹大王亚们的儿子约西亚在位的时候，耶和华的话临到希西家的元孙，亚玛利雅的曾孙，基大利的孙子，古示的儿子西番雅。
The word of the Lord which came to Zephaniah, the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of Judah.

耶和华说，我必从地上除灭万类。
I will take away everything from the face of the earth, says the Lord.

我必除灭人和牲畜，与空中的鸟，海里的鱼，以及绊脚石和恶人。我必将人从地上剪除。这是耶和华说的。
I will take away man and beast; I will take away the birds of the heaven and the fishes of the sea; causing the downfall of the evil-doers, and cutting man off from the face of the earth, says the Lord.

我必伸手攻击犹大和耶路撒冷的一切居民。也必从这地方剪除所剩下的巴力，并基玛林的名和祭司，
And my hand will be stretched out on Judah and on all the people of Jerusalem, cutting off the name of the Baal from this place, and the name of the false priests,

与那些在房顶上敬拜天上万象的，并那些敬拜耶和华指着他起誓，又指着玛勒堪起誓的，
And the worshippers of the army of heaven on the house-tops, and the Lord's worshippers who take oaths by Milcom,

与那些转去不跟从耶和华的，和不寻求耶和华，也不访问他的。
And those who are turned back from going after the Lord, and those who have not made prayer to the Lord or got directions from him.

你要在主耶和华面前静默无声，因为耶和华的日子快到。耶和华已经预备祭物，将他的客分别为圣。
Let there be no sound before the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is near: for the Lord has made ready an offering, he has made his guests holy.

到了我耶和华献祭的日子，必惩罚首领和王子，并一切穿外邦衣服的。
And it will come about in the day of the Lord's offering, that I will send punishment on the rulers and the king's sons and all who are clothed in robes from strange lands.

到那日，我必惩罚一切跳过门槛，将强暴和诡诈得来之物充满主人房屋的。
And in that day I will send punishment on all those who come jumping over the doorstep and make their master's house full of violent behaviour and deceit.

耶和华说，当那日，从鱼门必发出悲哀的声音，从二城发出哀号的声音，从山间发出大破裂的响声。
And in that day, says the Lord, there will be the sound of a cry from the fish doorway, and an outcry from the new town, and a great thundering from the hills, and cries of grief from the people of the Hollow;

玛革提施的居民哪，你们要哀号，因为迦南的商民都灭亡了。凡搬运银子的都被剪除。
Because of the downfall of all the people of Canaan: all those who were weighted down with silver have been cut off.

那时，我必用灯巡查耶路撒冷。我必惩罚那些如酒在渣滓上澄清的。他们心里说，耶和华必不降福，也不降祸。
And it will come about at that time, that I will go searching through Jerusalem with lights; and I will send punishment on the men who have become like wine stored over-long, who say to themselves, The Lord will not do good and will not do evil.

他们的财宝，必成为掠物，他们的房屋，必变为荒场。他们必建造房屋，却不得住在其内，栽种葡萄园，却不得喝所出的酒。
And their wealth will be violently taken away, and their houses will be made waste: they will go on building houses and never living in them, and planting vine-gardens but not drinking the wine from them.

耶和华的大日临近，临近而且甚快，乃是耶和华日子的风声。勇士必痛痛的哭号。
The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and coming very quickly; the bitter day of the Lord is near, coming on more quickly than a man of war.

那日是忿怒的日子，是急难困苦的日子，是荒废凄凉的日子，是黑暗，幽冥，密云，乌黑的日子。
That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and sorrow, a day of wasting and destruction, a day of dark night and deep shade, a day of cloud and thick dark.

是吹角呐喊的日子，要攻击坚固城，和高大的城楼。
A day of sounding the horn and the war-cry against the walled towns and the high towers.

我必使灾祸临到人身上，使他们行走如同瞎眼的，因为得罪了我。他们的血，必倒出如灰尘，他们的肉，必抛弃如粪土。
And I will send trouble on men so that they will go about like the blind, because they have done evil against the Lord: and their blood will be drained out like dust, and their strength like waste.

当耶和华发怒的日子，他们的金银不能救他们。他的忿怒如火，必烧灭全地，毁灭这地的一切居民，而且大大毁灭。
Even their silver and their gold will not be able to keep them safe in the day of the Lord's wrath; but all the land will be burned up in the fire of his bitter wrath: for he will put an end, even suddenly, to all who are living in the land.

不知羞耻的国民哪，你们应当聚集。趁命令没有发出，日子过去如风前的糠，耶和华的烈怒未临到你们，他发怒的日子未到以先，你们应当聚集前来。
Come together, make everyone come together, O nation without shame;


Before the Lord sends you violently away in flight like the waste from the grain; before the burning wrath of the Lord comes on you, before the day of the Lord's wrath comes on you.

世上遵守耶和华典章的谦卑人哪，你们都当寻求耶和华。当寻求公义谦卑，或者在耶和华发怒的日子，可以隐藏起来。
Make search for the Lord, all you quiet ones of the earth, who have done what is right in his eyes; make search for righteousness and a quiet heart: it may be that you will be safely covered in the day of the Lord's wrath.

迦萨必致见弃。亚实基伦必然荒凉。人在正午必赶出亚实突的民。以革伦也被拔出根来。
For Gaza will be given up and Ashkelon will become waste: they will send Ashdod out in the middle of the day, and Ekron will be uprooted.

住沿海之地的基利提族有祸了。迦南，非利士人之地阿，耶和华的话与你反对，说，我必毁灭你，以致无人居住。
Sorrow to the people living by the sea, the nation of the Cherethites! The word of the Lord is against you, O Canaan, the land of the Philistines; I will send destruction on you till there is no one living in you.

沿海之地要变为草场，其上有牧人的住处，和羊群的圈。
And the land by the sea will be grass-land, with houses for keepers of sheep and walled places for flocks.

这地必为犹大家剩下的人所得。他们必在那里牧放群羊。晚上必躺卧在亚实基伦的房屋中。因为耶和华他们的神，必眷顾他们，使他们被掳的人归回。
The land by the sea will be for the rest of the children of Judah; by the sea they will give their flocks food: in the houses of Ashkelon they will take their rest in the evening; for the Lord their God will take them in hand and their fate will be changed.

我听见摩押人的毁谤，和亚扪人的辱骂，就是毁谤我的百姓，自夸自大。侵犯他们的境界。
My ears have been open to the bitter words of Moab and the words of shame of the children of Ammon, which they have said against my people, lifting themselves up against the limit of their land.

万军之耶和华以色列的神说，我指着我的永生起誓，摩押必像所多玛，亚扪人必像蛾摩拉，都变为刺草，盐坑，永远荒废之地。我百姓所剩下的，必掳掠他们，我国中所余剩的，必得着他们的地。
For this cause, by my life, says the Lord of armies, the God of Israel, truly Moab will become like Sodom and the children of Ammon like Gomorrah, given up to waste plants and salt pools and unpeopled for ever: the rest of my people will take their property, the overflow of my nation will take their heritage.

这事临到他们，是因他们骄傲，自夸自大，毁谤万军之耶和华的百姓。
This will be their fate because of their pride, because they have said evil, lifting themselves up against the people of the Lord of armies.

耶和华必向他们显可畏之威。因他必叫世上的诸神瘦弱，列国海岛的居民各在自己的地方敬拜他。
The Lord will let himself be seen by them: for he will make all the gods of the earth feeble; and men will go down before him in worship, everyone from his place, even all the sea-lands of the nations.

古实人哪，你们必被我的刀所杀。
And you Ethiopians will be put to death by my sword.

耶和华必伸手攻击北方，毁灭亚述，使尼尼微荒凉，又干旱如旷野。
And his hand will be stretched out against the north, for the destruction of Assyria; and he will make Nineveh unpeopled and dry like the waste land.

群畜，就是各国的走兽（国或作类），必卧在其中。鹈鹕和箭猪要宿在柱顶上在窗户内有鸣叫的声音。门槛都必毁坏。香柏木已经露出。
And herds will take their rest in the middle of her, all the beasts of the valley: the pelican and the porcupine will make their living-places on the tops of its pillars; the owl will be crying in the window; the raven will be seen on the doorstep.

这是素来欢乐安然居住的城，心里说，惟有我，除我以外再没有别的。现在何竟荒凉，成为野兽躺卧之处。凡经过的人都必摇手嗤笑她。
This is the town which was full of joy, living without fear of danger, saying in her heart, I am, and there is no other: how has she been made waste, a place for beasts to take their rest in! everyone who goes by her will make hisses, waving his hand.

这悖逆，污秽，欺压的城，有祸了。
Sorrow to her who is uncontrolled and unclean, the cruel town!

她不听从命令，不领受训诲，不倚靠耶和华，不亲近她的神。
She gave no attention to the voice, she had no use for teaching, she put no faith in the Lord, she did not come near to her God.

她中间的首领是咆哮的狮子。她的审判官是晚上的豺狼，一点食物也不留到早晨。
Her rulers are like loud-voiced lions in her; her judges are wolves of the evening, crushing up the bones before the morning.

她的先知是虚浮诡诈的人。她的祭司亵渎圣所，强解律法。
Her prophets are good-for-nothing persons, full of deceit: her priests have made the holy place unclean and have gone violently against the law.

耶和华在她中间是公义的，断不做非义的事，每早晨显明他的公义，无日不然。只是不义的人不知羞耻。
The Lord in her is upright; he will not do evil; every morning he lets his righteousness be seen, he is unchanging; but the evil-doer has no sense of shame.

我耶和华已经除灭列国的民。他们的城楼毁坏。我使他们的街道荒凉，以致无人经过。他们的城邑毁灭，以致无人，也无居民。
I have had the nations cut off, their towers are broken down; I have made their streets a waste so that no one goes through them: destruction has overtaken their towns, so that there is no man living in them.

我说，你只要敬畏我，领受训诲。如此，你的住处，不致照我所拟定的除灭。只是你们从早起来，就在一切事上败坏自己。
I said, Certainly you will go in fear of me, and come under my training, so that whatever I may send on her may not be cut off before her eyes: but they got up early and made all their works evil.

耶和华说，你们要等候我，直到我兴起掳掠的日子，因为我已定意招聚列国，聚集列邦，将我的恼怒，就是我的烈怒，都倾在她们身上。我的忿怒如火，必烧灭全地。
For this reason, go on waiting for me, says the Lord, till the day when I come up as a witness: for my purpose is to send for the nations and to get the kingdoms together, so that I may let loose on them my passion, even all my burning wrath: for all the earth will be burned up in the fire of my bitter passion.

那时，我必使万民用清洁的言语，好求告我耶和华的名，同心合意地事奉我。
For then I will give the people a clean language, so that they may all make prayer to the Lord and be his servants with one mind.

祈祷我的，就是我所分散的民（原文作女子下同），必从古实河外来，给我献供物。
From over the rivers of Ethiopia, and from the sides of the north, they will come to me with an offering.

当那日，你必不因你一切得罪我的事，自觉羞愧。因为那时我必从你中间除掉矜夸高傲之辈，你也不再于我的圣山狂傲。
In that day you will have no shame on account of all the things in which you did evil against me: for then I will take away from among you those who were lifted up in pride, and you will no longer be lifted up with pride in my holy mountain.

我却要在你中间，留下困苦贫寒的民。他们必投靠我耶和华的名。
But I will still have among you a quiet and poor people, and they will put their faith in the name of the Lord.

以色列所剩下的人，必不作罪孽，不说谎言，口中也没有诡诈的舌头。而且吃喝躺卧，无人惊吓。
The rest of Israel will do no evil and say no false words; the tongue of deceit will not be seen in their mouth: for they will take their food and their rest, and no one will be a cause of fear to them.

锡安的民哪，应当歌唱。以色列阿，应当欢呼。耶路撒冷的民哪，应当满心欢喜快乐。
Make melody, O daughter of Zion; give a loud cry, O Israel; be glad and let your heart be full of joy, O daughter of Jerusalem.

耶和华已经除去你的刑罚，赶出你的仇敌。以色列的王耶和华在你中间，你必不再惧怕灾祸。
The Lord has taken away those who were judging you, he has sent your haters far away: the King of Israel, even the Lord, is among you: you will have no more fear of evil.

当那日，必有话向耶路撒冷说，不要惧怕。锡安哪，不要手软。
In that day it will be said to Jerusalem, Have no fear: O Zion, let not your hands be feeble.

耶和华你的神，是施行拯救，大有能力的主，他在你中间必因你欢欣喜乐，默然爱你，且因你喜乐而欢呼。
The Lord your God is among you, as a strong saviour: he will be glad over you with joy, he will make his love new again, he will make a song of joy over you as in the time of a holy feast.

那些属你，为无大会愁烦，因你担当羞辱的，我必聚集他们。
I will take away your troubles, lifting up your shame from off you.

那时，我必罚办一切苦待你的人，又拯救你瘸腿的。聚集你被赶出的。那些在全地受羞辱的，我必使他们得称赞，有名声。
See, at that time I will put an end to all who have been troubling you: I will give salvation to her whose steps are uncertain, and get together her who has been sent in flight; and I will make them a cause of praise and an honoured name in all the earth, when I let their fate be changed.

那时，我必领你们进来，聚集你们。我使你们被掳之人归回的时候，就必使你们在地上的万民中有名声，得称赞。这是耶和华说的。
At that time I will make you come in, at that time I will get you together: for I will make you a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth when I let your fate be changed before your eyes, says the Lord.

ll make you a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth when I let your fate be changed before your eyes, says the Lord.

