诗篇 Psalms

不从恶人的计谋，不站罪人的道路，不坐亵慢人的座位。
Happy is the man who does not go in the company of sinners, or take his place in the way of evil-doers, or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the Lord.

惟喜爱耶和华的律法，昼夜思想，这人便为有福。
But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose mind is on his law day and night.

他要像一棵树栽在溪水旁，按时候结果子，叶子也不枯干。凡他所作的，尽都顺利。
He will be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which gives its fruit at the right time, whose leaves will ever be green; and he will do well in all his undertakings.

恶人并不是这样，乃像糠秕被风吹散。
The evil-doers are not so; but are like the dust from the grain, which the wind takes away.

因此当审判的时候，恶人必站立不住，罪人在义人的会中，也是如此。
For this cause there will be no mercy for sinners when they are judged, and the evil-doers will have no place among the upright,

因为耶和华知道义人的道路。恶人的道路，却必灭亡。
Because the Lord sees the way of the upright, but the end of the sinner is destruction.

外邦为什么争闹，万民为什么谋算虚妄的事。
Why are the nations so violently moved, and why are the thoughts of the people so foolish?

世上的君王一齐起来，臣宰一同商议，要敌挡耶和华，并他的受膏者，
The kings of the earth have taken their place, and the rulers are fixed in their purpose, against the Lord, and against the king of his selection, saying,

说，我们要挣开他们的捆绑，脱去他们的绳索。
Let their chains be broken, and their cords taken from off us.

那坐在天上的必发笑。主必嗤笑他们。
Then he whose seat is in the heavens will be laughing: the Lord will make sport of them.

那时他要在怒中责备他们，在烈怒中惊吓他们，
Then will his angry words come to their ears, and by his wrath they will be troubled:

说，我已经立我的君在锡安我的圣山上了。
But I have put my king on my holy hill of Zion.

受膏者说，我要传圣旨。耶和华曾对我说，你是我的儿子，我今日生你。
I will make clear the Lord's decision: he has said to me, You are my son, this day have I given you being.

你求我，我就将列国赐你为基业，将地极赐你为田产。
Make your request to me, and I will give you the nations for your heritage, and the farthest limits of the earth will be under your hand.

你必用铁杖打破他们。你必将他们如同窑匠的瓦器摔碎。
They will be ruled by you with a rod of iron; they will be broken like a potter's vessel.

现在你们君王应当省悟。你们世上的审判官该受管教。
So now be wise, you kings: take his teaching, you judges of the earth.

当存畏惧事奉耶和华，又当存战兢而快乐。
Give worship to the Lord with fear, kissing his feet and giving him honour,

当以嘴亲子，恐怕他发怒，你们便在道中灭亡，因为他的怒气快要发作。凡投靠他的，都是有福的。
For fear that he may be angry, causing destruction to come on you, because he is quickly moved to wrath. Happy are all those who put their faith in him.

（大卫逃避他儿子押沙龙的时候作的诗。）耶和华阿，我的敌人何其加增。有许多人起来攻击我。
<A Psalm. Of David. When he went in flight from Absalom his son.> Lord, how greatly are they increased who make attacks on me! in great numbers they come against me.

有许多人议论我说，他得不着神的帮助。（细拉）
Unnumbered are those who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. (Selah.)

但你耶和华是我四围的盾牌。是我的荣耀，又是叫我抬起头来的。
But your strength, O Lord, is round me, you are my glory and the lifter up of my head.

我用我的声音求告耶和华，他就从他的圣山上应允我。（细拉）
I send up a cry to the Lord with my voice, and he gives me an answer from his holy hill. (Selah.)

我躺下睡觉。我醒着。耶和华都保佑我。
I took my rest in sleep, and then again I was awake; for the Lord was my support.

虽有成万的百姓来周围攻击我，我也不怕。
I will have no fear, though ten thousand have come round me, putting themselves against me.

耶和华阿，求你起来。我的神阿，求你救我。因为你打了我一切仇敌的腮骨，敲碎了恶人的牙齿。
Come to me, Lord; keep me safe, O my God; for you have given all my haters blows on their face-bones; the teeth of the evil-doers have been broken by you.

救恩属乎耶和华。愿你赐福给你的百姓。（细拉）
Salvation comes from the Lord; your blessing is on your people. (Selah.)

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。用丝弦的乐器。）显我为义的神阿，我呼吁的时候，求你应允我。我在困苦中，你曾使我宽广。现在求你怜恤我，听我的祷告。
<To the chief music-maker on corded instruments. A Psalm. Of David.> Give answer to my cry, O God of my righteousness; make me free from my troubles; have mercy on me, and give ear to my prayer.

你们这上流人哪，你们将我的尊荣变为羞辱，要到几时呢你们喜爱虚妄，寻找虚假，要到几时呢？（细拉）
O you sons of men, how long will you go on turning my glory into shame? how long will you give your love to foolish things, going after what is false? (Selah.)

你们要知道耶和华已经分别虔诚人归他自己。我求告耶和华，他必听我。
See how the Lord has made great his mercy for me; the Lord will give ear to my cry.

你们应当畏惧，不可犯罪。在床上的时候，要心里思想，并要肃静。（细拉）
Let there be fear in your hearts, and do no sin; have bitter feelings on your bed, but make no sound. (Selah.)

当献上公义的祭，又当倚靠耶和华。
Give the offerings of righteousness, and put your faith in the Lord.

有许多人说，谁能指示我们什么好处。耶和华阿，求你仰起脸来，光照我们。
There are numbers who say, Who will do us any good? the light of his face has gone from us.

你使我心里快乐，胜过那丰收五谷新酒的人。
Lord, you have put joy in my heart, more than they have when their grain and their wine are increased.

我必安然躺下睡觉，因为独有你耶和华使我安然居住。
I will take my rest on my bed in peace, because you only, Lord, keep me safe.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。用吹的乐器。）耶和华阿，求你留心听我的言语，顾念我的心思。
<To the chief music-maker on wind instruments. A Psalm. Of David.> Give ear to my words, O Lord; give thought to my heart-searchings.

我的王我的神阿，求你垂听我呼求的声音。因为我向你祈祷。
Let the voice of my cry come to you, my King and my God; for to you will I make my prayer.

耶和华阿，早晨你必听我的声音。早晨我必向你陈明我的心意，并要儆醒。
My voice will come to you in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I send my prayer to you, and keep watch.

因为你不是喜悦恶事的神。恶人不能与你同居。
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wrongdoing; there is no evil with you.

狂傲人不能站在你眼前。凡作孽的，都是你所恨恶的。
The sons of pride have no place before you; you are a hater of all workers of evil.

说谎言的，你必灭绝。好流人血弄诡诈的，都为耶和华所憎恶。
You will send destruction on those whose words are false; the cruel man and the man of deceit are hated by the Lord.

至于我，我必凭你丰盛的慈爱进入你的居所。我必存敬畏你的心向你的圣殿下拜。
But as for me, I will come into your house, in the full measure of your mercy; and in your fear I will give worship, turning my eyes to your holy Temple.

耶和华阿，求你因我的仇敌，凭你的公义，引领我。使你的道路在我面前正直。
Be my guide, O Lord, in the ways of your righteousness, because of those who are against me; make your way straight before my face.

因为他们的口中没有诚实。他们的心里满有邪恶。他们的喉咙，是敞开的坟墓。他们用舌头谄媚人。
For no faith may be put in their words; their inner part is nothing but evil; their throat is like an open place for the dead; smooth are the words of their tongues.

神阿，求你定他们的罪。愿他们因自己的计谋跌倒。愿你在他们许多的过犯中，把他们逐出。因为他们背叛了你。
Send them to destruction, O Lord; let their evil designs be the cause of their fall; let them be forced out by all their sins; because they have gone against your authority.

凡投靠你的，愿他们喜乐，时常欢呼，因为你护庇他们。又愿那爱你名的人，都靠你欢欣。
But let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cries of joy at all times, and let all the lovers of your name be glad in you.

因为你必赐福与义人。耶和华阿，你必用恩惠如同盾牌四面护卫他。
For you, Lord, will send a blessing on the upright man; your grace will be round him, and you will be his strength.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。用丝弦的乐器，调用第八。）耶和华阿，求你不要在怒中责备我，也不要在烈怒中惩罚我。
<To the chief music-maker on corded instruments, on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.> O Lord, do not be bitter with me in your wrath; do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion.

耶和华阿，求你可怜我。因为我软弱。耶和华阿，求你医治我。因为我的骨头发战。
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am wasted away: make me well, for even my bones are troubled.

我心也大大地惊惶。耶和华阿，你要到几时才救我呢？
My soul is in bitter trouble; and you, O Lord, how long?

耶和华阿，求你转回，搭救我。因你的慈爱拯救我。
Come back, O Lord, make my soul free; O give me salvation because of your mercy.

因为在死地无人记念你，在阴间有谁称谢你。
For in death there is no memory of you; in the underworld who will give you praise?

我因唉哼而困乏。我每夜流泪，把床榻漂起，把褥子湿透。
The voice of my sorrow is a weariness to me; all the night I make my bed wet with weeping; it is watered by the drops flowing from my eyes.

我因忧愁眼睛干瘪。又因我一切的敌人眼睛昏花。
My eyes are wasting away with trouble; they are becoming old because of all those who are against me.

你们一切作孽的人，离开我吧。因为耶和华听了我哀哭的声音。
Go from me, all you workers of evil; for the Lord has given ear to the voice of my weeping.

耶和华听了我的恳求。耶和华必收纳我的祷告。
The Lord has given ear to my request; the Lord has let my prayer come before him.

我的一切仇敌都必羞愧，大大惊惶。他们必要退后，忽然羞愧。
Let all those who are against me be shamed and deeply troubled; let them be turned back and suddenly put to shame.

（大卫指着便雅悯人古实的话，向耶和华唱的流离歌。）耶和华我的神阿，我投靠你。求你救我脱离一切追赶我的人，将我救拔出来。
<Shiggaion of David; a song which he made to the Lord, about the words of Cush the Benjamite.> O Lord my God, I put my faith in you; take me out of the hands of him who is cruel to me, and make me free;

恐怕他们像狮子撕裂我，甚至撕碎，无人搭救。
So that he may not come rushing on my soul like a lion, wounding it, while there is no one to be my saviour.

耶和华我的神阿，我若行了这事，若有罪孽在我手里，
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if my hands have done any wrong;

我若以恶报那与我交好的人，连那无故与我为敌的，我也救了他，
If I have given back evil to him who did evil to me, or have taken anything from him who was against me without cause;

就任凭仇敌追赶我，直到追上。将我的性命踏在地下，使我的荣耀归于灰尘。（细拉）
Let my hater go after my soul and take it; let my life be crushed to the earth, and my honour into the dust. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，求你在怒中起来，挺身而立，抵挡我敌人的暴怒。求你为我兴起。你已经命定施行审判。
Come up, Lord, in your wrath; be lifted up against my haters; be awake, my God, give orders for the judging.

愿众民的会环绕你。愿你从其上归于高位。
The meeting of the nations will be round you; take your seat, then, over them, on high.

耶和华向众民施行审判。耶和华阿，求你按我的公义，和我心中的纯正，判断我。
The Lord will be judge of the peoples; give a decision for me, O Lord, because of my righteousness, and let my virtue have its reward.

愿恶人的恶断绝。愿你坚立义人。因为公义的神察验人的心肠肺腑。
O let the evil of the evil-doer come to an end, but give strength to the upright: for men's minds and hearts are tested by the God of righteousness.

神是我的盾牌。他拯救心里正直的人。
God, who is the saviour of the upright in heart, is my breastplate.

神是公义的审判者，又是天天向恶人发怒的神。
God is the judge of the upright, and is angry with the evil-doers every day.

若有人不回头，他的刀必磨快。弓必上弦，预备妥当了。
If a man is not turned from his evil, he will make his sword sharp; his bow is bent and ready.

他也预备了杀人的器械。他所射的是火箭。
He has made ready for him the instruments of death; he makes his arrows flames of fire.

试看恶人因奸恶而劬劳。所怀的是毒害，所生的是虚假。
That man is a worker of evil; the seed of wrongdoing has given birth to deceit.

他掘了坑，又挖深了，竟掉在自己所挖的阱里。
He has made a hole deep in the earth, and is falling into the hole which he has made

他的毒害，必临到他自己的头上。他的强暴必落到他自己的脑袋上。
His wrongdoing will come back to him, and his violent behaviour will come down on his head.

我要照着耶和华的公义称谢他，歌颂耶和华至高者的名。
I will give praise to the Lord for his righteousness; I will make a song to the name of the Lord Most High.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。用迦特乐器。）耶和华我们的主阿，你的名在全地何其美。你将你的荣耀彰显于天。
<To the chief music-maker on the Gittith. A Psalm. Of David.> O Lord, our Lord, whose glory is higher than the heavens, how noble is your name in all the earth!

你因敌人的缘故，从婴孩和吃奶的口中，建立了能力，使仇敌和报仇的，闭口无言。
You have made clear your strength even out of the mouths of babies at the breast, because of those who are against you; so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man.

我观看你指头所造的天，并你所陈设的月亮星宿，
When I see your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have put in their places;

便说，人算什么，你竟顾念他。世人算什么，你竟眷顾他。
What is man, that you keep him in mind? the son of man, that you take him into account?

你叫他比天使（或作神）微小一点，并赐他荣耀尊贵为冠冕。
For you have made him only a little lower than the gods, crowning him with glory and honour.

你派他管理你手所造的，使万物，就是一切的牛羊，田野的兽，空中的鸟，海里的鱼，凡经行海道的，都服在他的脚下。
You have made him ruler over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet;


All sheep and oxen, and all the beasts of the field;


The birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and whatever goes through the deep waters of the seas.

耶和华我们的主阿，你的名在全地何其美。
O Lord, our Lord, how noble is your name in all the earth!

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。调用慕拉便。）我要一心称谢耶和华。我要传扬你一切奇妙的作为。
<To the chief music-maker on Muthlabben. A Psalm. Of David.> I will give you praise, O Lord, with all my heart; I will make clear all the wonder of your works.

我要因你欢喜快乐。至高者阿，我要歌颂你的名。
I will be glad and have delight in you: I will make a song of praise to your name, O Most High.

我的仇敌转身退去的时候，他们一见你的面，就跌倒灭亡。
When my haters are turned back, they will be broken and overcome before you.

因你已经为我伸冤，为我辨屈。你坐在宝座上，按公义审判。
For you gave approval to my right and my cause; you were seated in your high place judging in righteousness.

你曾斥责外邦。你曾灭绝恶人。你曾涂抹他们的名，直到永永远远。
You have said sharp words to the nations, you have sent destruction on the sinners, you have put an end to their name for ever and ever.

仇敌到了尽头。他们被毁坏，直到永远。你拆毁他们的城邑。连他们的名号，都归于无有。
You have given their towns to destruction; the memory of them has gone; they have become waste for ever.

惟耶和华坐着为王，直到永远。他已经为审判设摆他的宝座。
But the Lord is King for ever: he has made ready his high seat for judging.

他要按公义审判世界，按正直判断万民。
And he will be the judge of the world in righteousness, giving true decisions for the peoples.

耶和华又要给受欺压的人作高台，在患难的时候作高台。
The Lord will be a high tower for those who are crushed down, a high tower in times of trouble;

耶和华阿，认识你名的人要倚靠你。因你没有离弃寻求你的人。
And those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you; because you, Lord, have ever given your help to those who were waiting for you.

应当歌颂居锡安的耶和华，将他所行的传扬在众民中。
Make songs of praise to the Lord, whose house is in Zion: make his doings clear to the people.

因为那追讨流人血之罪的，他记念受屈的人，不忘记困苦人的哀求。
When he makes search for blood, he has them in his memory: he is not without thought for the cry of the poor.

耶和华阿，你是从死门把我提拔起来的。求你怜恤我。看那恨我的人所加给我的苦难。
Have mercy on me, O Lord, and see how I am troubled by my haters; let me be lifted up from the doors of death;

好叫我述说你一切的美德。我必在锡安城的门（城原文作女子），因你的救恩欢乐。
So that I may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of Zion: I will be glad because of your salvation.

外邦人陷在自己所掘的坑中。他们的脚，在自己暗设的网罗里缠住了。
The nations have gone down into the hole which they made: in their secret net is their foot taken.

耶和华已将自己显明了，他已施行审判。恶人被自己手所作的缠住了（或作他叫恶人被自己手所作的累住了）。（细拉）
The Lord has given knowledge of himself through his judging: the evil-doer is taken in the net which his hands had made. (Higgaion. Selah.)

恶人，就是忘记神的外邦人，都必归到阴间。
The sinners and all the nations who have no memory of God will be turned into the underworld.

穷乏人必不永久被忘，困苦人的指望，必不永远落空。
For the poor will not be without help; the hopes of those in need will not be crushed for ever.

耶和华阿，求你起来，不容人得胜。愿外邦人在你面前受审判。
Up! O Lord; let not man overcome you: let the nations be judged before you.

耶和华阿，求你使外邦人恐惧。愿他们知道自己不过是人。（细拉）
Put them in fear, O Lord, so that the nations may see that they are only men. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，你为什么站在远处。在患难的时候，为什么隐藏。
Why do you keep far away, O Lord? why are you not to be seen in times of trouble?

恶人在骄横中，把困苦人追得火急。愿他们陷在自己所设的计谋里。
The evil-doer in his pride is cruel to the poor; let him be taken by the tricks of his invention.

因为恶人以心愿自夸。贪财的背弃耶和华，并且轻慢他（或作他祝福贪财的，却轻慢耶和华）。
For the evil-doer is lifted up because of the purpose of his heart, and he whose mind is fixed on wealth is turned away from the Lord, saying evil against him.

恶人面带骄傲，说，耶和华必不追究。他一切所想的，都以为没有神。
The evil-doer in his pride says, God will not make a search. All his thoughts are, There is no God.

凡他所作的，时常稳固。你的审判超过他的眼界。至于他一切的敌人，他都向他们喷气。
His ways are ever fixed; your decisions are higher than he may see: as for his haters, they are as nothing to him.

他心里说，我必不动摇，世世代代不遭灾难。
He has said in his heart, I will not be moved: through all generations I will never be in trouble.

他满口是咒骂，诡诈，欺压。舌底是毒害奸恶。
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and false words: under his tongue are evil purposes and dark thoughts.

他在村庄埋伏等候。他在隐密处杀害无辜的人。他的眼睛窥探无倚无靠的人。
He is waiting in the dark places of the towns: in the secret places he puts to death those who have done no wrong: his eyes are secretly turned against the poor.

他埋伏在暗地，如狮子蹲在洞中。他埋伏，要掳去困苦人。他拉网，就把困苦人掳去。
He keeps himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole, waiting to put his hands on the poor man, and pulling him into his net.

他屈身蹲伏，无倚无靠的人，就倒在他爪牙之下（爪牙或作强暴人），
The upright are crushed and made low, and the feeble are overcome by his strong ones.

他心里说，神竟忘记了。他掩面，永不观看。
He says in his heart, God has no memory of me: his face is turned away; he will never see it.

耶和华阿，求你起来。神阿，求你举手。不要忘记困苦人。
Up! O Lord; let your hand be lifted: give thought to the poor.

恶人为何轻慢神，心里说，你必不追究。
Why has the evil-doer a low opinion of God, saying in his heart, You will not make search for it?

其实你已经观看。因为奸恶毒害，你都看见了，为要以手施行报应。无倚无靠的人，把自己交托你。你向来是帮助孤儿的。
You have seen it; for your eyes are on sorrow and grief, to take it into your hand: the poor man puts his faith in you; you have been the helper of the child who has no father.

愿你打断恶人的膀臂。至于坏人，愿你追究他的恶，直到净尽。
Let the arm of the sinner and the evil-doer be broken; go on searching for his sin till there is no more.

耶和华永永远远为王。外邦人从他的地已经灭绝了。
The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are gone from his land.

耶和华阿，谦卑人的心愿，你早已知道（原文作听见）。你必预备他们的心，也必侧耳听他们的祈求。
Lord, you have given ear to the prayer of the poor: you will make strong their hearts, you will give them a hearing:

为要给孤儿和受欺压的人伸冤，使强横的人不再威吓他们。
To give decision for the child without a father and for the broken-hearted, so that the man of the earth may no longer be feared.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）我是投靠耶和华。你们怎么对我说，你当像鸟飞往你的山去。
<For the chief music-maker. Of David.> In the Lord put I my faith; how will you say to my soul, Go in flight like a bird to the mountain?

看哪，恶人弯弓，把箭搭在弦上，要在暗中射那心里正直的人。
See, the bows of the evil-doers are bent, they make ready their arrows on the cord, so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart.

根基若毁坏，义人还能作什么呢？
If the bases are broken down, what is the upright man to do?

耶和华在他的圣殿里，耶和华的宝座在天上。他的慧眼察看世人。
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lord's seat is in heaven; his eyes are watching and testing the children of men.

耶和华试验义人。惟有恶人和喜爱强暴的人，他心里恨恶。
The Lord puts the upright and the sinner to the test, but he has hate in his soul for the lover of violent acts.

他要向恶人密布网罗。有烈火，硫磺，热风，作他们杯中的分。
On the evil-doer he will send down fire and flames, and a burning wind; with these will their cup be full.

因为耶和华是公义的。他喜爱公义。正直人必得见他的面。
For the Lord is upright; he is a lover of righteousness: the upright will see his face.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。调用第八。）耶和华阿，求你帮助，因虔诚人断绝了。世人中间的忠信人没有了。
<For the chief music-maker on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.> Send help, Lord, for mercy has come to an end; there is no more faith among the children of men.

人人向邻舍说谎。他们说话，是嘴唇油滑，心口不一。
Everyone says false words to his neighbour: their tongues are smooth in their talk, and their hearts are full of deceit.

凡油滑的嘴唇，和夸大的舌头，耶和华必要剪除。
The smooth lips and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the Lord.

他们曾说，我们必能以舌头得胜。我们的嘴唇是我们自己的。谁能作我们的主呢？
They have said, With our tongues will we overcome; our lips are ours: who is lord over us?

耶和华说，因为困苦人的冤屈，和贫穷人的叹息，我现在要起来，把他安置在他所切慕的稳妥之地。
Because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need, now will I come to his help, says the Lord; I will give him the salvation which he is desiring.

耶和华的言语，是纯净的言语。如同银子在泥炉中炼过七次。
The words of the Lord are true words: like silver tested by fire and burned clean seven times.

耶和华阿，你必保护他们。你必保佑他们永远脱离这世代的人。
You will keep them, O Lord, you will keep them safe from this generation for ever.

下流人在世人中升高，就有恶人到处游行。
The sinners are walking on every side, and evil is honoured among the children of men.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，你忘记我要到几时呢？要到永远吗？你掩面不顾我要到几时呢？
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> Will you for ever put me out of your memory, O Lord? will your face for ever be turned away from me?

我心里筹算，终日愁苦，要到几时呢？我的仇敌升高压制我，要到几时呢？
How long is my soul to be in doubt, with sorrow in my heart all the day? how long will he who is against me be given power over me?

耶和华我的神阿，求你看顾我，应允我，使我眼目光明，免得我沉睡至死。
Let my voice come before you, and give me an answer, O Lord my God; let your light be shining on me, so that the sleep of death may not overtake me;

免得我的仇敌说，我胜了他。免得我的敌人在我摇动的时候喜乐。
And he who is against me may not say, I have overcome him; and those who are troubling me may not be glad when I am moved.

但我倚靠你的慈爱。我的心因你的救恩快乐。
But I have had faith in your mercy; my heart will be glad in your salvation.

我要向耶和华歌唱，因他用厚恩待我。
I will make a song to the Lord, because he has given me my reward.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）愚顽人心里说，没有神。他们都是邪恶，行了可憎恶的事。没有一个人行善。
<To the chief music-maker. Of David.> The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.

耶和华从天上垂看世人，要看有明白的没有，有寻求神的没有。
The Lord was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.

他们都偏离正路，一同变为污秽。并没有行善的，连一个也没有。
They have all gone out of the way together; they are unclean, there is not one who does good, no, not one.

作孽的都没有知识吗？他们吞吃我的百姓，如同吃饭一样，并不求告耶和华。
Have all the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food as they would take bread; they make no prayer to the Lord.

他们在那里大大地害怕，因为神在义人的族类中。
Then were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the upright.

你们叫困苦人的谋算，变为羞辱。然而耶和华是他的避难所。
You have put to shame the thoughts of the poor, but the Lord is his support.

但愿以色列的救恩从锡安而出。耶和华救回他被掳的子民，那时雅各要快乐，以色列要欢喜。
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! when the fate of his people is changed by the Lord, Jacob will have joy and Israel will be glad.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，谁能寄居你的帐幕？谁能住在你的圣山？
<A Psalm. Of David.> Lord, who may have a resting-place in your tent, a living-place on your holy hill?

就是行为正直，作事公义，心里说实话的人。
He who goes on his way uprightly, doing righteousness, and saying what is true in his heart;

他不以舌头谗谤人，不恶待朋友，也不随伙毁谤邻里。
Whose tongue is not false, who does no evil to his friend, and does not take away the good name of his neighbour;

他眼中藐视匪类，却尊重那敬畏耶和华的人。他发了誓，虽然自己吃亏，也不更改。
Who gives honour to those who have the fear of the Lord, turning away from him who has not the Lord's approval. He who takes an oath against himself, and makes no change.

他不放债取利，不受贿赂以害无辜。行这些事的人，必永不动摇。
He who does not put out his money at interest, or for payment give false decisions against men who have done no wrong. He who does these things will never be moved.

（大卫的金诗。）神阿，求你保佑我，因为我投靠你。
<Michtam. Of David.> Keep me safe, O God: for in you I have put my faith.

我的心哪，你曾对耶和华说，你是我的主。我的好处不在你以外。
O my soul, you have said to the Lord, You are my Lord: I have no good but you.

论到世上的圣民，他们又美又善，是我最喜悦的。
As for the saints who are in the earth, they are the noble in whom is all my delight.

以别神代替耶和华的（或作送礼物给别神的），他们的愁苦必加增。他们所浇奠的血我不献上，我嘴唇也不提别神的名号。
Their sorrows will be increased who go after another god: I will not take drink offerings from their hands, or take their names on my lips.

耶和华是我的产业，是我杯中的分。我所得的你为我持守。
The Lord is my heritage and the wine of my cup; you are the supporter of my right.

用绳量给我的地界，坐落在佳美之处。我的产业实在美好。
Fair are the places marked out for me; I have a noble heritage.

我必称颂那指教我的耶和华。我的心肠在夜间也警戒我。
I will give praise to the Lord who has been my guide; knowledge comes to me from my thoughts in the night.

我将耶和华常摆在我面前。因他在我右边，我便不至摇动。
I have put the Lord before me at all times; because he is at my right hand, I will not be moved.

因此我的心欢喜，我的灵（原文作荣耀）快乐。我的肉身也要安然居住。
Because of this my heart is glad, and my glory is full of joy: while my flesh takes its rest in hope.

因为你必不将我的灵魂撇在阴间。也不叫你的圣者见朽坏。
For you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld; you will not let your loved one see the place of death.

你必将生命的道路指示我。在你面前有满足的喜乐。在你右手中有永远的福乐。
You will make clear to me the way of life; where you are joy is complete; in your right hand there are pleasures for ever and ever.

（大卫的祈祷。）耶和华阿，求你听闻公义，侧耳听我的呼吁。求你留心听我这不出于诡诈嘴唇的祈祷。
<A Prayer. Of David.> Let my cause come to your ears, O Lord, give attention to my cry; give ear to my prayer which goes not out from false lips.

愿我的判语从你面前发出。愿你的眼睛观看公正。
Be my judge; for your eyes see what is right.

你已经试验我的心。你在夜间鉴察我。你熬炼我，却找不着什么。我立志叫我口中没有过失。
You have put my heart to the test, searching me in the night; you have put me to the test and seen no evil purpose in me; I will keep my mouth from sin.

论到人的行为，我借着你嘴唇的言语，自己谨守，不行强暴人的道路。
As for the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the ways of the violent.

我的脚踏定了你的路径，我的两脚未曾滑跌。
I have kept my feet in your ways, my steps have not been turned away.

神阿，我曾求告你，因为你必应允我。求你向我侧耳，听我的言语。
My cry has gone up to you, for you will give me an answer, O God: let your ear be turned to me, and give attention to my words.

求你显出你奇妙的慈爱来。你是那用右手拯救投靠你的，脱离起来攻击他们的人。
Make clear the wonder of your mercy, O saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand, from those who come out against them.

求你保护我，如同保护眼中的瞳人。将我隐藏在你翅膀的荫下，
Keep me as the light of your eyes, covering me with the shade of your wings,

使我脱离那欺压我的恶人，就是围困我，要害我命的仇敌。
From the evil-doers who are violent to me, and from those who are round me, desiring my death.

他们的心被脂油包裹。他们用口说骄傲的话。
They are shut up in their fat: with their mouths they say words of pride.

他们围困了我们的脚步。他们瞪着眼，要把我们推倒在地。
They have made a circle round our steps: their eyes are fixed on us, forcing us down to the earth;

他像狮子急要抓食，又像少壮狮子蹲伏在暗处。
Like a lion desiring its food, and like a young lion waiting in secret places.

耶和华阿，求你起来，前去迎敌，将他打倒。用你的刀救护我命脱离恶人。
Up! Lord, come out against him, make him low, with your sword be my saviour from the evil-doer.

耶和华阿，求你用手救我脱离世人，脱离那只在今生有福分的世人。你把你的财宝充满他们的肚腹。他们因有儿女就心满意足，将其余的财物留给他们的婴孩。
With your hand, O Lord, from men, even men of the world, whose heritage is in this life, and whom you make full with your secret wealth: they are full of children; after their death their offspring take the rest of their goods.

至于我，我必在义中见你的面。我醒了的时候，得见你的形像（见或作看），就心满意足了。
As for me, I will see your face in righteousness: when I am awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form.

（耶和华的仆人大卫的诗，交与伶长。当耶和华救他脱离一切仇敌和扫罗之手的日子，他向耶和华念这诗的话。说：）耶和华我的力量阿，我爱你。
<To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord, of David, who said the words of this song to the Lord on the day when the Lord made him free from the hand of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul; and he said,> I will give you my love, O Lord, my strength.

耶和华是我的岩石，我的山寨，我的救主，我的神，我的磐石，我所投靠的。他是我的盾牌，是拯救我的角，是我的高台。
The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour; my God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

我要求告当赞美的耶和华。这样我必从仇敌手中被救出来。
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.

曾有死亡的绳索缠绕我。匪类的急流使我惊惧。
The cords of death were round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear.

阴间的绳索缠绕我。死亡的网罗临到我。
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.

我在急难中求告耶和华，向我的神呼求。他从殿中听了我的声音，我在他面前的呼求入了他的耳中。
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came before him, even into his ears.

那时因他发怒，地就摇撼战抖，山的根基也震动摇撼。
Then trouble and shock came on the earth; and the bases of the mountains were moved and shaking, because he was angry.

从他鼻孔冒烟上腾，从他口中发火焚烧。连炭也着了。
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: flames were lighted by it.

他又使天下垂，亲自降临。有黑云在他脚下。
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.

他坐着基路伯飞行。他借着风的翅膀快飞。
And he went in flight through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.

他以黑暗为藏身之处，以水的黑暗，天空的厚云，为他四围的行宫。
He made the dark his secret place; his tent round him was the dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.

因他面前的光辉，他的厚云行过。便有冰雹火炭。
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and fire.

耶和华也在天上打雷。至高者发出声音，便有冰雹火炭。
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out: a rain of ice and fire.

他射出箭来，使仇敌四散。多多发出闪电，使他们扰乱。
He sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.

耶和华阿，你的斥责一发，你鼻孔的气一出，海底就出现，大地的根基也显露。
Then the deep beds of the waters were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of your words of wrath, O Lord, because of the breath from your mouth.

他从高天伸手抓住我。把我从大水中拉上来。
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.

他救我脱离我的劲敌，和那些恨我的人。因为他们比我强盛。
He made me free from my strong hater, and from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.

我遭遇灾难的日子，他们来攻击我。但耶和华是我的倚靠。
They came on me in the day of my trouble; but the Lord was my support.

他又领我到宽阔之处。他救拔我，因他喜悦我。
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.

耶和华按着我的公义报答我，按着我手中的清洁赏赐我。
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.

因为我遵守了耶和华的道，未曾作恶离开我的神。
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.

他的一切典章常在我面前。他的律例我也未曾丢弃。
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.

我在他面前作了完全人。我也保守自己远离我的罪孽。
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.

所以耶和华按我的公义，按我在他眼前手中的清洁，偿还我。
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.

慈爱的人，你以慈爱待他。完全的人，你以完全待他。
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;

清洁的人，你以清洁待他。乖僻的人，你以弯曲待他。
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.

困苦的百姓，你必拯救。高傲的眼目，你必使他降卑。
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but eyes full of pride will be made low.

你必点着我的灯。耶和华我的神必照明我的黑暗。
You, O Lord, will be my light; by you, my God, the dark will be made bright for me.

我借着你冲入敌军，借着我的神跳过墙垣。
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in; by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.

至于神，他的道是完全的。耶和华的话是炼净的。凡投靠他的，他便作他们的盾牌。
As for God, his way is completely good; the word of the Lord is tested; he is a breastplate for all those who put their faith in him.

除了耶和华，谁是神呢？除了我们的神，谁是磐石呢？
For who is God but the Lord? or who is a Rock but our God?

惟有那以力量束我的腰，使我行为完全的，他是神。
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.

他使我的脚快如母鹿的蹄，又使我在高处安稳。
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.

他教导我的手能以争战，甚至我的膀臂能开铜弓。
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.

你把你的救恩给我作盾牌。你的右手扶持我。你的温和使我为大。
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation: your right hand has been my support, and your mercy has made me great.

你使我脚下的地步宽阔。我的脚未曾滑跌。
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet are kept from slipping.

我要追赶我的仇敌，并要追上他们。不将他们灭绝，我总不归回。
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.

我要打伤他们，使他们不能起来。他们必倒在我的脚下。
I will give them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.

因为你曾以力量束我的腰，使我能争战。你也使那起来攻击我的，都服在我以下。
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who come out against me.

你又使我的仇敌在我面前转背逃跑，叫我能以剪除那恨我的人。
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.

他们呼求，却无人拯救，就是呼求耶和华，他也不应允。
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.

我捣碎他们，如同风前的灰尘，倒出他们，如同街上的泥土。
Then they were crushed as small as dust before the wind; they were drained out like the waste of the streets.

你救我脱离百姓的争竞，立我作列国的元首。我素不认识的民必事奉我。
You have made me free from the fightings of the people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.

他们一听见我的名声，就必顺从我。外邦人要投降我。
From the time when my name comes to their ears they will be ruled by me: men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority.

外邦人要衰残，战战兢兢地出他们的营寨。
They will be wasting away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.

耶和华是活神。愿我的磐石被人称颂。愿救我的神被人尊崇。
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured.

这位神，就是那为我伸冤，使众民服在我以下的。
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.

你救我脱离仇敌。又把我举起，高过那些起来攻击我的。你救我脱离强暴的人。
He makes me free from my haters; I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.

耶和华阿，因此我要在外邦中称谢你，歌颂你的名。
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.

耶和华赐极大的救恩给他所立的王，施慈爱给他的受膏者，就是给大卫和他的后裔，直到永远。
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）诸天述说神的荣耀，穹苍传扬他的手段。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> The heavens are sounding the glory of God; the arch of the sky makes clear the work of his hands.

这日到那日发出言语。这夜到那夜传出知识。
Day after day it sends out its word, and night after night it gives knowledge.

无言无语，也无声音可听。
There are no words or language; their voice makes no sound.

他的量带通遍天下，他的言语传到地极。神在其间为太阳安设帐幕。
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them has he put a tent for the sun,

太阳如同新郎出洞房，又如勇士欢然奔路。
Who is like a newly married man coming from his bride-tent, and is glad like a strong runner starting on his way.

他从天这边出来，绕到天那边。没有一物被隐藏不得他的热气。
His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his circle to the ends of it; there is nothing which is not open to his heat.

耶和华的律法全备，能苏醒人心。耶和华的法度确定，能使愚人有智慧。
The law of the Lord is good, giving new life to the soul: the witness of the Lord is certain, giving wisdom to the foolish.

耶和华的训词正直，能快活人的心。耶和华的命令清洁，能明亮人的眼目。
The orders of the Lord are right, making glad the heart: the rule of the Lord is holy, giving light to the eyes.

耶和华的道理洁净，存到永远。耶和华的典章真实，全然公义。
The fear of the Lord is clean, and has no end; the decisions of the Lord are true and full of righteousness.

都比金子可羡慕，且比极多的精金可羡慕。比蜜甘甜，且比蜂房下滴的蜜甘甜。
More to be desired are they than gold, even than much shining gold; sweeter than the dropping honey.

况且你的仆人因此受警戒。守着这些便有大赏。
By them is your servant made conscious of danger, and in keeping them there is great reward.

谁能知道自己的错失呢？愿你赦免我隐而未现的过错。
Who has full knowledge of his errors? make me clean from secret evil.

求你拦阻仆人，不犯任意妄为的罪。不容这罪辖制我。我便完全，免犯大罪。
Keep your servant back from sins of pride; let them not have rule over me: then will I be upright and free from great sin.

耶和华我的磐石，我的救赎主阿，愿我口中的言语，心里的意念，在你面前蒙悦纳。
Let the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing in your eyes, O Lord, my strength and my salvation.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）愿耶和华在你遭难的日子应允你。愿名为雅各神的高举你。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> May the Lord give ear to you in the day of trouble; may you be placed on high by the name of the God of Jacob;

愿他从圣所救助你，从锡安坚固你。
May he send you help from the holy place, and give you strength from Zion;

记念你的一切供献，悦纳你的燔祭。（细拉）
May he keep all your offerings in mind, and be pleased with the fat of your burned offerings; (Selah.)

将你心所愿的赐给你，成就你的一切筹算。
May he give you your heart's desire, and put all your purposes into effect.

我们要因你的救恩夸胜，要奉我们神的名竖立旌旗。愿耶和华成就你一切所求的。
We will be glad in your salvation, and in the name of our God we will put up our flags: may the Lord give you all your requests.

现在我知道耶和华救护他的受膏者，必从他的圣天上应允他，用右手的能力救护他。
Now am I certain that the Lord gives salvation to his king; he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand.

有人靠车，有人靠马。但我们要提到耶和华我们神的名。
Some put their faith in carriages and some in horses; but we will be strong in the name of the Lord our God.

他们都屈身仆倒，我们却起来，立得正直。
They are bent down and made low; but we have been lifted up.

求耶和华施行拯救。我们呼求的时候，愿王应允我们。
Come to our help, Lord: let the king give ear to our cry.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，王必因你的能力欢喜。因你的救恩，他的快乐何其大。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> The king will be glad in your strength, O Lord; how great will be his delight in your salvation!

他心里所愿的，你已经赐给他。他嘴唇所求的，你未尝不应允。（细拉）
You have given him his heart's desire, and have not kept back the request of his lips. (Selah.)

你以美福迎接他，把精金的冠冕戴在他头上。
For you go before him with the blessings of good things: you put a crown of fair gold on his head.

他向你求寿，你便赐给他，就是日子长久，直到永远。
He made request to you for life, and you gave it to him, long life for ever and ever.

他因你的救恩大有荣耀。你又将尊荣威严加在他身上。
His glory is great in your salvation: honour and authority have you put on him.

你使他有洪福，直到永远。又使他在你面前欢喜快乐。
For you have made him a blessing for ever: you have given him joy in the light of your face.

王倚靠耶和华，因至高者的慈爱必不摇动。
For the king has faith in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be moved.

你的手要搜出你的一切仇敌。你的右手要搜出那些恨你的人。
Your hand will make a search for all your haters; your right hand will be hard on all those who are against you.

你发怒的时候，要使他们如在炎热的火炉中。耶和华要在他的震怒中吞灭他们。那火要把他们烧尽了。
You will make them like a flaming oven before you; the Lord in his wrath will put an end to them, and they will be burned up in the fire.

你必从世上灭绝他们的子孙（子孙原文作果子），从人间灭绝他们的后裔。
Their fruit will be cut off from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.

因为他们有意加害于你。他们想出计谋，却不能作成。
For their thoughts were bitter against you: they had an evil design in their minds, which they were not able to put into effect.

你必使他们转背逃跑，向他们的脸搭箭在弦。
Their backs will be turned when you make ready the cords of your bow against their faces.

耶和华阿，愿你因自己的能力显为至高。这样，我们就唱诗，歌颂你的大能。
Be lifted up, O Lord, in your strength; so will we make songs in praise of your power.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。调用朝鹿。）我的神，我的神，为什么离弃我。为什么远离不救我，不听我唉哼的言语。
<To the chief music-maker on Aijeleth-hash-shahar. A Psalm. Of David.> My God, my God, why are you turned away from me? why are you so far from helping me, and from the words of my crying?

我的神阿，我白日呼求，你不应允。夜间呼求，并不住声。
O my God, I make my cry in the day, and you give no answer; and in the night, and have no rest.

但你是圣洁的，是用以色列的赞美为宝座的（宝座或作居所）。
But you are holy, O you who are seated among the praises of Israel.

我们的祖宗倚靠你。他们倚靠你，你便解救他们。
Our fathers had faith in you: they had faith and you were their saviour.

他们哀求你，便蒙解救。他们倚靠你，就不羞愧。
They sent up their cry to you and were made free: they put their faith in you and were not put to shame.

但我是虫，不是人。被众人羞辱，被百姓藐视。
But I am a worm and not a man; cursed by men, and looked down on by the people.

凡看见我的都嗤笑我。他们撇嘴摇头，说，
I am laughed at by all those who see me: pushing out their lips and shaking their heads they say,

他把自己交托耶和华，耶和华可以救他吧。耶和华既喜悦他，可以搭救他吧。
He put his faith in the Lord; let the Lord be his saviour now: let the Lord be his saviour, because he had delight in him.

但你是叫我出母腹的。我在母怀里，你就使我有倚靠的心。
But it was you who took care of me from the day of my birth: you gave me faith even from my mother's breasts.

我自出母胎就被交在你手里。从我母亲生我，你就是我的神。
I was in your hands even before my birth; you are my God from the time when I was in my mother's body.

求你不要远离我。因为急难临近了，没有人帮助我。
Be not far from me, for trouble is near; there is no one to give help.

有许多公牛围绕我。巴珊大力的公牛四面困住我。
A great herd of oxen is round me: I am shut in by the strong oxen of Bashan.

他们向我张口，好像抓撕吼叫的狮子。
I saw their mouths wide open, like lions crying after food.

我如水被倒出来。我的骨头都脱了节。我心在我里面如蜡熔化。
I am flowing away like water, and all my bones are out of place: my heart is like wax, it has become soft in my body.

我的精力枯干，如同瓦片。我的舌头贴在我牙床上。你将我安置在死地的尘土中。
My throat is dry like a broken vessel; my tongue is fixed to the roof of my mouth, and the dust of death is on my lips.

犬类围着我。恶党环绕我。他们扎了我的手，我的脚。
Dogs have come round me: I am shut in by the band of evil-doers; they made wounds in my hands and feet.

我的骨头，我都能数过。他们瞪着眼看我。
I am able to see all my bones; their looks are fixed on me:

他们分我的外衣，为我的里衣拈阄。
They make a division of my robes among them, by the decision of chance they take my clothing.

耶和华阿，求你不要远离我。我的救主阿，求你快来帮助我。
Do not be far from me, O Lord: O my strength, come quickly to my help.

求你救我的灵魂脱离刀剑，救我的生命脱离犬类（生命原文作独一者）。
Make my soul safe from the sword, my life from the power of the dog.

救我脱离狮子的口。你已经应允我，使我脱离野牛的角。
Be my saviour from the lion's mouth; let me go free from the horns of the cruel oxen.

我要将你的名传与我的弟兄。在会中我要赞美你。
I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers: I will give you praise among the people.

你们敬畏耶和华的人，要赞美他。雅各的后裔，都要荣耀他。以色列的后裔，都要惧怕他。
You who have fear of the Lord, give him praise; all you seed of Jacob, give him glory; go in fear of him, all you seed of Israel.

因为他没有藐视憎恶受苦的人。也没有向他掩面。那受苦之人呼吁的时候，他就垂听。
For he has not been unmoved by the pain of him who is troubled; or kept his face covered from him; but he has given an answer to his cry.

我在大会中赞美你的话，是从你而来的。我要在敬畏耶和华的人面前还我的愿。
My praise will be of you in the great meeting: I will make my offerings before his worshippers.

谦卑的人必吃得饱足。寻求耶和华的人必赞美他。愿你们的心永远活着。
The poor will have a feast of good things: those who make search for the Lord will give him praise: your heart will have life for ever.

地的四极，都要想念耶和华，并且归顺他。列国的万族，都要在你面前敬拜。
All the ends of the earth will keep it in mind and be turned to the Lord: all the families of the nations will give him worship.

因为国权是耶和华的。他是管理万国的。
For the kingdom is the Lord's; he is the ruler among the nations.

地上一切丰肥的人，必吃喝而敬拜。凡下到尘土中不能存活自己性命的人，都要在他面前下拜。
All the fat ones of the earth will give him worship; all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him, even he who has not enough for the life of his soul.

他必有后裔事奉他。主所行的事，必传与后代。
A seed will be his servant; the doings of the Lord will be made clear to the generation which comes after.

他们必来把他的公义传给将要生的民，言明这事是他所行的。
They will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he has done this.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华是我的牧者。我必不至缺乏。
<A Psalm. Of David.> The Lord takes care of me as his sheep; I will not be without any good thing.

他使我躺卧在青草地上，领我在可安歇的水边。
He makes a resting-place for me in the green fields: he is my guide by the quiet waters.

他使我的灵魂苏醒，为自己的名引导我走义路。
He gives new life to my soul: he is my guide in the ways of righteousness because of his name.

我虽然行过死荫的幽谷，也不怕遭害。因为你与我同在。你的杖，你的竿，都安慰我。
Yes, though I go through the valley of deep shade, I will have no fear of evil; for you are with me, your rod and your support are my comfort.

在我敌人面前，你为我摆设筵席。你用油膏了我的头，使我的福杯满溢。
You make ready a table for me in front of my haters: you put oil on my head; my cup is overflowing.

我一生一世必有恩惠慈爱随着我。我且要住在耶和华的殿中，直到永远。
Truly, blessing and mercy will be with me all the days of my life; and I will have a place in the house of the Lord all my days.

（大卫的诗。）地和其中所充满的，世界和住在其间的，都属耶和华。
<A Psalm. Of David.> The earth is the Lord's, with all its wealth; the world and all the people living in it.

他把地建立在海上，安定在大水之上。
For by him it was based on the seas, and made strong on the deep rivers.

谁能登耶和华的山。谁能站在他的圣所。
Who may go up into the hill of the Lord? and who may come into his holy place?

就是手洁心清，不向虚妄，起誓不怀诡诈的人。
He who has clean hands and a true heart; whose desire has not gone out to foolish things, who has not taken a false oath.

他必蒙耶和华赐福，又蒙救他的神使他成义。
He will have blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.

这是寻求耶和华的族类，是寻求你面的雅各（细拉）。
This is the generation of those whose hearts are turned to you, even to your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)

众城门哪，你们要抬起头来。永久的门户，你们要被举起。那荣耀的王将要进来。
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.

荣耀的王是谁呢？就是有力有能的耶和华，在战场上有能的耶和华。
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of strength and power, the Lord strong in war.

众城门哪，你们要抬起头来。永久的门户，你们要把头抬起。那荣耀的王将要进来。
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; let them be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.

荣耀的王是谁呢？万军之耶和华，他是荣耀的王。（细拉）
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of armies, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，我的心仰望你。
<Of David.> To you, O Lord, my soul is lifted up.

我的神阿，我素来倚靠你。求你不要叫我羞愧。不要叫我的仇敌向我夸胜。
O my God, I have put my faith in you, let me not be shamed; let not my haters be glorying over me.

凡等候你的必不羞愧。惟有那无故行奸诈的，必要羞愧。
Let no servant of yours be put to shame; may those be shamed who are false without cause.

耶和华阿，求你将你的道指示我，将你的路教训我。
Make your steps clear to me, O Lord; give me knowledge of your ways.

求你以你的真理引导我，教训我。因为你是救我的神。我终日等候你。
Be my guide and teacher in the true way; for you are the God of my salvation; I am waiting for your word all the day.

耶和华阿，求你记念你的怜悯和慈爱。因为这是亘古以来所常有的。
O Lord, keep in mind your pity and your mercies; for they have been from the earliest times.

求你不要记念我幼年的罪愆，和我的过犯。耶和华阿，求你因你的恩惠，按你的慈爱记念我。
Do not keep in mind my sins when I was young, or my wrongdoing: let your memory of me be full of mercy, O Lord, because of your righteousness.

耶和华是良善正直的。所以他必指示罪人走正路。
Good and upright is the Lord: so he will be the teacher of sinners in the way.

他必按公平引领谦卑人，将他的道教训他们。
He will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit: he will make his way clear to them.

凡遵守他的约和他法度的人，耶和华都以慈爱诚实待他。
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness.

耶和华阿，求你因你的名赦免我的罪，因为我的罪重大。
Because of your name, O Lord, let me have forgiveness for my sin, which is very great.

谁敬畏耶和华，耶和华必指示他当选择的道路。
If a man has the fear of the Lord, the Lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure.

他必安然居住。他的后裔必承受地土。
His soul will be full of good things, and his seed will have the earth for its heritage.

耶和华与敬畏他的人亲密。他必将自己的约指示他们。
The secret of the Lord is with those in whose hearts is the fear of him; he will make his agreement clear to them.

我的眼目时常仰望耶和华。因为他必将我的脚从网里拉出来。
My eyes are turned to the Lord at all times; for he will take my feet out of the net.

求你转向我，怜恤我，因为我是孤独困苦。
Be turned to me, and have mercy on me; for I am troubled and have no helper.

我心里的愁苦甚多。求你救我脱离我的祸患。
The troubles of my heart are increased: O take me out of my sorrows.

求你看顾我的困苦，我的艰难，赦免我一切的罪。
Give thought to my grief and my pain; and take away all my sins.

求你察看我的仇敌，因为他们人多。并且痛痛的恨我。
See how those who are against me are increased, for bitter is their hate of me.

求你保护我的性命，搭救我，使我不至羞愧，因为我投靠你。
O keep my soul, and take me out of danger: let me not be shamed, for I have put my faith in you.

愿纯全正直保守我，因为我等候你。
For my clean and upright ways keep me safe, because my hope is in you.

神阿，求你救赎以色列脱离他一切的愁苦。
Give Israel salvation, O God, out of all his troubles.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，求你为我伸冤，因我向来行事纯全，我又倚靠耶和华并不摇动。
<Of David.> O Lord, be my judge, for my behaviour has been upright: I have put my faith in the Lord, I am not in danger of slipping.

耶和华阿，求你察看我，试验我，熬炼我的肺腑心肠。
Put me in the scales, O Lord, so that I may be tested; let the fire make clean my thoughts and my heart.

因为你的慈爱常在我眼前。我也按你的真理而行。
For your mercy is before my eyes; and I have gone in the way of your good faith.

我没有和虚谎人同坐。也不与瞒哄人的同群。
I have not taken my seat with foolish persons, and I do not go with false men.

我恨恶恶人的会，必不与恶人同坐。
I have been a hater of the band of wrongdoers, and I will not be seated among sinners.

耶和华阿，我要洗手表明无辜，才环绕你的祭坛。
I will make my hands clean from sin; so will I go round your altar, O Lord;

我好发称谢的声音。也要述说你一切奇妙的作为。
That I may give out the voice of praise, and make public all the wonders which you have done.

耶和华阿，我喜爱你所住的殿，和你显荣耀的居所。
Lord, your house has been dear to me, and the resting-place of your glory.

不要把我的灵魂和罪人一同除掉，不要把我的性命和流人血的一同除掉。
Let not my soul be numbered among sinners, or my life among men of blood;

他们的手中有奸恶，右手满有贿赂。
In whose hands are evil designs, and whose right hands take money for judging falsely.

至于我，却要行事纯全。求你救赎我，怜恤我。
But as for me, I will go on in my upright ways: be my saviour, and have mercy on me.

我的脚站在平坦地方。在众会中我要称颂耶和华。
I have a safe resting-place for my feet; I will give praise to the Lord in the meetings of the people.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华是我的亮光，是我的拯救。我还怕谁呢？耶和华是我性命的保障（保障或作力量），我还惧谁呢？
<Of David.> The Lord is my light and my salvation; who is then a cause of fear to me? the Lord is the strength of my life; who is a danger to me?

那作恶的，就是我的仇敌，前来吃我肉的时候，就绊跌仆倒。
When evil-doers, even my haters, came on me to put an end to me, they were broken and put to shame.

虽有军兵安营攻击我，我的心也不害怕。虽然兴起刀兵攻击我，我必仍旧安稳。
Even if an army came against me with its tents, my heart would have no fear: if war was made on me, my faith would not be moved.

有一件事，我曾求耶和华，我仍要寻求。就是一生一世住在耶和华的殿中，瞻仰他的荣美，在他的殿里求问。
One prayer have I made to the Lord, and this is my heart's desire; that I may have a place in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, looking on his glory, and getting wisdom in his Temple.

因为我遭遇患难，他必暗暗地保守我。在他亭子里，把我藏在他帐幕的隐密处，将我高举在磐石上。
For in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent: in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men's eyes; high on a rock he will put me.

现在我得以昂首，高过四面的仇敌。我要在他的帐幕里欢然献祭。我要唱诗，歌颂耶和华。
And now my head will be lifted up higher than my haters who are round me: because of this I will make offerings of joy in his tent; I will make a song, truly I will make a song of praise to the Lord.

耶和华阿，我用声音呼吁的时候，求你垂听。并求你怜恤我，应允我。
O Lord, let the voice of my cry come to your ears: have mercy on me, and give me an answer.

你说，你们当寻求我的面。那时我心向你说，耶和华阿，你的面我正要寻求。
When you said, Make search for my face, my heart said to you, For your face will I make my search.

不要向我掩面，不要发怒赶逐仆人。你向来是帮助我的。救我的神阿，不要丢掉我，也不要离弃我。
Let not your face be covered from me; do not put away your servant in wrath; you have been my help: do not give me up or take your support from me, O God of my salvation.

我父母离弃我，耶和华必收留我。
When my father and my mother are turned away from me, then the Lord will be my support.

耶和华阿，求你将你的道指教我，因我仇敌的缘故引导我走平坦的路。
Make your way clear to me, O Lord, guiding me by the right way, because of my haters.

求你不要把我交给敌人，遂其所愿，因为妄作见证的，和口吐凶言的，起来攻击我。
Do not give me into their hands, because false witnesses have come out against me, and men breathing destruction.

我若不信在活人之地得见耶和华的恩惠，就早已丧胆了
I had almost given up my hope of seeing the blessing of the Lord in the land of the living.

要等候耶和华。当壮胆，坚固你的心。我再说，要等候耶和华。
Let your hope be in the Lord: take heart and be strong; yes, let your hope be in the Lord.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，我要求告你。我的磐石阿，不要向我缄默。倘若你向我闭口，我就如将死的人一样。
<Of David.> My cry goes up to you, O Lord, my Rock; do not keep back your answer from me, so that I may not become like those who go down into the underworld.

我呼求你，向你至圣所举手的时候，求你垂听我恳求的声音。
Give ear to the voice of my prayer, when I am crying to you, when my hands are lifted up to your holy place.

不要把我和恶人，并作孽的，一同除掉。他们与邻舍说和平话，心里却是奸恶。
Do not take me away with the sinners and the workers of evil, who say words of peace to their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.

愿你按着他们所作的，并他们所行的恶事待他们。愿你照着他们手所作的待他们。将他们所应得的报应加给他们。
Give them the right reward of their acts, and of their evil doings: give them punishment for the works of their hands, let them have their full reward.

他们既然不留心耶和华所行的，和他手所作的，他就必毁坏他们，不建立他们。
Because they have no respect for the works of the Lord, or for the things which his hands have made, they will be broken down and not lifted up by him.

耶和华是应当称颂的，因为他听了我恳求的声音。
May the Lord be praised, because he has given ear to the voice of my prayer.

耶和华是我的力量，是我的盾牌。我心里倚靠他，就得帮助。所以我心中欢乐。我必用诗歌颂赞他。
The Lord is my strength and my breastplate, my heart had faith in him and I am helped; for this cause my heart is full of rapture, and I will give him praise in my song.

耶和华是他百姓的力量，又是他受膏者得救的保障。
The Lord is their strength, and a strong place of salvation for his king.

求你拯救你的百姓，赐福给你的产业，牧养他们，扶持他们，直到永远。
Be a saviour to your people, and send a blessing on your heritage: be their guide, and let them be lifted up for ever.

（大卫的诗。）神的众子阿，你们要将荣耀能力，归给耶和华。归给耶和华。
<A Psalm. Of David.> Give to the Lord, you sons of the gods, give to the Lord glory and strength.

要将耶和华的名所当得的荣耀归给他。以圣洁的妆饰（的或作为）敬拜耶和华。
Give to the Lord the full glory of his name; give him worship in holy robes.

耶和华的声音发在水上。荣耀的神打雷，耶和华打雷在大水之上。
The voice of the Lord is on the waters: the God of glory is thundering, the Lord is on the great waters.

耶和华的声音大有能力。耶和华的声音满有威严。
The voice of the Lord is full of power; the voice of the Lord has a noble sound.

耶和华的声音震破香柏树。耶和华震碎利巴嫩的香柏树。
By the voice of the Lord are the cedar-trees broken, even the cedars of Lebanon are broken by the Lord.

他也使之跳跃如牛犊，使利巴嫩和西连跳跃如野牛犊。
He makes them go jumping about like a young ox; Lebanon and Sirion like a young mountain ox.

耶和华的声音使火焰分岔。
At the voice of the Lord flames of fire are seen.

耶和华的声音震动旷野。耶和华震动加低斯的旷野。
At the voice of the Lord there is a shaking in the waste land, even a shaking in the waste land of Kadesh.

耶和华的声音惊动母鹿落胎，树木也脱落净光。凡在他殿中的，都称说他的荣耀。
At the voice of the Lord the roes give birth, the leaves are taken from the trees: in his Temple everything says, Glory.

洪水泛滥之时，耶和华坐着为王。耶和华坐着为王，直到永远。
The Lord had his seat as king when the waters came on the earth; the Lord is seated as king for ever.

耶和华必赐力量给他的百姓。耶和华必赐平安的福给他的百姓。
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will give his people the blessing of peace.

（大卫在献殿的时候，作这诗歌。）耶和华阿，我要尊崇你，因为你曾提拔我，不叫仇敌向我夸耀。
<A Psalm. A Song at the blessing of the House. Of David.> I will give you praise and honour, O Lord, because through you I have been lifted up; you have not given my haters cause to be glad over me.

耶和华我的神阿，我曾呼求你，你医治了我。
O Lord my God, I sent up my cry to you, and you have made me well.

耶和华阿，你曾把我的灵魂从阴间救上来，使我存活，不至于下坑。
O Lord, you have made my soul come again from the underworld: you have given me life and kept me from going down among the dead.

耶和华的圣民哪，你们要歌颂他，称赞他可记念的圣名。
Make songs to the Lord, O you saints of his, and give praise to his holy name.

因为他的怒气不过是转眼之间。他的恩典乃是一生之久。一宿虽然有哭泣，早晨便必欢呼。
For his wrath is only for a minute; in his grace there is life; weeping may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

至于我，我凡事平顺，便说，我永不动摇。
When things went well for me I said, I will never be moved.

耶和华阿，你曾施恩，叫我的江山稳固。你掩了面，我就惊惶。
Lord, by your grace you have kept my mountain strong: when your face was turned from me I was troubled.

耶和华阿，我曾求告你。我向耶和华恳求，说，
My voice went up to you, O Lord; I made my prayer to the Lord.

我被害流血，下到坑中，有什么益处呢？尘土岂能称赞你，传说你的诚实吗？
What profit is there in my blood if I go down into the underworld? will the dust give you praise, or be a witness to your help?

耶和华阿，求你应允我，怜恤我。耶和华阿，求你帮助我。
Give ear to me, O Lord, and have mercy on me: Lord, be my helper.

你已将我的哀哭变为跳舞，将我的麻衣脱去，给我披上喜乐。
By you my sorrow is turned into dancing; you have taken away my clothing of grief, and given me robes of joy;

好叫我的灵（原文作荣耀）歌颂你，并不住声。耶和华我的神阿，我要称谢你，直到永远。
So that my glory may make songs of praise to you and not be quiet. O Lord my God, I will give you praise for ever.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，我投靠你，求你使我永不羞愧，凭你的公义搭救我。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed; keep me safe in your righteousness.

求你侧耳而听，快快救我，作我坚固的磐石，拯救我的保障。
Let your ear be turned to me; take me quickly out of danger; be my strong Rock, my place of strength where I may be safe.

因为你是我的岩石，我的山寨。所以求你为你名的缘故，引导我，指点我。
For you are my Rock and my strong tower; go in front of me and be my guide, because of your name.

求你救我脱离人为我暗设的网罗。因为你是我的保障。
Take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly; for you are my strength.

我将我的灵魂交在你手里。耶和华诚实的神阿，你救赎了我。
Into your hands I give my spirit; you are my saviour, O Lord God for ever true.

我恨恶那信奉虚无之神的人。我却倚靠耶和华。
I am full of hate for those who go after false gods; but my hope is in the Lord.

我要为你的慈爱高兴欢喜。因为你见过我的困苦，知道我心中的艰难。
I will be glad and have delight in your mercy; because you have seen my trouble; you have had pity on my soul in its sorrows;

你未曾把我交在仇敌手里。你使我的脚站在宽阔之处。
And you have not given me into the hand of my hater; you have put my feet in a wide place.

耶和华阿，求你怜恤我，因为我在急难之中。我的眼睛因忧愁而干瘪，连我的身心，也不安舒。
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eyes are wasted with grief, I am wasted in soul and body.

我的生命为愁苦所消耗。我的年岁为叹息所旷废。我的力量因我的罪孽衰败。我的骨头也枯干。
My life goes on in sorrow, and my years in weeping; my strength is almost gone because of my sin, and my bones are wasted away.

我因一切敌人成了羞辱，在我的邻舍跟前更甚。那认识我的都惧怕我。在外头看见我的都躲避我。
Because of all those who are against me, I have become a word of shame to my neighbours; a cause of shaking the head and a fear to my friends: those who saw me in the street went in flight from me.

我被人忘记，如同死人，无人记念。我好像破碎的器皿。
I have gone from men's minds and memory like a dead man; I am like a broken vessel.

我听见了许多人的谗谤，四围都是惊吓。他们一同商议攻击我的时候，就图谋要害我的性命。
False statements against me have come to my ears; fear was on every side: they were talking together against me, designing to take away my life.

耶和华阿，我仍旧倚靠你。我说，你是我的神。
But I had faith in you, O Lord; I said, You are my God.

我终身的事在你手中。求你救我脱离仇敌的手，和那些逼迫我的人。
The chances of my life are in your hand; take me out of the hands of my haters, and of those who go after me.

求你使你的脸光照仆人，凭你的慈爱拯救我。
Let your servant see the light of your face; in your mercy be my saviour.

耶和华阿，求你叫我不至羞愧。因为我曾呼吁你。求你使恶人羞愧，使他们在阴间缄默无声。
Let me not be shamed, O Lord, for I have made my prayer to you; let the sinners be shamed, and let their mouths be shut in the underworld.

那撒谎的人，逞骄傲轻慢，出狂妄的话攻击义人。愿他的嘴哑而无言。
Let the false lips be shut, which say evil against the upright, looking down on him in their pride.

敬畏你投靠你的人，你为他们所积存的，在世人面前所施行的恩惠，是何等大呢。
O how great is your grace, which you have put in store for your worshippers, and which you have made clear to those who had faith in you, before the sons of men!

你必把他们藏在你面前的隐密处，免得遇见人的计谋。你必暗暗地保守他们在亭子里，免受口舌的争闹。
You will keep them safe in your house from the designs of man; in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongues.

耶和华是应当称颂的。因为他在坚固城里，向我施展奇妙的慈爱。
May the Lord be praised, because he has made clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town.

至于我，我曾急促的说，我从你眼前被隔绝。然而我呼求你的时候，你仍听我恳求的声音。
And as for me, I said in my fear, I am cut off from before your eyes; but you gave ear to the voice of my prayer, when my cry went up to you.

耶和华的圣民哪，你们都要爱他。耶和华保护诚实人，足足报应行事骄傲的人。
O have love for the Lord, all you his saints; for the Lord keeps safe from danger all those who are true to him, and gives the workers of pride their right reward.

凡仰望耶和华的人，你们都要壮胆，坚固你们的心。
Put away fear and let your heart be strong, all you whose hope is in the Lord.

（大卫的训诲诗。）得赦免其过，遮盖其罪的，这人是有福的。
<Of David. Maschil.> Happy is he who has forgiveness for his wrongdoing, and whose sin is covered.

凡心里没有诡诈，耶和华不算为有罪的，这人是有福的。
Happy is the man in whom the Lord sees no evil, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.

我闭口不认罪的时候，因终日唉哼，而骨头枯干。
When I kept my mouth shut, my bones were wasted, because of my crying all through the day.

黑夜白日，你的手在我身上沉重。我的精液耗尽，如同夏天的干旱。（细拉）
For the weight of your hand was on me day and night; my body became dry like the earth in summer. (Selah.)

我向你陈明我的罪，不隐瞒我的恶。我说，我要向耶和华承认我的过犯，你就赦免我的罪恶。（细拉）
I made my wrongdoing clear to you, and did not keep back my sin. I said, I will put it all before the Lord; and you took away my wrongdoing and my sin. (Selah.)

为此，凡虔诚人，都当趁你可寻找的时候祷告你。大水泛溢的时候，必不能到他那里。
For this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you are near: then the overflowing of the great waters will not overtake him.

你是我藏身之处。你必保佑我脱离苦难，以得救的乐歌，四面环绕我。（细拉）
You are my safe and secret place; you will keep me from trouble; you will put songs of salvation on the lips of those who are round me. (Selah.)

我要教导你，指示你当行的路。我要定睛在你身上劝戒你。
I will give you knowledge, teaching you the way to go; my eye will be your guide.

你不可像那无知的骡马，必用嚼环辔头勒住他，不然，就不能驯服。
Do not be like the horse or the ass, without sense; ...

恶人必多受苦楚。惟独倚靠耶和华的，必有慈爱四面环绕他。
The sinner will be full of trouble; but mercy will be round the man who has faith in the Lord.

你们义人应当靠耶和华欢喜快乐。你们心里正直的人，都当欢呼。
Be glad in the Lord with joy, you upright men; give cries of joy, all you whose hearts are true.

义人哪，你们应当靠耶和华欢乐。正直人的赞美是合宜的。
Be glad in the Lord, O doers of righteousness; for praise is beautiful for the upright.

你们应当弹琴称谢耶和华，用十弦瑟歌颂他。
Give praise to the Lord on the corded instrument; make melody to him with instruments of music.

应当向他唱新歌，弹得巧妙，声音洪亮。
Make a new song to him; playing expertly with a loud noise.

因为耶和华的言语正直。凡他所作的，尽都诚实。
For the word of the Lord is upright, and all his works are certain.

他喜爱仁义公平。遍地满了耶和华的慈爱。
His delight is in righteousness and wisdom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.

诸天借耶和华的命而造，万象借他口中的气而成。
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth.

他聚集海水如垒，收藏深洋在库房。
He makes the waters of the sea come together in a mass; he keeps the deep seas in store-houses.

愿全地都敬畏耶和华。愿世上的居民，都惧怕他。
Let the earth be full of the fear of the Lord; let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him.

因为他说有，就有。命立，就立。
For he gave the word, and it was done; by his order it was fixed for ever.

耶和华使列国的筹算归于无有，使众民的思念无有功效。
The Lord undoes the designs of the nations; he makes the thoughts of the peoples without effect.

耶和华的寿算永远立定，他心中的思念万代常存。
The Lord's purpose is eternal, the designs of his heart go on through all the generations of man.

以耶和华为神的，那国是有福的。他所拣选为自己产业的，那民是有福的。
Happy is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he has taken for his heritage.

耶和华从天上观看。他看见一切的世人。
The Lord is looking down from heaven; he sees all the sons of men;

从他的居所，往外察看地上一切的居民。
From his house he keeps watch on all who are living on the earth;

他是那造成他们众人心的，留意他们一切作为的。
He makes all their hearts; their works are clear to him.

君王不能因兵多得胜。勇士不能因力大得救。
A king's salvation is not in the power of his army; a strong man does not get free by his great strength.

靠马得救是枉然的。马也不能因力大救人。
A horse is a false hope; his great power will not make any man free from danger.

耶和华的眼目，看顾敬畏他的人，和仰望他慈爱的人，
See, the eye of the Lord is on those in whose hearts is the fear of him, on those whose hope is in his mercy;

要救他们的命脱离死亡，并使他们在饥荒中存活。
To keep their souls from death; and to keep them living in time of need.

我们的心向来等候耶和华。他是我们的帮助，我们的盾牌。
Our souls are waiting for the Lord; he is our help and our salvation.

我们的心必靠他欢喜，因为我们向来倚靠他的圣名。
For in him our hearts have joy; in his holy name is our hope.

耶和华阿，求你照着我们所仰望你的，向我们施行慈爱。
Let your mercy be on us, O Lord, as we are waiting for you.

（大卫在亚比米勒面前装疯，被他赶出去，就作这诗。）我要时时称颂耶和华。赞美他的话必常在我口中。
<Of David. When he made a change in his behaviour before Abimelech, who sent him away, and he went.> I will be blessing the Lord at all times; his praise will be ever in my mouth.

我的心必因耶和华夸耀。谦卑人听见，就要喜乐。
My soul will say great things of the Lord: the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad.

你们和我当称耶和华为大，一同高举他的名。
O give praise to the Lord with me; let us be witnesses together of his great name.

我曾寻求耶和华，他就应允我，救我脱离了一切的恐惧。
I was searching for the Lord, and he gave ear to my voice, and made me free from all my fears.

凡仰望他的，便有光荣。他们的脸，必不蒙羞。
Let your eyes be turned to him and you will have light, and your faces will not be shamed.

我这困苦人呼求，耶和华便垂听，救我脱离一切患难。
This poor man's cry came before the Lord, and he gave him salvation from all his troubles.

耶和华的使者，在敬畏他的人四围安营，搭救他们。
The angel of the Lord is ever watching over those who have fear of him, to keep them safe.

你们要尝尝主恩的滋味，便知道他是美善。投靠他的人有福了。
By experience you will see that the Lord is good; happy is the man who has faith in him.

耶和华的圣民哪，你们当敬畏他，因敬畏他的一无所缺。
Keep yourselves in the fear of the Lord, all you his saints; for those who do so will have no need of anything.

少壮狮子，还缺食忍饿。但寻求耶和华的。什么好处都不缺。
The young lions are in need and have no food; but those who are looking to the Lord will have every good thing.

众弟子阿，你们当来听我的话。我要将敬畏耶和华的道教训你们。
Come, children, give attention to me; I will be your teacher in the fear of the Lord.

有何人喜好存活，爱慕长寿，得享美福。
What man has a love of life, and a desire that his days may be increased so that he may see good?

就要禁止舌头不出恶言，嘴唇不说诡诈的话。
Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from words of deceit.

要离恶行善，寻求和睦，一心追赶。
Be turned from evil, and do good; make a search for peace, desiring it with all your heart.

耶和华的眼目，看顾义人，他的耳朵，听他们的呼求。
The eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their cry.

耶和华向行恶的人变脸，要从世上除灭他们的名号。
The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, to take away the memory of them from the earth.

义人呼求，耶和华听见了，便救他们脱离一切患难。
The cry of the upright comes before the Lord, and he takes them out of all their troubles.

耶和华靠近伤心的人，拯救灵性痛悔的人。
The Lord is near the broken-hearted; he is the saviour of those whose spirits are crushed down.

义人多有苦难。但耶和华救他脱离这一切。
Great are the troubles of the upright: but the Lord takes him safely out of them all.

又保全他一身的骨头，连一根也不折断。
He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.

恶必害死恶人。恨恶义人的，必被定罪。
Evil will put an end to the sinner, and those who are haters of righteousness will come to destruction.

耶和华救赎他仆人的灵魂。凡投靠他的，必不至定罪。
The Lord will be the saviour of the souls of his servants, and no one who has faith in him will be put to shame.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，与我相争的，求你与他们相争。与我相战的，求你与他们相战。
<Of David.> O Lord, be on my side against those who are judging me; be at war with those who make war against me.

拿着大小的盾牌，起来帮助我。
Be a breastplate to me, and give me your help.

抽出枪来，挡住那追赶我的。求你对我的灵魂说，我是拯救你的。
Take up your spear and keep back my attackers; say to my soul, I am your salvation.

愿那寻索我命的，蒙羞受辱。愿那谋害我的，退后羞愧。
Let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempts to take my soul; let those who would do me damage be turned back and made foolish.

愿他们像风前的糠，有耶和华的使者赶逐他们。
Let them be like dust from the grain before the wind; let the angel of the Lord send them in flight.

愿他们的道路，又暗又滑，有耶和华的使者追赶他们。
Let their way be dark and full of danger; let them be troubled by the angel of the Lord.

因他们无故地为我暗设网罗。无故地挖坑要害我的性命。
For without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly, in which to take my soul.

愿灾祸忽然临到他身上。愿他暗设的网缠住自己。愿他落在其中遭灾祸。
Let destruction come on them without their knowledge; let them be taken themselves in their secret nets, falling into the same destruction.

我的心必靠耶和华快乐，靠他的救恩高兴。
And my soul will have joy in the Lord; it will be glad in his salvation.

我的骨头都要说，耶和华阿，谁能象你救护困苦人，脱离那比他强壮的，救护困苦穷乏人，脱离那抢夺他的。
All my bones will say, Lord, who is like you? The saviour of the poor man from the hands of the strong, of him who is poor and in need from him who takes his goods.

凶恶的见证人起来，盘问我所不知道的事。
False witnesses got up: they put questions to me about crimes of which I had no knowledge.

他们向我以恶报善，使我的灵魂孤苦。
They gave me back evil for good, troubling my soul.

至于我，当他们有病的时候，我便穿麻衣，禁食刻苦己心。我所求的都归到自己的怀中。
But as for me, when they were ill I put on the clothing of sorrow: I went without food and was sad, and my prayer came back again to my heart.

我这样行，好像他是我的朋友，我的弟兄。我屈身悲哀，如同人为母亲哀痛。
My behaviour was as if it had been my friend or my brother: I was bent low in grief like one whose mother is dead.

我在患难中，他们却欢喜，大家聚集。我所不认识的那些下流人，聚集攻击我。他们不住地把我撕裂。
But they took pleasure in my trouble, and came together, yes, low persons came together against me without my knowledge; they never came to an end of wounding me.

他们如同席上好嬉笑的狂妄人，向我咬牙。
Like men of deceit they put me to shame; the voice of their wrath was loud against me.

主阿，你看着不理，要到几时呢？求你救我的灵魂，脱离他们的残害，救我的生命，脱离少壮狮子。（生命原文作独一者）
Lord, how long will you be looking on? take my soul from their destruction, my life from the lions.

我在大会中要称谢你，在众民中要赞美你。
I will give you praise in the great meeting; I will give you honour among a strong people.

求你不容那无理与我为仇的，向我夸耀。不容那无故恨我的，向我挤眼。
Do not let my haters be glad over me falsely; let not those who are against me without cause make sport of me.

因为他们不说和平话。倒想出诡诈的言语，害地上的安静人。
For they do not say words of peace; in their deceit they are designing evil things against the quiet ones in the land.

他们大大张口攻击我，说，阿哈，阿哈，我们的眼已经看见了。
Their mouths were open wide against me, and they said, Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.

耶和华阿，你已经看见了。求你不要闭口。主阿，求你不要远离我。
You have seen this, O Lord; be not unmoved: O Lord, be not far from me.

我的神我的主阿，求你奋兴醒起，判清我的事，伸明我的冤。
Be awake, O Lord, be moved to take up my cause, my God and my Lord.

耶和华我的神阿，求你按你的公义判断我，不容他们向我夸耀。
Be my judge, O Lord my God, in your righteousness; do not let them be glad over me.

不容他们心里说，阿哈，遂我们的心愿了。不容他们说，我们已经把他吞了。
Let them not say in their hearts, So we will have it: let them not say, We have put an end to him.

愿那喜欢我遭难的，一同抱愧蒙羞。愿那向我妄自尊大的，披惭愧，蒙羞辱。
Let all those who take pleasure in my troubles be shamed and come to nothing: let those who are lifted up against me be covered with shame and have no honour.

愿那喜悦我冤屈得伸的，（冤屈得伸原文作公义），欢呼快乐。愿他们常说，当尊耶和华为大。耶和华喜悦他的仆人平安。
Let those who are on my side give cries of joy; let them ever say, The Lord be praised, for he has pleasure in the peace of his servant.

我的舌头，要终日论说你的公义，时常赞美你。
And my tongue will be talking of your righteousness and of your praise all the day.

（耶和华的仆人大卫的诗，交与伶长。）恶人的罪过，在他心里说，我眼中不怕神。
<To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord. Of David.> The sin of the evil-doer says in his heart, There is no fear of the Lord before his eyes.

他自夸自媚，以为他的罪孽终不显露，不被恨恶。
For he takes comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncovered and hated.

他口中的言语，尽是罪孽诡诈。他与智慧善行，已经断绝。
In the words of his mouth are evil and deceit; he has given up being wise and doing good.

他在床上图谋罪孽，定意行不善的道，不憎恶恶事。
He gives thought to evil on his bed; he takes a way which is not good; he is not a hater of evil.

耶和华阿，你的慈爱，上及诸天。你的信实，达到穹苍。
Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and your strong purpose is as high as the clouds.

你的公义，好像高山。你的判断，如同深渊。耶和华阿，人民牲畜，你都救护。
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God; your judging is like the great deep; O Lord, you give life to man and beast.

神阿，你的慈爱，何其宝贵。世人投靠在你翅膀的荫下。
How good is your loving mercy, O God! the children of men take cover under the shade of your wings.

他们必因你殿里的肥甘，得以饱足。你也必叫他们喝你乐河的水
The delights of your house will be showered on them; you will give them drink from the river of your pleasures.

因为在你那里，有生命的源头。在你的光中，我们必得见光
For with you is the fountain of life: in your light we will see light.

愿你常施慈爱给认识你的人。常以公义待心里正直的人。
O let there be no end to your loving mercy to those who have knowledge of you, or of your righteousness to the upright in heart.

不容骄傲人的脚践踏我，不容凶恶人的手赶逐我。
Let not the foot of pride come against me, or the hand of the evil-doers put me out of my place.

在那里作孽的人，已经仆倒。他们被推倒，不能再起来。
There the workers of evil have come down: they have been made low, and will not be lifted up.

（大卫的诗。）不要为作恶的，心怀不平，也不要向那行不义的，生出嫉妒。
<Of David.> Do not be angry because of the wrongdoers, or have envy of the workers of evil.

因为他们如草快被割下，又如青菜快要枯干。
For they will quickly be cut down like grass, and become dry like the green plants.

你当倚靠耶和华而行善。住在地上，以他的信实为粮。
Have faith in the Lord, and do good; be at rest in the land, and go after righteousness.

又要以耶和华为乐。他就将你心里所求的赐给你。
So will your delight be in the Lord, and he will give you your heart's desires.

当将你的事交托耶和华，并倚靠他，他就必成全。
Put your life in the hands of the Lord; have faith in him and he will do it.

他要使你的公义，如光发出，使你的公平，明如正午。
And he will make your righteousness be seen like the light, and your cause like the shining of the sun.

你当默然倚靠耶和华，耐性等候他。不要因那道路通达的，和那恶谋成就的，心怀不平。
Take your rest in the Lord, waiting quietly for him; do not be angry because of the man who does well in his evil ways, and gives effect to his bad designs.

当止住怒气，离弃忿怒。不要心怀不平，以致作恶。
Put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter; do not give way to angry feeling which is a cause of sin.

因为作恶的，必被剪除。惟有等候耶和华的，必承受地土。
For the evil-doers will be cut off: but those who have faith in the Lord will have the earth for their heritage.

还有片时，恶人要归于无有。你就是细察他的住处，也要归于无有。
For in a short time the evil-doer will be gone: you will go searching for his place, and it will not be there.

但谦卑人必承受地土，以丰盛的平安为乐。
But the gentle will have the earth for their heritage; they will take their delight in peace without measure.

恶人设谋害义人，又向他咬牙。
The sinner has evil designs against the upright, lifting up the voice of wrath against him.

主要笑他，因见他受罚的日子将要来到。
He will be laughed at by the Lord, who sees that his day is coming.

恶人已经弓上弦，刀出鞘，要打倒困苦穷乏的人，要杀害行动正直的人。
The evil-doers have taken out their swords, their bows are bent; for crushing the poor, and to put to death those who are upright in their ways.

他们的刀，必刺入自己的心，他们的弓，必被折断。
But their swords will be turned into their hearts, and their bows will be broken.

一个义人所有的虽少，强过许多恶人的富余。
The little which the good man has is better than the wealth of evil-doers.

因为恶人的膀臂，必被折断。但耶和华是扶持义人。
For the arms of the evil-doers will be broken: but the Lord is the support of the good.

耶和华知道完全人的日子。他们的产业，要存到永远。
The days of the upright are numbered by the Lord, and their heritage will be for ever.

他们在急难的时候，不至羞愧，在饥荒的日子，必得饱足。
They will not be shamed in the evil time, and in the days when all are in need of food they will have enough.

恶人却要灭亡。耶和华的仇敌，要像羊羔的脂油。（或作像草地的华美）他们要消灭，要如烟消灭。
But the wrongdoers will come to destruction, and the haters of the Lord will be like the fat of lambs, they will be burned up; they will go up in smoke, and never again be seen.

恶人借贷而不偿还。义人却恩待人，并且施舍。
The sinner takes money and does not give it back; but the upright man has mercy, and gives to others.

蒙耶和华赐福的，必承受地土。被他咒诅的，必被剪除。
Those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage; but those who are cursed by him will be cut off.

义人的脚步，被耶和华立定。他的道路，耶和华也喜爱。
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he takes delight in his way.

他虽失脚，也不至全身仆倒。因为耶和华用手搀扶他。（或作搀扶他的手）
Even if he has a fall he will not be without help: for the hand of the Lord is supporting him.

我从前年幼，现在年老，却未见过义人被弃。也未见过他的后裔讨饭。
I have been young, and now am old, but I have not seen the good man without help, or his children looking for bread.

他终日恩待人，借给人。他的后裔也蒙福。
All the day he is ready to have mercy and to give; his children are a blessing.

你当离恶行善，就可永远安居。
Be turned from evil, and do good; and your place will be for ever.

因为耶和华喜爱公平，不撇弃他的圣民。他们永蒙保佑。但恶人的后裔，必被剪除。
For the Lord is a lover of righteousness, and takes care of his saints; they will be kept safe for ever; but the seed of the evil-doers will be cut off.

义人必承受地土，永居其上。
The upright will have the earth for their heritage, and will go on living there for ever.

义人的口谈论智慧，他的舌头讲说公平。
The mouth of the good man says words of wisdom; the talk of his tongue is of righteousness.

神的律法在他心里。他的脚总不滑跌。
The law of his God is in his heart; he will never make a false step.

恶人窥探义人，想要杀他。
The sinners are watching the upright man, desiring to put him to death.

耶和华必不撇他在恶人手中，当审判的时候，也不定他的罪。
The Lord will not give him into their hands, or be against him when he is judged.

你当等候耶和华，遵守他的道，他就抬举你，使你承受地土。恶人被剪除的时候，你必看见。
Be waiting for the Lord, and keep his way; and you will be lifted up, and have the land for your heritage: when the evil-doers are cut off, you will see it.

我见过恶人大有势力，好像一根青翠树在本土生发。
I have seen the evil-doer in great power, covering the earth like a great tree.

有人从那里经过，不料，他没有了。我也寻找他，却寻不着。
But he came to an end, and there was no sign of him; I made a search for him and he was not there.

你要细察那完全人，观看那正直人。因为和平人有好结局。
Give attention to the good man, and take note of the upright; because the end of that man is peace.

至于犯法的人，必一同灭绝。恶人终必剪除。
But as for the sinners, they will be cut off together; the end of the wrongdoers is destruction.

但义人得救，是由于耶和华。他在患难时作他们的营寨。
But the Lord is the saviour of the upright: he is their strength in the time of trouble.

耶和华帮助他们，解救他们。他解救他们脱离恶人，把他们救出来，因为他们投靠他。
And the Lord will be their help, and keep them safe: he will take them out of the hands of the evil-doers, and be their saviour, because they had faith in him.

（大卫的记念诗）耶和华阿，求你不要在怒中责备我。不要在烈怒中惩罚我。
<A Psalm. Of David. To keep in memory.> O Lord, be not bitter with me in your wrath; let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion.

因为你的箭射入我身，你的手压住我。
For your arrows have gone into my flesh, and I am crushed under the weight of your hand.

因你的恼怒，我的肉无一完全。因我的罪过，我的骨头也不安宁。
My flesh is wasted because of your wrath; and there is no peace in my bones because of my sin.

我的罪孽高过我的头，如同重担叫我担当不起。
For my crimes have gone over my head; they are like a great weight which is more than my strength.

因我的愚昧，我的伤发臭流脓。
My wounds are poisoned and evil-smelling, because of my foolish behaviour.

我疼痛，大大拳曲，终日哀痛。
I am troubled, I am made low; I go weeping all the day.

我满腰是火。我的肉无一完全。
For my body is full of burning; all my flesh is unhealthy.

我被压伤，身体疲倦。因心里不安，我就唉哼。
I am feeble and crushed down; I gave a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart.

主阿，我的心愿都在你面前。我的叹息不向你隐瞒。
Lord, all my desire is before you; my sorrow is not kept secret from you.

我心跳动，我力衰微，连我眼中的光，也没有了。
My heart goes out in pain, my strength is wasting away; as for the light of my eyes, it is gone from me.

我的良朋密友，因我的灾病，都躲在旁边站着。我的亲戚本家，也远远地站立。
My lovers and my friends keep away from my disease; my relations keep far away.

那寻索我命的，设下网罗。那想要害我的，口出恶言，终日思想诡计。
Those who have a desire to take my life put nets for me; those who are designing my destruction say evil things against me, all the day their minds are full of deceit.

但我如聋子不听，像哑巴不开口。
But I kept my ears shut like a man without hearing; like a man without a voice, never opening his mouth.

我如不听见的人，口中没有回话。
So I was like a man whose ears are shut, and in whose mouth there are no sharp words.

耶和华阿，我仰望你。主我的神阿，你必应允我。
In you, O Lord, is my hope: you will give me an answer, O Lord, my God.

我曾说，恐怕他们向我夸耀。我失脚的时候，他们向我夸大。
I said, Let them not be glad over me; when my foot is moved, let them not be lifted up with pride against me.

我几乎跌倒，我的痛苦常在我面前。
My feet are near to falling, and my sorrow is ever before me.

我要承认我的罪孽。我要因我的罪忧愁。
I will make clear my wrongdoing, with sorrow in my heart for my sin.

但我的仇敌又活泼又强壮。无理恨我的增多了。
But they are strong who have hate for me without cause: those who are against me falsely are increased in numbers.

以恶报善的与我作对，因我是追求良善。
They give me back evil for good; they are my haters because I go after the thing which is right.

耶和华阿，求你不要撇弃我。我的神阿，求你不要远离我。
Do not give me up, O Lord; O my God, be near to me.

拯救我的主阿，求你快快帮助我。
Come quickly to give me help, O Lord, my salvation.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长耶杜顿。）我曾说，我要谨慎我的言行，免得我舌头犯罪。恶人在我面前的时候，我要用嚼环勒住我的口。
<To the chief music-maker. Of Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.> I said, I will give attention to my ways, so that my tongue may do no wrong; I will keep my mouth under control, while the sinner is before me.

我默然无声，连好话也不出口。我的愁苦就发动了。
I made no sound, I said no word, even of good; and I was moved with sorrow.

我的心在我里面发热。我默想的时候，火就烧起，我便用舌头说话。
My heart was burning in my breast; while I was deep in thought the fire was lighted; then I said with my tongue,

耶和华阿，求你叫我晓得我身之终，我的寿数几何，叫我知道我的生命不长。
Lord, give me knowledge of my end, and of the measure of my days, so that I may see how feeble I am.

你使我的年日，窄如手掌。我一生的年数，在你面前，如同无有。各人最稳妥的时候，真是全然虚幻。（细拉）
You have made my days no longer than a hand's measure; and my years are nothing in your eyes; truly, every man is but a breath. (Selah.)

世人行动实系幻影。他们忙乱，真是枉然。积蓄财宝，不知将来有谁收取。
Truly, every man goes on his way like an image; he is troubled for no purpose: he makes a great store of wealth, and has no knowledge of who will get it.

主阿，如今我等什么呢？我的指望在乎你。
And now, Lord, what am I waiting for? my hope is in you.

求你救我脱离一切的过犯。不要使我受愚顽人的羞辱。
Make me free from all my sins; do not let me be shamed by the man of evil behaviour.

因我所遭遇的是出于你，我就默然不语。
I was quiet, and kept my mouth shut; because you had done it.

求你把你的责罚，从我身上免去。因你手的责打，我便消灭。
No longer let your hand be hard on me; I am wasted by the blows of your hand.

你因人的罪恶，惩罚他的时候，叫他的笑容消灭，（的笑容或作所喜爱的）如衣被虫所咬。世人真是虚幻。（细拉）
By the weight of your wrath against man's sin, the glory of his form is wasted away; truly every man is but a breath. (Selah.)

耶和华阿。求你听我的祷告，留心听我的呼求。我流泪，求你不要静默无声。因为我在你面前是客旅，是寄居的，像我列祖一般。
Let my prayer come to your ears, O Lord, and give attention to my cry, make an answer to my weeping: for my time here is short before you, and in a little time I will be gone, like all my fathers.

求你宽容我，使我在去而不返之先，可以力量复原。
Let your wrath be turned away from me, so that I may be comforted, before I go away from here, and become nothing.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长）我曾耐性等候耶和华。他垂听我的呼求。
<To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.> When I was waiting quietly for the Lord, his heart was turned to me, and he gave ear to my cry.

他从祸坑里，从淤泥中，把我拉上来，使我的脚立在磐石上，使我脚步稳当。
He took me up out of a deep waste place, out of the soft and sticky earth; he put my feet on a rock, and made my steps certain.

他使我口唱新歌，就是赞美我们神的话。许多人必看见而惧怕，并要倚靠耶和华。
And he put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God; numbers have seen it with fear, and put their faith in the Lord.

那倚靠耶和华，不理会狂傲和偏向虚假之辈的，这人便为有福。
Happy is the man who has faith in the Lord, and does not give honour to the men of pride or to those who are turned away to deceit.

耶和华我的神阿，你所行的奇事，并你向我们所怀的意念甚多，不能向你陈明。若要陈明，其事不可胜数。
O Lord my God, great are the wonders which you have done in your thought for us; it is not possible to put them out in order before you; when I would give an account of them, their number is greater than I may say.

祭物和礼物，你不喜悦。你已经开通我的耳朵。燔祭和赎罪祭，非你所要。
You had no desire for offerings of beasts or fruits of the earth; ears you made for me: for burned offerings and sin offerings you made no request.

那时我说，看哪，我来了。我的事在经卷上已经记载了。
Then I said, See, I come; it is recorded of me in the roll of the book,

我的神阿，我乐意照你的旨意行。你的律法在我心里。
My delight is to do your pleasure, O my God; truly, your law is in my heart.

我在大会中宣传公义的佳音。我必不止住我的嘴唇。耶和华阿，这是你所知道的。
I have given news of righteousness in the great meeting; O Lord, you have knowledge that I have not kept back my words.

我未曾把你的公义藏在心里。我已陈明你的信实，和你的救恩。我在大会中未曾隐瞒你的慈爱，和诚实。
Your righteousness has not been folded away in my heart; I have made clear your true word and your salvation; I have not kept secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting.

耶和华阿，求你不要向我止住你的慈悲。愿你的慈爱和诚实，常常保佑我。
Take not away your gentle mercies from me, O Lord; let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever.

因有无数的祸患围困我。我的罪孽追上了我，使我不能昂首。这罪孽比我的头发还多。我就心寒胆战。
For unnumbered evils are round about me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I am bent down with their weight; they are more than the hairs of my head, my strength is gone because of them.

耶和华阿，求你开恩搭救我。耶和华阿，求你速速帮助我。
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me out of danger; O Lord, come quickly and give me help.

愿那些寻找我，要灭我命的，一同抱愧蒙羞。愿那些喜悦我受害的，退后受辱。
Let those who go after my soul for its destruction have shame and trouble together; let them be turned back and made foolish who take pleasure in my trouble.

愿那些对我说，阿哈，阿哈的，因羞愧而败亡。
Let those who say to me, Aha, aha! be surprised because of their shame.

愿一切寻求你的，因你高兴欢喜。愿那些喜爱你救恩的，常说，当尊耶和华为大。
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May the Lord be great.

但我是困苦穷乏的，主仍顾念我。你是帮助我的，搭救我的。神阿，求你不要耽延。
Though I am poor and in need, the Lord has me in mind; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O my God.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）眷顾贫穷的有福了。他遭难的日子，耶和华必搭救他。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> Happy is the man who gives thought to the poor; the Lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble.

耶和华必保全他，使他存活。他必在地上享福。求你不要把他交给仇敌，遂其所愿。
The Lord will keep him safe, and give him life; the Lord will let him be a blessing on the earth, and will not give him into the hand of his haters.

他病重在榻，耶和华必扶持他。他在病中，你必给他铺床。
The Lord will be his support on his bed of pain: by you will all his grief be turned to strength.

我曾说，耶和华阿，求你怜恤我，医治我。因为我得罪了你。
I said, Lord, have mercy on me; make my soul well, because my faith is in you.

我的仇敌用恶言议论我，说，他几时死，他的名才灭亡呢？
My haters say evil against me, When will he be dead, and his name come to an end?

他来看我，就说假话。他心存奸恶，走到外边才说出来。
If one comes to see me, deceit is in his heart; he keeps a store of evil, which he makes public in every place.

一切恨我的，都交头接耳的议论我。他们设计要害我。
All my haters are talking secretly together against me; they are designing my downfall.

他们说，有怪病贴在他身上。他已躺卧，必不能再起来。
They say, He has an evil disease, which will not let him go: and now that he is down he will not get up again.

连我知己的朋友，我所倚靠吃过我饭的，也用脚踢我。
Even my dearest friend, in whom I had faith, who took bread with me, is turned against me.

耶和华阿，求你怜恤我，使我起来，好报复他们。
But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, lifting me up, so that I may give them their punishment.

因我的仇敌不得向我夸胜。我从此便知道你喜爱我。
By this I see that you have pleasure in me, because my hater does not overcome me.

你因我纯正，就扶持我，使我永远站在你的面前。
And as for me, you are my support in my righteousness, giving me a place before your face for ever.

耶和华以色列的神，是应当称颂的，从亘古直到永远。阿们，阿们。
May the Lord God of Israel be praised, through eternal days and for ever. So be it. So be it.

（可拉后裔的训诲诗，交与伶长。）神阿，我的心切慕你，如鹿切慕溪水。
<To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of the sons of Korah.> Like the desire of the roe for the water-streams, so is my soul's desire for you, O God.

我的心渴想神，就是永生神。我几时得朝见神呢？
My soul is dry for need of God, the living God; when may I come and see the face of God?

我昼夜以眼泪当饮食。人不住地对我说，你的神在哪里呢？
My tears have been my food day and night, while they keep saying to me, Where is your God?

我从前与众人同往，用欢呼称赞的声音，领他们到神的殿里，大家守节。我追想这些事，我的心极其悲伤。
Let my soul be overflowing with grief when these things come back to my mind, how I went in company to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the song of those who were keeping the feast.

我的心哪，你为何忧闷，为何在我里面烦躁。应当仰望神。因他笑脸帮助我，我还要称赞他。
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.

我的神阿，我的心在我里面忧闷。所以我从约但地，从黑门岭，从米萨山，记念你。
My soul is crushed down in me, so I will keep you in mind; from the land of Jordan and of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.

你的瀑布发声，深渊就与深渊响应。你的波浪洪涛漫过我身。
Deep is sounding to deep at the noise of your waterfalls; all your waves have gone rolling over me.

白昼耶和华必向我施慈爱。黑夜我要歌颂祷告赐我生命的神。
But the Lord will send his mercy in the daytime, and in the night his song will be with me, a prayer to the God of my life.

我要对神我的磐石说，你为何忘记我呢？我为何因仇敌的欺压时常哀痛呢？
I will say to God my Rock, Why have you let me go from your memory? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?

我的敌人辱骂我，好像打碎我的骨头，不住地对我说，你的神在哪里呢？
The cruel words of my haters are like a crushing of my bones; when they say to me every day, Where is your God?

我的心哪，你为何忧闷？为何在我里面烦躁？应当仰望神。因我还要称赞他。他是我脸上的光荣，（原文作帮助），是我的神。
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.

神阿，求你伸我的冤，向不虔诚的国，为我辨屈。求你救我脱离诡诈不义的人。
Be my judge, O God, supporting my cause against a nation without religion; O keep me from the false and evil man.

因为你是赐我力量的神，为何丢弃我呢？我为何因仇敌的欺压时常哀痛呢？
You are the God of my strength; why have you put me from you? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?

求你发出你的亮光和真实，好引导我，带我到你的圣山，到你的居所。
O send out your light and your true word; let them be my guide: let them take me to your holy hill, and to your tents.

我就走到神的祭坛，到我最喜乐的神那里。神阿，我的神，我要弹琴称赞你。
Then I will go up to the altar of God, to the God of my joy; I will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music, O God, my God.

我的心哪，你为何忧闷？为何在我里面烦躁？应当仰望神。因我还要称赞他。他是我脸上的光荣，（原文作帮助）是我的神。
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God, for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.

（可拉后裔的训诲诗，交与伶长。）神阿，你在古时，我们列祖的日子，所行的事，我们亲耳听见了，我们的列祖，也给我们述说过。
<To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah Maschil.> It has come to our ears, O God, our fathers have given us the story, of the works which you did in their days, in the old times,

你曾用手赶出外邦人，却栽培了我们列祖。你苦待列邦，却叫我们列祖发达。
Uprooting the nations with your hand, and planting our fathers in their place; cutting down the nations, but increasing the growth of your people.

因为他们不是靠自己的刀剑得地土，也不是靠自己的膀臂得胜。乃是靠你的右手，你的膀臂，和你脸上的亮光，因为你喜悦他们。
For they did not make the land theirs by their swords, and it was not their arms which kept them safe; but your right hand, and your arm, and the light of your face, because you had pleasure in them.

神阿，你是我的王，求你出令，使雅各得胜。
You are my King and my God; ordering salvation for Jacob.

我们靠你要推倒我们的敌人。靠你的名要践踏那起来攻击我们的人。
Through you will we overcome our haters; by your name will they be crushed under our feet who are violent against us.

因为我必不靠我的弓，我的刀也不能使我得胜。
I will not put faith in my bow, my sword will not be my salvation.

惟你救了我们脱离敌人，使恨我们的人羞愧。
But it is you who have been our saviour from those who were against us, and have put to shame those who had hate for us.

我们终日因神夸耀，还要永远称谢你的名。（细拉）
Our pride is in God at all times, to his name we give praise for ever. (Selah.)

但如今你丢弃了我们，使我们受辱，不和我们的军兵同去。
But now you have sent us away from you, and put us to shame; you do not go out with our armies.

你使我们向敌人转身退后。那恨我们的人任意抢夺。
Because of this we are turned back by the attacker: those who have hate for us take our goods for themselves.

你使我们当作快要被吃的羊，把我们分散在列邦中。
You have made us like sheep which are taken for meat; we are put to flight among the nations.

你卖了你的子民，也不赚利。所得的价值，并不加添你的资财。
You let your people go for nothing; your wealth is not increased by their price.

你使我们受邻国的羞辱，被四围的人嗤笑讥刺。
You have made us to be looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and shamed by those who are round about us.

你使我们在列邦中作了笑谈，使众民向我们摇头。
Our name is a word of shame among the nations, a sign for the shaking of heads among the peoples.

我的凌辱，终日在我面前。我脸上的羞愧，将我遮蔽。
My downfall is ever before me, and I am covered with the shame of my face;

都因那辱骂毁谤人的声音，又因仇敌和报仇人的缘故。
Because of the voice of him who says sharp and bitter words; because of the hater and him who is the instrument of punishment.

这都临到我们身上。我们却没有忘记你。也没有违背你的约。
All this has come on us, but still we have kept you in our memory; and we have not been false to your word.

我们的心没有退后，我们的脚也没有偏离你的路。
Our hearts have not gone back, and our steps have not been turned out of your way;

你在野狗之处压伤我们，用死荫遮蔽我们。
Though you have let us be crushed in the place of jackals, though we are covered with darkest shade.

倘若我们忘了神的名，或向别神举手，
If the name of our God has gone out of our minds, or if our hands have been stretched out to a strange god,

神岂不鉴察这事吗？因为他晓得人心里的隐秘。
Will not God make search for it? for he sees the secrets of the heart.

我们为你的缘故终日被杀，人看我们如将宰的羊。
Truly, because of you we are put to death every day; we are numbered like sheep for destruction.

主阿，求你睡醒，为何尽睡呢？求你兴起，不要永远丢弃我们。
Why are you sleeping, O Lord? awake! and come to our help, do not give us up for ever.

你为何掩面，不顾我们所遭的苦难，和所受的欺压。
Why is your face covered, and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate?

我们的性命伏于尘土。我们的肚腹紧贴地面。
For our souls are crushed down to the dust: our bodies are stretched out on the earth.

求你起来帮助我们，凭你的慈爱救赎我们。
Up! and come to our help, and give us salvation because of your mercy.

（可拉后裔的训诲诗，又是爱慕歌，交与伶长，调用百合花。）我心里涌出美辞。我论到我为王作的事。我的舌头是快手笔。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves.> My heart is flowing over with good things; my words are of that which I have made for a king; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.

你比世人更美，在你嘴里满有恩惠。所以神赐福给你，直到永远。
You are fairer than the children of men; grace is flowing through your lips; for this cause the blessing of God is with you for ever.

大能者阿，愿你腰间佩刀，大有荣耀和威严。
Put on your sword, make it ready at your side, O strong chief, with your glory and power.

为真理，谦卑，公义，赫然坐车前往，无不得胜。你的右手必显明可畏的事。
And go nobly on in your power, because you are good and true and without pride; and your right hand will be teaching you things of fear.

你的箭锋快，射中王敌之心。万民仆倒在你以下。
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's haters; because of them the peoples are falling under you.

神阿，你的宝座是永永远远的，你的国权是正直的。
Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; the rod of your kingdom is a rod of honour.

你喜爱公义，恨恶罪恶。所以神，就是你的神，用喜乐油膏你，胜过膏你的同伴。
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil: and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head, lifting you high over all other kings.

你的衣服，都有没药沉香肉桂的香气。象牙宫中有丝弦乐器的声音，使你欢喜。
Your robes are full of the smell of all sorts of perfumes and spices; music from the king's ivory houses has made you glad.

有君王的女儿，在你尊贵妇女之中。王后佩戴俄斐金饰，站在你右边。
Kings' daughters are among your noble women: on your right is the queen in gold of Ophir.

女子阿，你要听，要想，要侧耳而听。不要记念你的民，和你的父家。
O daughter, give thought and attention, and let your ear be open; no longer keep in mind your people, and your father's house;

王就羡慕你的美貌。因为他是你的主。你当敬拜他。
So will the king have a great desire for you, seeing how beautiful you are; because he is your lord, give him honour.

推罗的民，（民原文作女子），必来送礼。民中的富足人，也必向你求恩。
And the daughters of Tyre will be there with an offering; those who have wealth among the people will be looking for your approval.

王女在宫里，极其荣华。他的衣服是用金线绣的。
In the great house the king's daughter is all shining: her clothing is worked with gold.

他要穿锦绣的衣服，被引到王前。随从他的陪伴童女，也要被带到你面前。
She will come before the king in robes of needlework; the virgins in her train will come before you.

他们要欢喜快乐被引导。他们要进入王宫。
With joy and rapture will they come; they will go into the king's house.

你的子孙要接续你的列祖。你要立他们在全地作王。
Your children will take the place of your fathers; so that you may make them rulers over all the earth.

我必叫你的名被万代记念。所以万民要永永远远称谢你。
I will keep the memory of your name living through all generations; and because of this the people will give you praise for ever.

（可拉后裔的诗歌，交与伶长，调用女音。）神是我们的避难所，是我们的力量，是我们在患难中随时的帮助。
<To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah; put to Alamoth. A Song.> God is our harbour and our strength, a very present help in trouble.

所以地虽改变，山虽摇动到海心，
For this cause we will have no fear, even though the earth is changed, and though the mountains are moved in the heart of the sea;

其中的水虽砰訇翻腾，山虽因海涨而战抖，我们也不害怕。（细拉）。
Though its waters are sounding and troubled, and though the mountains are shaking with their violent motion. (Selah.)

有一道河。这河的分汊，使神的城欢喜。这城就是至高者居住的圣所。
There is a river whose streams make glad the resting-place of God, the holy place of the tents of the Most High.

神在其中。城必不动摇。到天一亮，神必帮助这城。
God has taken his place in her; she will not be moved: he will come to her help at the dawn of morning.

外邦喧嚷，列国动摇。神发声，地便熔化。
The nations were angry, the kingdoms were moved; at the sound of his voice the earth became like wax.

万军之耶和华与我们同在。雅各的神是我们的避难所。（细拉）。
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)

你们来看耶和华的作为，看他使地怎样荒凉。
Come, see the works of the Lord, the destruction which he has made in the earth.

他止息刀兵，直到地极。他折弓断枪，把战车焚烧在火中。
He puts an end to wars over all the earth; by him the bow is broken, and the spear cut in two, and the carriage burned in the fire.

你们要休息，要知道我是神。我必在外邦中被尊崇，在遍地上也被尊崇。
Be at peace in the knowledge that I am God: I will be lifted up among the nations, I will be honoured through all the earth.

万军之耶和华与我们同在。雅各的神，是我们的避难所。
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)

（可拉后裔的诗，交与伶长。）万民哪，你们都要拍掌。要用夸胜的声音向神呼喊。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.> O make a glad noise with your hands, all you peoples; letting your voices go up to God with joy.

因为耶和华至高者是可畏的。他是治理全地的大君王。
For the Lord Most High is to be feared; he is a great King over all the earth.

他叫万民服在我们以下，又叫列邦服在我们脚下。
He will put down the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.

他为我们选择产业，就是他所爱之雅各的荣耀。（细拉）。
He will give us our heritage, the glory of Jacob who is dear to him. (Selah.)

神上升，有喊声相送。耶和华上升，有角声相送。
God has gone up with a glad cry, the Lord with the sound of the horn.

你们要向神歌颂，歌颂，向我们王歌颂，歌颂。
Give praises to God, make songs of praise; give praises to our King, make songs of praise.

因为神是全地的王。你们要用悟性歌颂。
For God is the King of all the earth; make songs of praise with knowledge.

神作王治理万国。神坐在他的圣宝座上。
God is the ruler over the nations; God is on the high seat of his holy rule.

列邦的君王聚集，要作亚伯拉罕之神的民。因为世界的盾牌，是属神的。他为至高。
The rulers of the peoples have come together, with the people of the God of Abraham; because the powers of the earth are God's: he is lifted up on high.

（可拉后裔的诗歌。）耶和华本为大，在我们神的城中，在他的圣山上，该受大赞美。
<A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.> Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, in the town of our God, in his holy mountain.

锡安山，大君王的城，在北面居高华美，为全地所喜悦。
Beautiful in its high position, the joy of all the earth, is the mountain of Zion, the mountain of God, the town of the great King.

神在其宫中自显为避难所。
In its buildings God is seen to be a high tower.

看哪，众王会合，一同经过。
For see! the kings came together by agreement, they were joined together.

他们见了这城，就惊奇丧胆，急忙逃跑。
They saw it, and so were full of wonder; they were troubled, and went quickly away in fear.

他们在那里被战兢疼痛抓住，好像产难的妇人一样。
Shaking came on them and pain, as on a woman in childbirth.

神阿，你用东风打破他施的船只。
By you the ships of Tarshish are broken as by an east wind.

我们在万军之耶和华的城中，就是我们神的城中，所看见的，正如我们所听见的。神必坚立这城，直到永远。（细拉）。
As it came to our ears so have we seen it, in the town of the Lord of armies, in the town of our God; God will keep it fixed for ever. (Selah.)

神阿，我们在你的殿中，想念你的慈爱。
Our thoughts were of your mercy, O God, while we were in your Temple.

神阿，你受的赞美，正与你的名相称，直到地极。你的右手满了公义。
As your name is, O God, so is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of righteousness.

因你的判断，锡安山应当欢喜，犹大的城邑，应当快乐。（城邑原文作女子）
Let there be joy in the mountain of Zion, and let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of your wise decisions.

你们当周游锡安，四围旋绕，数点城楼，
Make your way about Zion, and go round it, numbering its towers.

细看他的外郭，察看他的宫殿，为要传说到后代。
Take note of its strong walls, looking well at its fair buildings; so that you may give word of it to the generation which comes after.

因为这神永永远远为我们的神。他必作我们引路的，直到死时。
Because this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide.

（可拉后裔的诗，交与伶长。）万民哪，你们都当听这话，世上一切的居民，
<Alamoth. To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.> Give attention to this, all you peoples; let your ears be open, all you who are living in the world.

无论上流下流，富足贫穷，都当留心听。
High and low together, the poor, and those who have wealth.

我口要说智慧的言语。我心要想通达的道理。
From my mouth will come words of wisdom; and in the thoughts of my heart will be knowledge.

我要侧耳听比喻，用琴解谜语。
I will put my teaching into a story; I will make my dark sayings clear with music.

在患难的日子，奸恶随我脚跟，四面环绕我，我何必惧怕。
What cause have I for fear in the days of evil, when the evil-doing of those who are working for my downfall is round about me?

那些倚仗财货自夸钱财多的人，
Even of those whose faith is in their wealth, and whose hearts are lifted up because of their stores.

一个也无法赎自己的弟兄，也不能替他将赎价给神，
Truly, no man may get back his soul for a price, or give to God the payment for himself;

叫他长远活着，不见朽坏。因为赎他生命的价值极贵，只可永远罢休。
(Because it takes a great price to keep his soul from death, and man is not able to give it.)


So that he might have eternal life, and never see the underworld.

他必见智慧人死。又见愚顽人和畜类人，一同灭亡，将他们的财货留给别人。
For he sees that wise men come to their end, and foolish persons of low behaviour come to destruction together, letting their wealth go to others.

他们心里思想，他们的家室必永存，住宅必留到万代。他们以自己的名，称自己的地。
The place of the dead is their house for ever, and their resting-place through all generations; those who come after them give their names to their lands.

但人居尊贵中不能长久，如同死亡的畜类一样。
But man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.

他们行的这道，本为自己的愚昧。但他们以后的人，还佩服他们的话语。（细拉）。
This is the way of the foolish; their silver is for those who come after them, and their children get the pleasure of their gold. (Selah.)

他们如同羊群派定下阴间。死亡必作他们的牧者。到了早晨，正直人必管辖他们。他们的美容，必被阴间所灭，以致无处可存。
Death will give them their food like sheep; the underworld is their fate and they will go down into it; their flesh is food for worms; their form is wasted away; the underworld is their resting-place for ever.

只是神必救赎我的灵魂，脱离阴间的权柄，因他必收纳我。（细拉）
But God will get back my soul; for he will take me from the power of death. (Selah.)

见人发财家室增荣的时候，你不要惧怕。
Have no fear when wealth comes to a man, and the glory of his house is increased;

因为他死的时候，什么也不能带去。他的荣耀不能随他下去。
For at his death, he will take nothing away; his glory will not go down after him.

他活着的时候，虽然自夸为有福，（你若利己，人必夸奖你）。
Though he might have pride in his soul in his life-time, and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself,

他仍必归到他历代的祖宗那里，永不见光。
He will go to the generation of his fathers; he will not see the light again.

人在尊贵中，而不醒悟，就如死亡的畜类一样。
Man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.

（亚萨的诗。）大能者神耶和华，已经发言招呼天下，从日出之地到日落之处。
<A Psalm. Of Asaph.> The God of gods, even the Lord, has sent out his voice, and the earth is full of fear; from the coming up of the sun to its going down.

从全美的锡安中，神已经发光了。
From Zion, most beautiful of places, God has sent out his light.

我们的神要来，决不闭口。有烈火在他面前吞灭，有暴风在他四围大刮。
Our God will come, and will not keep quiet; with fire burning before him, and storm-winds round him.

他招呼上天下地，为要审判他的民，
His voice will go out to the heavens and to the earth, for the judging of his people:

说，招聚我的圣民到我这里来，就是那些用祭物与我立约的人。
Let my saints come together to me; those who have made an agreement with me by offerings.

诸天必表明他的公义。因为神是施行审判的。（细拉）
And let the heavens make clear his righteousness; for God himself is the judge. (Selah.)

我的民哪，你们当听我的话。以色列阿，我要劝戒你。我是神，是你的神。
Give ear, O my people, to my words; O Israel, I will be a witness against you; I am God, even your God.

我并不因你的祭物责备你。你的燔祭常在我面前。
I will not take up a cause against you because of your offerings, or because of your burned offerings, which are ever before me.

我不从你家中取公牛，也不从你圈内取山羊。
I will take no ox out of your house, or he-goats from your flocks;

因为树林中的百兽是我的，千山上的牲畜也是我的。
For every beast of the woodland is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.

山中的飞鸟，我都知道。野地的走兽，也都属我。
I see all the birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the field are mine.

我若是饥饿，我不用告诉你。因为世界，和其中所充满的，都是我的。
If I had need of food, I would not give you word of it; for the earth is mine and all its wealth.

我岂吃公牛的肉呢？我岂喝山羊的血呢？
Am I to take the flesh of the ox for my food, or the blood of goats for my drink?

你们要以感谢为祭献与神。又要向至高者还你的愿。
Make an offering of praise to God; keep the agreements which you have made with the Most High;

并要在患难之日求告我，我必搭救你。你也要荣耀我。
Let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble; I will be your saviour, so that you may give glory to me.

但神对恶人说，你怎敢传说我的律例，口中提到我的约呢？
But to the sinner, God says, What are you doing, talking of my laws, or taking the words of my agreement in your mouth?

其实你恨恶管教，将我的言语丢在背后。
Seeing that you have no desire for my teaching, turning your back on my words.

你见了盗贼，就乐意与他同伙，又与行奸淫的人，一同有分。
When you saw a thief, you were in agreement with him, and you were joined with those who took other men's wives.

你口任说恶言，你舌编造诡诈。
You have given your mouth to evil, your tongue to words of deceit.

你坐着毁谤你的兄弟，谗毁你亲母的儿子。
You say evil of your brother; you make false statements against your mother's son.

你行了这些事，我还闭口不言。你想我恰和你一样。其实我要责备你，将这些事摆在你眼前。
These things have you done, and I said nothing; it seemed to you that I was such a one as yourself; but I will make a protest against you, and put them in order before your eyes.

你们忘记神的，要思想这事，免得我把你们撕碎，无人搭救。
Now keep this in mind, you who have no memory of God, for fear that you may be crushed under my hand, with no one to give you help:

凡以感谢献上为祭的，便是荣耀我。那按正路而行的，我必使他得着我的救恩。
Whoever makes an offering of praise gives glory to me; and to him who is upright in his ways I will make clear the salvation of God.

（大卫与拔示巴同室以后，先知拿单来见他。他作这诗，交与伶长。）神阿，求你按你的慈爱怜恤我，按你丰盛的慈悲涂抹我的过犯。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.> Have pity on me, O God, in your mercy; out of a full heart, take away my sin.

求你将我的罪孽洗除净尽，并洁除我的罪。
Let all my wrongdoing be washed away, and make me clean from evil.

因为我知道我的过犯，我的罪常在我面前。
For I am conscious of my error; my sin is ever before me.

我向你犯罪，惟独得罪了你，在你眼前行了这恶，以致你责备我的时候，显为公义。判断我的时候，显为清正。
Against you, you only, have I done wrong, working that which is evil in your eyes; so that your words may be seen to be right, and you may be clear when you are judging.

我是在罪孽里生的。在我母亲怀胎的时候，就有了罪。
Truly, I was formed in evil, and in sin did my mother give me birth.

你所喜爱的，是内里诚实。你在我隐密处，必使我得智慧。
Your desire is for what is true in the inner parts: in the secrets of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom.

求你用牛膝草洁净我，我就干净，求你洗涤我，我就比雪更白。
Make me free from sin with hyssop: let me be washed whiter than snow.

求你使我得听欢喜快乐的声音，使你所压伤的骨头，可以踊跃。
Make me full of joy and rapture; so that the bones which have been broken may be glad.

求你掩面不看我的罪，涂抹我一切的罪孽。
Let your face be turned from my wrongdoing, and take away all my sins.

神阿，求你为我造清洁的心，使我里面重新有正直的灵。（正直或作坚定）。
Make a clean heart in me, O God; give me a right spirit again.

不要丢弃我，使我离开你的面。不要从我收回你的圣灵。
Do not put me away from before you, or take your holy spirit from me.

求你使我仍得救恩之乐，赐我乐意的灵扶持我。
Give me back the joy of your salvation; let a free spirit be my support.

我就把你的道指教有过犯的人。罪人必归顺你。
Then will I make your ways clear to wrongdoers; and sinners will be turned to you.

神阿，你是拯救我的神。求你救我脱离流人血的罪。我的舌头就高声歌唱你的公义。
Be my saviour from violent death, O God, the God of my salvation; and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness.

主阿，求你使我嘴唇张开，我的口便传扬赞美你的话。
O Lord, let my lips be open, so that my mouth may make clear your praise.

你本不喜爱祭物。若喜爱，我就献上。燔祭你也不喜悦。
You have no desire for an offering or I would give it; you have no delight in burned offerings.

神所要的祭，就是忧伤的灵。神阿，忧伤痛悔的心，你必不轻看。
The offerings of God are a broken spirit; a broken and sorrowing heart, O God, you will not put from you.

求你随你的美意善待锡安，建造耶路撒冷的城墙。
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure, building up the walls of Jerusalem.

那时，你必喜爱公义的祭，和燔祭并全牲的燔祭。那时，人必将公牛献在你坛上。
Then you will have delight in the offerings of righteousness, in burned offerings and offerings of beasts; then they will make offerings of oxen on your altar.

（以东人多益来告诉扫罗说，大卫到了亚希米勒家。那时，大卫作这训诲诗，交与伶长。）勇士阿，你为何以作恶自夸。神的慈爱是常存的。
<To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of David. When Doeg the Edomite came to Saul saying, David has come to the house of Ahimelech.> Why do you take pride in wrongdoing, lifting yourself up against the upright man all the day?

你的舌头邪恶诡诈，好像剃头刀，快利伤人。
Purposing destruction, using deceit; your tongue is like a sharp blade.

你爱恶胜似爱善，又爱说谎，不爱说公义。（细拉）
You have more love for evil than for good, for deceit than for works of righteousness. (Selah.)

诡诈的舌头阿，你爱说一切毁灭的话。
Destruction is in all your words, O false tongue.

神也要毁灭你，直到永远。他要把你拿去，从你的帐棚中抽出，从活人之地将你拔出。（细拉）
But God will put an end to you for ever; driving you out from your tent, uprooting you from the land of the living. (Selah.)

义人要看见而惧怕，并要笑他。
The upright will see it with fear, and will say, laughing at you:

说，看哪，这就是那不以神为他力量的人。只倚仗他丰富的财物，在邪恶上坚立自己。
See, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but had faith in his goods and his property, and made himself strong in his wealth.

至于我，就像神殿中的青橄榄树。我永永远远倚靠神的慈爱。
But I am like a branching olive-tree in the house of God; I have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever.

我要称谢你，直到永远，因为你行了这事。我也要在你圣民面前仰望你的名。这名本为美好。
I will give you praise without end for what you have done; I will give honour to your name before your saints, for it is good.

（大卫的训诲诗，交与伶长，调用麻哈拉。）愚顽人心里说，没有神。他们都是邪恶，行了可憎恶的罪孽。没有一个人行善。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath. Maschil. Of David.> The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.

神从天上垂看世人，要看有明白的没有，有寻求他的没有。
God was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.

他们各人都退后，一同变为污秽。并没有行善的。连一个也没有。
Every one of them has gone back; they are unclean: there is not one who does good, no, not one.

作孽的没有知识吗？他们吞吃我的百姓如同吃饭一样。并不求告神。
Have the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food, as they would take bread; they make no prayer to God.

他们在无可惧怕之处，就大大害怕。因为神把那安营攻击你之人的骨头散开了。你使他们蒙羞，因为神弃绝了他们。
They were in great fear, where there was no cause for fear: for the bones of those who make war on you have been broken by God; you have put them to shame, because God has no desire for them.

但愿以色列的救恩从锡安而出。神救回他被掳的子民，那时，雅各要快乐，以色列要欢喜。
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! When the fate of his people is changed by God, Jacob will have joy, and Israel will be glad.

（西弗人来对扫罗说，大卫岂不是在我们那里藏身吗？那时大卫作这训诲诗，交与伶长。用丝弦的乐器。）神阿，求你以你的名救我，凭你的大能为我伸冤。
<To the chief music-maker; on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David. When the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Is not David keeping himself secret among us?> Let your name be my salvation, O God; let my cause be judged by your strength.

神阿，求你听我的祷告，留心听我口中的言语。
Let my prayer come before you, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.

因为外人起来攻击我，强暴人寻索我的命。他们眼中没有神。（细拉）
For men who are going after me have come out against me, violent men are purposing to take my soul; they have not put God before their eyes. (Selah.)

神是帮助我的，是扶持我命的。
See, God is my helper: the Lord is the great supporter of my soul.

他要报应我仇敌所行的恶。求你凭你的诚实灭绝他们。
Let the evil works of my haters come back on them again; let them be cut off by your good faith.

我要把甘心祭献给你。耶和华阿，我要称赞你的名。这名本为美好。
Freely will I make my offerings to you; I will give praise to your name, O Lord, for it is good.

他从一切的急难中，把我救出来。我的眼睛也看见了我仇敌遭报。
Because it has been my saviour from all my trouble; and my eyes have seen the punishment of my haters.

（大卫的训诲诗，交与伶长，用丝弦的乐器）神阿，求你留心听我的祷告。不要隐藏不听我的恳求。
<To the chief music-maker, on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David.> Give hearing to my prayer, O God; and let not your ear be shut against my request.

求你侧耳听我，应允我。我哀叹不安，发声唉哼。
Give thought to me, and let my prayer be answered: I have been made low in sorrow;

都因仇敌的声音，恶人的欺压。因为他们将罪孽加在我身上，发怒气逼迫我。
I am troubled because of the voice of the cruel ones, because of the loud cry of the evil-doers; for they put a weight of evil on me, and they are cruel in their hate for me.

我心在我里面甚是疼痛。死的惊惶临到我身。
My heart is deeply wounded, and the fear of death has come on me.

恐惧战兢归到我身，惊恐漫过了我。
Fear and shaking have come over me, with deep fear I am covered.

我说，但愿我有翅膀像鸽子，我就飞去得享安息。
And I said, If only I had wings like a dove! for then I would go in flight from here and be at rest.

我必远游宿在旷野。（细拉）
I would go wandering far away, living in the waste land. (Selah.)

我必速速逃到避所，脱离狂风暴雨。
I would quickly take cover from the driving storm and from the violent wind.

主阿，求你吞灭他们，变乱他们的舌头。因为我在城中见了强暴争竞的事。
Send destruction on them, O Lord, make a division of tongues among them: for I have seen fighting and violent acts in the town.

他们在城墙上昼夜绕行。在城内也有罪孽和奸恶。
By day and night they go round the town, on the walls; trouble and sorrow are in the heart of it.

邪恶在其中，欺压和诡诈不离街市。
Evil is there; cruel rule and deceit are ever in the streets.

原来不是仇敌辱骂我。若是仇敌，还可忍耐。也不是恨我的人向我狂大。若是恨我的人，就必躲避他。
For it was not my hater who said evil of me; that would have been no grief to me; it was not one outside the number of my friends who made himself strong against me, or I would have kept myself from him in a secret place;

不料是你，你原与我平等，是我的同伴，是我知己的朋友。
But it was you, my equal, my guide, my well-loved friend.

我们素常彼此谈论，以为甘甜。我们与群众在神的殿中同行。
We had loving talk together, and went to the house of God in company.

愿死亡忽然临到他们。愿他们活活地下入阴间。因为他们的住处，他们的心中，都是邪恶。
Let the hand of death come on them suddenly, and let them go down living into the underworld; because evil is in their houses and in their hearts.

至于我，我要求告神。耶和华必拯救我。
As for me, I will make my prayer to God, and he will be my saviour.

我要晚上，早晨，晌午，哀声悲叹。他也必听我的声音。
In the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day I will make my prayer with sounds of grief; and my voice will come to his ears.

他救赎我命脱离攻击我的人，使我得享平安。因为与我相争的人甚多。
He has taken my soul away from the attack which was made against me, and given it peace; for great numbers were against me.

那没有更变，不敬畏神的人，从太古常存的神，必听见而苦待他。
God will give thought to me; he who from early times is strong will send pain and trouble on them. (Selah.) Because they are unchanged, they have no fear of God.

他背了约，伸手攻击与他和好的人。
He has put out his hand against those who were at peace with him; he has not kept his agreement.

他的口如奶油光滑，他的心却怀着争战。他的话比油柔和，其实是拔出来的刀。
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, but they were sharp swords.

你要把你的重担卸给耶和华，他必抚养你，他永不叫义人动摇。
Put your cares on the Lord, and he will be your support; he will not let the upright man be moved.

神阿，你必使恶人下入灭亡的坑。流人血行诡诈的人，必活不到半世，但我要倚靠你。
But you, O God, will send them down into the underworld; the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their days are ended; but I will have faith in you.

（非利士人在迦特拿住大卫。那时他作这金诗，交与伶长，调用远方无声鸽）神阿，求你怜悯我，因为人要把我吞了，终日攻击欺压我。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Jonath elem rehokim. Of David. Michtam. When the Philistines took him in Gath.> Have mercy on me, O God, for man is attempting my destruction; every day he makes cruel attacks against me.

我的仇敌终日要把我吞了。因逞骄傲攻击我的人甚多。
My haters are ever ready to put an end to me; great numbers are lifting themselves up against me.

我惧怕的时候要倚靠你。
In the time of my fear, I will have faith in you.

我倚靠神。我要赞美他的话。我倚靠神，必不惧怕。血气之辈能把我怎么样呢？
In God will I give praise to his word; in God have I put my hope; I will have no fear of what flesh may do to me.

他们终日颠倒我的话。他们一切的心思，都是要害我。
Every day they make wrong use of my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.

他们聚集，埋伏窥探我的脚踪。等候要害我的命。
They come together, they are waiting in secret places, they take note of my steps, they are waiting for my soul.

他们岂能因罪孽逃脱吗？神阿，求你在怒中使众民堕落。
By evil-doing they will not get free from punishment. In wrath, O God, let the peoples be made low.

我几次流离，你都记数。求你把我眼泪装在你的皮袋里。这不都记在你册子上吗？
You have seen my wanderings; put the drops from my eyes into your bottle; are they not in your record?

我呼求的日子，我的仇敌都要转身退后。神帮助我，这是我所知道的。
When I send up my cry to you, my haters will be turned back; I am certain of this, for God is with me.

我倚靠神。我要赞美他的话。我倚靠耶和华。我要赞美他的话。
In God will I give praise to his word; in the Lord will I give praise to his word.

我倚靠神，必不惧怕。人能把我怎么样呢？
In God have I put my hope, I will have no fear of what man may do to me.

神阿，我向你所许的愿在我身上。我要将感谢祭献给你。
I keep the memory of my debt to you, O God; I will give you the offerings of praise.

因为你救我的命脱离死亡。你岂不是救护我的脚不跌倒，使我在生命光中行在神面前吗？
Because you have taken my soul from the power of death; and kept my feet from falling, so that I may be walking before God in the light of life.

（大卫逃避扫罗，藏在洞里。那时他作这金诗，交与伶长，调用休要毁坏）神阿，求你怜悯我，怜悯我。因为我的心投靠你。我要投靠在你翅膀的荫下，等到灾害过去。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When he went in flight from Saul, in the hole of the rock.> Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for the hope of my soul is in you: I will keep myself safely under the shade of your wings, till these troubles are past.

我要求告至高的神，就是为我成全诸事的神。
I will send up my cry to the Most High God; to God who does all things for me.

那要吞我的人辱骂我的时候，神从天上必施恩救我。也必向我发出慈爱和诚实。
He will send from heaven, and take me from the power of him whose desire is for my destruction. God will send out his mercy and his good faith.

我的性命在狮子中间。我躺卧在性如烈火的世人当中。他们的牙齿是枪，箭。他们的舌头是快刀。
My soul is among lions; I am stretched out among those who are on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and whose tongue is a sharp sword.

神阿，愿你崇高，过于诸天。愿你的荣耀，高过全地。
O God, be lifted up higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.

他们为我的脚设下网罗，压制我的心。他们在我面前挖了坑，自己反掉在其中。（细拉）
They have made ready a net for my steps; my soul is bent down; they have made a great hole before me, and have gone down into it themselves. (Selah.)

神阿，我心坚定，我心坚定。我要唱诗，我要歌颂。
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs, and give praise.

我的灵阿，（原文作荣耀）你当醒起，琴瑟阿，你们当醒起。我自己要极早醒起。
You are my glory; let the instruments of music be awake; I myself will be awake with the dawn.

主阿，我要在万民中称谢你。在列邦中歌颂你。
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make songs to you among the nations.

因为你的慈爱，高及诸天。你的诚实，达到穹苍。
For your mercy is great, stretching up to the heavens, and your righteousness goes up to the clouds.

神阿，愿你崇高，过于诸天。愿你的荣耀，高过全地。
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens, let your glory be over all the earth.

（大卫的金诗，交与伶长，调用休要毁坏）世人哪，你们默然不语，真合公义吗？施行审判，岂按正直吗？
<To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David.> Is there righteousness in your mouths, O you gods? are you upright judges, O you sons of men?

不然，你们是心中作恶。你们在地上秤出你们手所行的强暴。
The purposes of your hearts are evil; your hands are full of cruel doings on the earth.

恶人一出母胎，就与神疏远。一离母腹，便走错路，说谎话。
The evil-doers are strange from the first; from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way, saying false words.

他们的毒气，好像蛇的毒气。他们好像塞耳的聋虺，
Their poison is like the poison of a snake; they are like the adder, whose ears are shut;

不听行法术的声音。虽用极灵的咒语，也是不听。
Who will not be moved by the voice of the wonder-worker, however great are his powers.

神阿，求你敲碎他们口中的牙。耶和华阿，求你敲掉少壮狮子的大牙。
O God, let their teeth be broken in their mouths; let the great teeth of the young lions be pulled out, O Lord.

愿他们消灭如急流的水一般。他们瞅准射箭的时候，愿箭头仿佛砍断。
Let them be turned to liquid like the ever-flowing waters; let them be cut off like the grass by the way.

愿他们像蜗牛消化过去，又像妇人坠落未见天日的胎。
Let them be like an after-birth which is turned to water and comes to an end; like the fruit of a woman who gives birth before her time, let them not see the sun.

你们用荆棘烧火。锅还未热，他要用旋风把青的和烧着的一齐刮去。
Before they are conscious of it, let them be cut down like thorns; let a strong wind take them away like waste growth.

义人见仇敌遭报，就欢喜，要在恶人的血中洗脚。
The upright man will be glad when he sees their punishment; his feet will be washed in the blood of the evil-doer.

因此，人必说，义人诚然有善报。在地上果有施行判断的神。
So that men will say, Truly there is a reward for righteousness; truly there is a God who is judge on the earth.

（扫罗打发人窥探大卫的房屋，要杀他。那时大卫用这金诗，交与伶长，调用休要毁坏）我的神阿，求你救我脱离仇敌，把我安置在高处，得脱那些起来攻击我的人。
<To the chief music-maker; put to At-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When Saul sent, and they were watching the house, to put him to death.> Take me out of the hands of the cruel ones, O my God; keep me safe from those who come up against me.

求你救我脱离作孽的人，和喜爱流人血的人。
Take me out of the power of the workers of evil, and keep me safe from the men of blood.

因为他们埋伏，要害我的命，有能力的人聚集来攻击我。耶和华阿，这不是为我的过犯，也不是为我的罪愆。
For see, they are watching in secret for my soul; the strong have come together against me? but not because of my sin, or my evil-doing, O Lord.

我虽然无过，他们预备整齐，跑来攻击我。求你兴起鉴察帮助我。
For no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready; be awake and come to my help, and see.

万军之神耶和华以色列的神阿，求你兴起，惩治万邦。不要怜悯行诡诈的恶人。（细拉）
You, O Lord God of armies, are the God of Israel; come now and give punishment to the nations; have no mercy on any workers of deceit. (Selah.)

他们晚上转回，叫号如狗，围城绕行。
They come back in the evening; they make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.

他们口中喷吐恶言，嘴里有刀，他们说有谁听见。
See, hate is dropping from their lips; curses are on their tongues: they say, Who gives attention to it?

但你耶和华必笑话他们。你要嗤笑万邦。
But you are laughing at them, O Lord; you will make sport of all the nations.

我的力量阿，我必仰望你。因为神是我的高台。
O my strength, I will put my hope in you; because God is my strong tower.

我的神要以慈爱迎接我。神要叫我看见我仇敌遭报。
The God of my mercy will go before me: God will let me see my desire effected on my haters.

不要杀他们，恐怕我的民忘记。主阿，你是我们的盾牌。求你用你的能力使他们四散，且降为卑。
Put them not to death, for so my people will keep the memory of them: let them be sent in all directions by your power; make them low, O Lord our saviour.

因他们口中的罪，和嘴里的言语，并咒骂虚谎的话，愿他们在骄傲之中被缠住了。
Because of the sin of their mouths and the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and for their curses and their deceit,

求你发怒，使他们消灭，以至归于无有，叫他们知道神在雅各中间掌权，直到地极。（细拉）
Put an end to them in your wrath, put an end to them, so that they may not be seen again; let them see that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah.)

到了晚上，任凭他们转回。任凭他们叫号如狗，围城绕行。
And in the evening let them come back, and make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.

他们必走来走去，寻找食物。若不得饱，就终夜在外。
Let them go wandering up and down in search of food, and be there all night if they have not enough.

但我要歌颂你的力量，早晨要高唱你的慈爱。因为你作过我的高台。在我急难的日子，作过我的避难所。
But I will make songs of your power; yes, I will give cries of joy for your mercy in the morning; because you have been my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble.

我的力量阿，我要歌颂你。因为神是我的高台，是赐恩与我的神。
To you, O my strength, will I make my song: because God is my high tower, even the God of my mercy.

（大卫与两河间的亚兰并琐巴的亚兰争战的时候，约押转回，在盐谷攻击以东，杀了一万二千人。那时大卫作这金诗，叫人学习，交与伶长。调用为证的百合花。）神阿，你丢弃了我们，使我们破败；你向我们发怒，求你使我们复兴。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Shushan-eduth. Michtam. Of David. For teaching. When he was fighting against Aram-naharaim and Aramzobah, when Joab came back, and put twelve thousand of the Edomites to death, in the Valley of Salt.> God, you have put us away from you, you have sent us in all directions, you have been angry; O be turned to us again.

你使地震动，而且崩裂。求你将裂口医好。因为地摇动。
By the power of your hand the earth is shaking and broken; make it strong again, for it is moved.

你叫你的民遇见艰难。你叫我们喝那使人东倒西歪的酒。
You have made the people see hard times; you have given us the wine of shaking for our drink.

你把旌旗赐给敬畏你的人，可以为真理扬起来。（细拉）
Give a safe place to those who have fear of you, where they may go in flight from before the bow. (Selah.)

求你应允我们，用右手拯救我们，好叫你所亲爱的人得救。
So that your loved ones may be made safe, let your right hand be my salvation, and give me an answer.

神已经指着他的圣洁说，（说或作应许我）我要欢乐。我要分开示剑，丈量疏割谷。
God has said in his holy place, I will be glad: I will make a division of Shechem, and the valley of Succoth will be measured out.

基列是我的。玛拿西也是我的。以法莲是护卫我头的。犹大是我的杖。
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;

摩押是我的沐浴盆。我要向以东抛鞋。非利士阿，你还能因我欢呼吗？
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I put out my shoe; over Philistia will a glad cry be sounded.

谁能领我进坚固城。谁能引我到以东地。
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?

神阿，你不是丢弃了我们吗？神阿，你不和我们的军兵同去吗？
Have not you put us away, O God? and you have not gone out with our armies.

求你帮助我们攻击敌人，因为人的帮助是枉然的。
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.

我们倚靠神，才得施展大能，因为践踏我们敌人的就是他。
Through God we will do great things, for through him our haters will be crushed under our feet.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。用丝弦的乐器。）神阿，求你听我的呼求，侧耳听我的祷告。
<To the chief music-maker. On a corded instrument. Of David.> Let my cry come to you, O God; let your ears be open to my prayer.

我心里发昏的时候，我要从地极求告你。求你领我到那比我更高的磐石。
From the end of the earth will I send up my cry to you, when my heart is overcome: take me to the rock which is over-high for me.

因为你作过我的避难所，作过我的坚固台，脱离仇敌。
For you have been my secret place, and my high tower from those who made war on me.

我要永远住在你的帐幕里。我要投靠在你翅膀下的隐密处。（细拉）
I will make your tent my resting-place for ever: I will keep myself under the cover of your wings. (Selah.)

神阿，你原是听了我所许的愿。你将产业赐给敬畏你名的人。
For you, O God, have made answer to my prayers; you have given me the heritage of those who give honour to your name.

你要加添王的寿数。他的年岁必存到世世。
You will give the king long life; and make his years go on through the generations.

他必永远坐在神面前。愿你预备慈爱和诚实保佑他。
May the seat of his authority be before God for ever; may mercy and righteousness keep him safe.

这样，我要歌颂你的名直到永远，好天天还我所许的愿。
So will I make songs in praise of your name for ever, giving to God that which is right day by day.

（大卫的诗，照耶杜顿的作法，交与伶长。）我的心默默无声，专等候神。我的救恩是从他而来。
<To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.> My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my salvation.

惟独他是我的磐石，我的拯救。他是我的高台。我必不很动摇。
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.

你们大家攻击一人，把他毁坏。如同毁坏歪斜的墙，将倒的壁，要到几时呢？
How long will you go on designing evil against a man? running against him as against a broken wall, which is on the point of falling?

他们彼此商议，专要从他的尊位上把他推下。他们喜爱谎话。口虽祝福，心却咒诅。（细拉）
Their only thought is to put him down from his place of honour; their delight is in deceit: blessing is in their mouths but cursing in their hearts. (Selah.)

我的心哪，你当默默无声，专等候神。因为我的盼望是从他而来。
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my hope.

惟独他是我的磐石，我的拯救。他是我的高台。我必不动摇。
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.

我的拯救，我的荣耀，都在乎神。我力量的磐石，我的避难所，都在乎神。
In God is my salvation, and my glory; the Rock of my strength, and my safe place.

你们众民当时时倚靠他，在他面前倾心吐意。神是我们的避难所。（细拉）
Have faith in him at all times, you people; let your hearts go flowing out before him: God is our safe place. (Selah.)

下流人真是虚空，上流人也是虚假。放在天平里就必浮起。他们一共比空气还轻。
Truly men of low birth are nothing, and men of high position are not what they seem; if they are put in the scales together they are less than a breath.

不要仗势欺人，也不要因抢夺而骄傲。若财宝加增，不要放在心上。
Have no faith in the rewards of evil-doing, or in profits wrongly made: if your wealth is increased, do not put your hopes on it.

神说了一次，两次，我都听见，就是能力都属乎神。
Once has God said, twice has it come to my ears, that power is God's:

主阿，慈爱也是属乎你。因为你照着各人所行的报应他。
And mercy, O Lord, is yours, for you give to every man the reward of his work.

（大卫在犹大旷野的时候，作了这诗。）神阿，你是我的神，我要切切地寻求你。在干旱疲乏无水之地，我渴想你，我的心切慕你。
<A Psalm. Of David. When he was in the waste land of Judah.> O God, you are my God; early will I make my search for you: my soul is dry for need of you, my flesh is wasted with desire for you, as a dry and burning land where no water is;

我在圣所中曾如此瞻仰你，为要见你的能力，和你的荣耀。
To see your power and your glory, as I have seen you in the holy place.

因你的慈爱比生命更好，我的嘴唇要颂赞你。
Because your mercy is better than life, my lips will give you praise.

我还活的时候，要这样称颂你。我要奉你的名举手。
So will I go on blessing you all my life, lifting up my hands in your name.

我在床上记念你，在夜更的时候思想你，我的心就像饱足了骨髓肥油。我也要以欢乐的嘴唇赞美你。
My soul will be comforted, as with good food; and my mouth will give you praise with songs of joy;


When the memory of you comes to me on my bed, and when I give thought to you in the night-time.

因为你曾帮助我，我就在你翅膀的荫下欢呼。
Because you have been my help, I will have joy in the shade of your wings.

我心紧紧的跟随你。你的右手扶持我。
My soul keeps ever near you: your right hand is my support.

但那些寻索要灭我命的人，必往地底下去。
But those whose desire is my soul's destruction will go down to the lower parts of the earth.

他们必被刀剑所杀，被野狗所吃。
They will be cut off by the sword; they will be food for foxes.

但是王必因神欢喜。凡指着他发誓的，必要夸口。因为说谎之人的口，必被塞住。
But the king will have joy in God; everyone who takes an oath by him will have cause for pride; but the false mouth will be stopped.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）神阿，我哀叹的时候，求你听我的声音。求你保护我的性命，不受仇敌的惊恐。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> O God, let the voice of my grief come to your ear: keep my life from the fear of those who are against me.

求你把我隐藏，使我脱离作恶之人的暗谋，和作孽之人的扰乱。
Keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoers; from the band of the workers of evil;

他们磨舌如刀，发出苦毒的言语，好像比准了的箭。
Who make their tongues sharp like a sword, and whose arrows are pointed, even bitter words;

要在暗地射完全人。他们忽然射他，并不惧怕。
So that in secret they may let loose their arrows at the upright, suddenly and unseen.

他们彼此勉励设下恶计。他们商量暗设网罗，说，谁能看见。
They make themselves strong in an evil purpose; they make holes for secret nets; they say, Who will see it,

他们图谋奸恶，说，我们是极力图谋的。他们各人的意念心思是深的。
Or make discovery of our secret purpose? The design is framed with care; and the inner thought of a man, and his heart, is deep.

但神要射他们。他们忽然被箭射伤。
But God sends out an arrow against them; suddenly they are wounded.

他们必然绊跌，被自己的舌头所害。凡看见他们的，必都摇头。
The evil of their tongues is the cause of their fall; all those who see them are shaking their heads at them.

众人都要害怕，要传扬神的工作，并且明白他的作为。
And in fear men make public the works of God; and giving thought to his acts they get wisdom.

义人必因耶和华欢喜，并要投靠他。凡心里正直的人，都要夸口。
The upright will be glad in the Lord and have hope in him; and all the lovers of righteousness will give him glory.

（大卫的诗歌，交与伶长。）神阿，锡安的人都等候赞美你，所许的愿，也要向你偿还。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. A Song.> It is right for you, O God, to have praise in Zion: to you let the offering be made.

听祷告的主阿，凡有血气的，都要来就你。
To you, O hearer of prayer, let the words of all flesh come.

罪孽胜了我。至于我们的过犯，你都要赦免。
Evils have overcome us: but as for our sins, you will take them away.

你所拣选，使他亲近你，住在你院中的，这人便为有福。我们必因你居所，你圣殿的美福知足了。
Happy is the man of your selection, to whom you give a resting-place in your house; we will be full of the good things out of your holy place.

拯救我们的神阿，你必以威严秉公义应允我们。你本是一切地极，和海上远处的人所倚靠的。
You will give us an answer in righteousness by great acts of power, O God of our salvation; you who are the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the far-off lands of the sea;

他既以大能束腰，就用力量安定诸山。
The God by whose strength the mountains are fixed; who is robed with power:

使诸海的响声，和其中波浪的响声，并万民的喧哗，都平静了。
Who makes the loud voice of the sea quiet, and puts an end to the sound of its waves.

住在地极的人，因你的神迹惧怕。你使日出日落之地都欢呼。
Those in the farthest parts of the earth have fear when they see your signs: the outgoings of the morning and evening are glad because of you.

你眷顾地，降下透雨，使地大得肥美。神的河满了水。你这样浇灌了地，好为人预备五谷。
You have given your blessing to the earth, watering it and making it fertile; the river of God is full of water: and having made it ready, you give men grain.

你浇透地的犁沟，润平犁脊。降甘霖，使地软和。其中发长的，蒙你赐福。
You make the ploughed lands full of water; you make smooth the slopes: you make the earth soft with showers, sending your blessing on its growth.

你以恩典为年岁的冠冕。你的路径都滴下脂油。
The year is crowned with the good you give; life-giving rain is dropping from your footsteps,

滴在旷野的草场上。小山以欢乐束腰。
Falling on the grass of the waste land: and the little hills are glad on every side.

草场以羊群为衣。谷中也长满了五谷。这一切都欢呼歌唱。
The grass-land is thick with flocks; the valleys are full of grain; they give glad cries and songs of joy.

（一篇诗歌，交与伶长。）全地都当向神欢呼。
<To the chief music-maker. A Song. A Psalm.> Send up a glad cry to God, all the earth:

歌颂他名的荣耀。用赞美的言语，将他的荣耀发明。
Make a song in honour of his name: give praise and glory to him.

当对神说，你的作为何等可畏。因你的大能仇敌要投降你。
Say to God, How greatly to be feared are your works! because of your great power your haters are forced to put themselves under your feet.

全地要敬拜你，歌颂你，要歌颂你的名。（细拉）
Let all the earth give you worship, and make songs to you; let them make songs to your name. (Selah.)

你们来看神所行的。他向世人所作之事，是可畏的。
Come and see the works of God: he is to be feared in all he does to the children of men.

他将海变成干地。众民步行过河。我们在那里因他欢喜。
The sea was turned into dry land: they went through the river on foot: there did we have joy in him.

他用权能治理万民，直到永远。他的眼睛鉴察列邦。悖逆的人不可自高。（细拉）
He is ruling in power for ever; his eyes are watching the nations: may his haters have no strength against him. (Selah.)

万民哪，你们当称颂我们的神。使人得听赞美他的声音。
Give blessings to our God, O you peoples, let the voice of his praise be loud;

他使我们的性命存活，也不叫我们的脚摇动。
Because he gives us life, and has not let our feet be moved.

神阿，你曾试验我们，熬炼我们，如熬炼银子一样。
For you, O God, have put us to the test: testing us by fire like silver.

你使我们进入网罗，把重担放在我们的身上。
You let us be put in prison; chains were put on our legs.

你使人坐车轧我们的头。我们经过水火。你却使我们到丰富之地。
You let men go driving over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but you took us out into a wide place.

我要用燔祭进你的殿，向你还我的愿。
I will come into your house with burned offerings, I will make payment of my debt to you,

就是在急难时我嘴唇所发的，口中所许的。
Keeping the word which came from my lips, and which my mouth said, when I was in trouble.

我要把肥牛作燔祭，将公羊的香祭献给你。又把公牛和山羊献上。（细拉）
I will give you burned offerings of fat beasts, and the smoke of sheep; I will make offerings of oxen and goats. (Selah.)

凡敬畏神的人，你们都来听。我要述说他为我所行的事。
Come, give ear to me, all you God-fearing men, so that I may make clear to you what he has done for my soul.

我曾用口求告他，我的舌头，也称他为高。
My voice went up to him, and I was lifted up from the underworld.

我若心里注重罪孽，主必不听。
I said in my heart, The Lord will not give ear to me:

但神实在听见了。他侧耳听了我祷告的声音。
But truly God's ear has been open; he has give attention to the voice of my prayer.

神是应当称颂的。他并没有推却我的祷告，也没有叫他的慈爱离开我。
Praise be to God who has not taken away his good faith and his mercy from me.

（一篇诗歌，交与伶长。用丝弦的乐器。）愿神怜悯我们，赐福与我们，用脸光照我们。（细拉）
<To the chief music-maker. With corded instruments. A Psalm. A Song.> May God give us mercy and blessing, and let the light of his face be shining on us; (Selah.)

好叫世界得知你的道路，万国得知你的救恩。
So that men may see your way on the earth, and your salvation among all nations.

神阿，愿列邦称赞你，愿万民都称赞你。
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.

愿万国都快乐欢呼。因为你必按公正审判万民，引导世上的万国。（细拉）
O let the nations be glad, and make song of joy; for you will be the judge of the peoples in righteousness, guiding the nations of the earth. (Selah.)

神阿，愿列邦称赞你。愿万民都称赞你。
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.

地已经出了土产。神，就是我们的神，要赐福与我们。
The earth has given her increase; and God, even our God, will give us his blessing.

神要赐福与我们。地的四极都要敬畏他。
God will give us his blessing; so let all the ends of the earth be in fear of him.

（大卫的诗歌，交与伶长。）愿神兴起，使他的仇敌四散，叫那恨他的人，从他面前逃跑。
<To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm. A Song.> Let God be seen, and let his haters be put to flight; let those who are against him be turned back before him.

他们被驱逐，如烟被风吹散。恶人见神之面而消灭，如蜡被火熔化。
Let them be like smoke before the driving wind; as wax turning soft before the fire, so let them come to an end before the power of God.

惟有义人必然欢喜，在神面前高兴快乐。
But let the upright be glad; let them have delight before God; let them be full of joy.

你们当向神唱诗，歌颂他的名。为那坐车行过旷野的，修平大路。他的名是耶和华。要在他面前欢乐。
Make songs to God, make songs of praise to his name; make a way for him who comes through the waste lands; his name is Jah; be glad before him.

神在他的圣所作孤儿的父，作寡妇的伸冤者。
A father to those who have no father, a judge of the widows, is God in his holy place.

神叫孤独的有家，使被囚的出来享福。惟有悖逆的住在干燥之地。
Those who are without friends, God puts in families; he makes free those who are in chains; but those who are turned away from him are given a dry land.

神阿，你曾在你百姓前头出来，在旷野行走。（细拉）
O God, when you went out before your people, wandering through the waste land; (Selah.)

那时地见神的面而震动，天也落雨。西乃山见以色列神的面也震动。
The earth was shaking and the heavens were streaming, because God was present; even Sinai itself was moved before God, the God of Israel.

神阿，你降下大雨。你产业以色列疲乏的时候，你使他坚固。
You, O God, did freely send the rain, giving strength to the weariness of your heritage.

你的会众住在其中。神阿，你的恩惠是为困苦人预备的。
Those whose resting-place was there, even the poor, were comforted by your good things, O God.

主发命令，传好信息的妇女成了大群。
The Lord gives the word; great is the number of the women who make it public.

统兵的君王逃跑了，逃跑了。在家等候的妇女，分受所夺的。
Kings of armies quickly go in flight: and the women in the houses make a division of their goods.

你们安卧在羊圈的时候，好像鸽子的翅膀镀白银，翎毛镀黄金一般。
Will you take your rest among the flocks? like the wings of a dove covered with silver, and its feathers with yellow gold.

全能者在境内赶散列王的时候，势如飘雪在撒们。
When the Most High put the kings to flight, it was as white as snow in Salmon.

巴珊山是神的山。巴珊山是多峰多岭的山。
A hill of God is the hill of Bashan; a hill with high tops is the hill of Bashan.

你们多峰多岭的山哪，为何斜看神所愿居住的山。耶和华必住这山。直到永远。
Why are you looking with envy, you high hills, on the hill desired by God as his resting-place? truly, God will make it his house for ever.

神的车辇累万盈千。主在其中，好像在西乃圣山一样。
The war-carriage of God is among Israel's thousands; the Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.

你已经升上高天，掳掠仇敌，你在人间，就是在悖逆的人间，受了供献，叫耶和华神可以与他们同住。
You have gone up on high, taking your prisoners with you; you have taken offerings from men; the Lord God has taken his place on the seat of his power.

天天背负我们重担的主，就是拯救我们的神。是应当称颂的。（细拉）
Praise be to the Lord, who is our support day by day, even the God of our salvation. (Selah.)

神是为我们施行诸般救恩的神。人能脱离死亡，是在乎主耶和华。
Our God is for us a God of salvation; his are the ways out of death.

但神要打破他仇敌的头，就是那常犯罪之人的发顶。
The heads of the haters of God will be crushed; even the head of him who still goes on in his evil ways.

主说，我要使众民从巴珊而归，使他们从深海而回。
The Lord said, I will make them come back from Bashan, and from the deep parts of the sea;

使你打碎仇敌，你的脚踹在血中，使你狗的舌头，从其中得分。
So that your foot may be red with blood, and the tongues of your dogs with the same.

神阿，你是我的神，我的王。人已经看见你行走，进入圣所。
We see your going, O God: even the going of my God, my King, into the holy place.

歌唱的行在前，作乐的随在后，都在击鼓的童女中间。
The makers of songs go before, the players of music come after, among the young girls playing on brass instruments.

从以色列源头而来的，当在各会中称颂主神。
Give praise to God in the great meeting; even the Lord, you who come from the fountain of Israel.

在那里有统管他们的小便雅悯，有犹大的首领，和他们的群众。有西布伦的首领。有拿弗他利的首领。
There is little Benjamin ruling them, the chiefs of Judah and their army, the rulers of Zebulun and the rulers of Naphtali.

以色列的能力，是神所赐的。神阿，求你坚固你为我们所成全的事。
O God, send out your strength; the strength, O God, with which you have done great things for us,

因你耶路撒冷的殿，列王必带贡物献给你。
Out of your Temple in Jerusalem.

求你叱喝芦苇中的野兽，和群公牛，并列邦中的牛犊，把银块踹在脚下。神已经赶散好争战的列邦。
Say sharp words to the beast among the water-plants, the band of strong ones, with the lords of the peoples, put an end to the people whose delight is in war.

埃及的公侯要出来朝见神。古实人要急忙举手祷告。
Kings will give you offerings, they will come out of Egypt; from Pathros will come offerings of silver; Ethiopia will be stretching out her hands to God.

世上的列国阿，你们要向神歌唱。愿你们歌颂主，
Make songs to God, you kingdoms of the earth; O make songs of praise to the Lord; (Selah.)

歌颂那自古驾行在诸天以上的主。他发出声音，是极大的声音。
To him who goes or the clouds of heaven, the heaven which was from earliest times; he sends out his voice of power.

你们要将能力归给神。他的威荣在以色列之上，他的能力是在穹苍。
Make clear that strength is God's: he is lifted up over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.

神阿，你从圣所显为可畏。以色列的神，是那将力量权能赐给他百姓的。神是应当称颂的。
O God, you are to be feared in your holy place: the God of Israel gives strength and power to his people. Praise be to God.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长，调用百合花。）神阿，求你救我。因为众水要淹没我。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of David.> Be my saviour, O God; because the waters have come in, even to my neck.

我陷在深淤泥中，没有立脚之地。我到了深水中。大水漫过我身。
My feet are deep in the soft earth, where there is no support; I have come into deep waters, the waves are flowing over me.

我因呼求困乏，喉咙发干。我因等候神，眼睛失明。
I am tired with my crying; my throat is burning: my eyes are wasted with waiting for my God.

无故恨我的，比我头发还多。无理与我为仇，要把我剪除的甚为强盛。我没有抢夺的，要叫我偿还。
Those who have hate for me without cause are greater in number than the hairs of my head; those who are against me, falsely desiring my destruction, are very strong; I gave back what I had not taken away.

神阿，我的愚昧你原知道。我的罪愆不能隐瞒。
O God, you see how foolish I am; and my wrongdoing is clear to you.

万军的主耶和华阿，求你叫那等候你的，不要因我蒙羞。以色列的神阿，求你叫那寻求你的，不要因我受辱。
Let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me, O Lord God of armies: let not those who are waiting for you be made low because of me, O God of Israel.

因我为你的缘故受了辱骂，满面羞愧。
I have been wounded with sharp words because of you; my face has been covered with shame.

我的弟兄看我为外路人。我的同胞看我为外邦人。
I have become strange to my brothers, and like a man from a far country to my mother's children.

因我为你的殿心里焦急，如同火烧。并且辱骂你人的辱骂，都落在我身上。
I am on fire with passion for your house; and the hard things which are said about you have come on me.

我哭泣，以禁食刻苦我心，这倒算为我的羞辱。
My bitter weeping, and my going without food, were turned to my shame.

我拿麻布当衣裳。就成了他们的笑谈。
When I put on the clothing of grief, they said evil of me.

坐在城门口的谈论我。酒徒也以我为歌曲。
I am a cause of wonder to those in authority; a song to those who are given to strong drink.

但我在悦纳的时候，向你耶和华祈祷。神阿，求你按你丰盛的慈爱，凭你拯救的诚实，应允我。
But as for me, let my prayer be made to you, O Lord, at a time when you are pleased; O God, give me an answer in your great mercy, for your salvation is certain.

求你搭救我出离淤泥，不叫我陷在其中。求你使我脱离那些恨我的人，使我出离深水。
Take me from the grip of the sticky earth, so that I may not go down into it; let me be lifted up from the deep waters.

求你不容大水漫过我，不容深渊吞灭我，不容坑坎在我以上合口。
Let me not be covered by the flowing waters; let not the deep waters go over my head, and let me not be shut up in the underworld.

耶和华阿，求你应允我，因为你的慈爱本为美好。求你按你丰盛的慈悲，回转眷顾我。
Give an answer to my words, O Lord; for your mercy is good: be turned to me, because of your great pity.

不要掩面不顾你的仆人。我是在急难之中。求你速速地应允我。
Let not your face be covered from your servant, for I am in trouble; quickly give me an answer.

求你亲近我，救赎我。求你因我的仇敌把我赎回。
Come near to my soul, for its salvation: be my saviour, because of those who are against me.

你知道我受的辱骂，欺凌，羞辱。我的敌人都在你面前。
You have seen my shame, how I was laughed at and made low; my haters are all before you.

辱骂伤破了我的心。我又满了忧愁。我指望有人体恤，却没有一个。我指望有人安慰，却找不着一个。
My heart is broken by bitter words, I am full of grief; I made a search for some to have pity on me, but there was no one; I had no comforter.

他们拿苦胆给我当食物。我渴了，他们拿醋给我喝。
They gave me poison for my food; and bitter wine for my drink.

愿他们的筵席，在他们面前变为网罗，在他们平安的时候，变为机槛。
Let their table before them be for their destruction; let their feasts become a net to take them.

愿他们的眼睛昏蒙，不得看见。愿你使他们的腰常常战抖。
Let their eyes be blind so that they may not see; let their bodies for ever be shaking.

求你将你的恼恨，倒在他们身上，叫你的烈怒追上他们。
Let your curse come on them; let the heat of your wrath overtake them.

愿他们的住处，变为荒场。愿他们的帐棚，无人居住。
Give their houses to destruction, and let there be no one in their tents.

因为你所击打的，他们就逼迫。你所击伤的他们戏说他的愁苦。
Because they are cruel to him against whom your hand is turned; they make bitter the grief of him who is wounded by you.

愿你在他们的罪上加罪，不容他们在你面前称义。
Let their punishment be increased; let them not come into your righteousness.

愿他们从生命册上被涂抹，不得记录在义人之中。
Let their names be taken from the book of the living, let them not be numbered with the upright.

但我是困苦忧伤的。神阿，愿你的救恩，将我安置在高处。
But I am poor and full of sorrow; let me be lifted up by your salvation, O Lord.

我要以诗歌赞美神的名，以感谢称他为大。
I will give praise to the name of God with a song; I will give glory to him for what he has done.

这便叫耶和华喜悦，胜似献牛，或是献有角有蹄的公牛。
This will be more pleasing to the Lord than an ox, or a young ox of full growth.

谦卑的人看见了，就喜乐。寻求神的人，愿你们的心苏醒。
The poor will see it and be glad: you who are lovers of God, let your hearts have life.

因为耶和华听了穷乏人，不藐视被囚的人。
For the ears of the Lord are open to the poor, and he takes thought for his prisoners.

愿天和地，洋海，和其中一切的动物，都赞美他。
Let the heavens and the earth give praise to him, the seas, and everything moving in them.

因为神要拯救锡安，建造犹大的城邑。他的民要在那里居住，得以为业。
For God will be the saviour of Zion, and the builder of the towns of Judah; so that it may be their resting-place and heritage.

他仆人的后裔，要承受为业。爱他名的人，也要住在其中。
The seed of his servants will have their part in it, and there the lovers of his name will have rest.

（大卫的记念诗，交与伶长。）神阿，求你快快搭救我。耶和华阿，求你速速帮助我。
<To the chief music-maker. Of David. To keep in memory.> Let your salvation come quickly, O God; come quickly to my help, O Lord.

愿那些寻索我命的，抱愧蒙羞。愿那些喜悦我遭害的，退后受辱。
Let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble; let those who have evil designs against me be turned back and made foolish.

愿那些对我说，阿哈，阿哈的，因羞愧退后。
Let those who say Aha, aha! be turned back as a reward of their shame.

愿一切寻求你的，因你高兴欢喜。愿那些喜爱你救恩的常说，当尊神为大。
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May God be great.

但我是困苦穷乏的。神阿，求你速速到我这里来。你是帮助我的，搭救我的。耶和华阿，求你不要耽延。
But I am poor and in need; come to me quickly, O God; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O Lord.

耶和华阿，我投靠你。求你叫我永不羞愧。
In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed.

求你凭你的公义搭救我，救拔我，侧耳听我，拯救我。
Keep me safe in your righteousness, and come to my help; give ear to my voice, and be my saviour.

求你作我常住的磐石。你已经命定要救我。因为你是我的岩石，我的山寨。
Be my strong Rock, the strong place of my salvation; for you are my Rock, and my safe place.

我的神阿，求你救我脱离恶人的手，脱离不义和残暴之人的手。
O my God, take me out of the hand of the sinner, out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.

主耶和华阿，你是我所盼望的。从我年幼你是我所倚靠的。
For you are my hope, O Lord God; I have had faith in you from the time when I was young.

我从出母胎被你扶持。使我出母腹的是你。我必常常赞美你。
You have been my support from the day of my birth; you took me out of my mother's body; my praise will be ever of you.

许多人以我为怪。但你是我坚固的避难所。
I am a wonder to all; but you are my strong tower.

你的赞美，你的荣耀，终日必满了我的口。
My mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day.

我年老的时候，求你不要丢弃我。我力气衰弱的时候，求你不要离弃我。
Do not give me up when I am old; be my help even when my strength is gone.

我的仇敌议论我。那些窥探要害我命的彼此商议，
For my haters are waiting secretly for me; and those who are watching for my soul are banded together in their evil designs,

说，神已经离弃他。我们追赶他，捉拿他吧。因为没有人搭救。
Saying, God has given him up; go after him and take him, for he has no helper.

神阿，求你不要远离我。我的神阿，求你速速帮助我。
O God, be not far from me; O my God, come quickly to my help.

愿那与我性命为敌的，羞愧被灭。愿那谋害我的，受辱蒙羞。
Let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame; let my haters be made low and have no honour.

我却要常常盼望，并要越发赞美你。
But I will go on ever hoping, and increasing in all your praise.

我的口终日要述说你的公义，和你的救恩。因我不计其数。
My mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day; for they are more than may be measured.

我要来说主耶和华大能的事。我单要提说你的公义。
I will give news of the great acts of the Lord God; my words will be of your righteousness, and of yours only.

神阿，自我年幼时，你就教训我。直到如今，我传扬你奇妙的作为。
O God, you have been my teacher from the time when I was young; and I have been talking of your works of wonder even till now.

神阿，我到年老发白的时候，求你不要离弃我，等我将你的能力指示下代，将你的大能指示后世的人。
Now when I am old and grey-headed, O God, give me not up; till I have made clear your strength to this generation, and your power to all those to come.

神阿，你的公义甚高。行过大事的神阿，谁能象你。
Your righteousness, O God, is very high; you have done great things; O God, who is like you?

你是叫我们多经历重大急难的，必使我们复活。从地的深处救上来。
You, who have sent great and bitter troubles on me, will give me life again, lifting me up from the deep waters of the underworld.

求你使我越发昌大，又转来安慰我。
You will make me greater than before, and give me comfort on every side.

我的神阿，我要鼓瑟称赞你，称赞你的诚实。以色列的圣者阿，我要弹琴歌颂你。
I will give praise to you with instruments of music, O my God, for you are true; I will make songs to you with music, O Holy One of Israel.

我歌颂你的时候，我的嘴唇，和你所赎我的灵魂，都必欢呼。
Joy will be on my lips when I make melody to you; and in my soul, to which you have given salvation.

并且我的舌头，必终日讲论你的公义，因为那些谋害我的人，已经蒙羞受辱了。
My tongue will be talking of your righteousness all the day; for those whose purpose is to do me evil have been crushed and put to shame.

（所罗门的诗。）神阿，求你将判断的权柄赐给王，将公义赐给王的儿子。
<Of Solomon.> Give the king your authority, O God, and your righteousness to the king's son.

他要按公义审判你的民，按公平审判你的困苦人。
May he be a judge of your people in righteousness, and make true decisions for the poor.

大山小山，都要因公义使民得享平安。
May the mountains give peace to the people, and the hills righteousness.

他必为民中的困苦人伸冤，拯救穷乏之辈，压碎那欺压人的。
May he be a judge of the poor among the people, may he give salvation to the children of those who are in need; by him let the violent be crushed.

太阳还存，月亮还在，人要敬畏你，直到万代。
May his life go on as long as the sun and moon, through all generations.

他必降临，像雨降在已割的草地上，如甘霖滋润田地。
May he come down like rain on the cut grass; like showers watering the earth.

在他的日子义人要发旺，大有平安，好像月亮长存。
In his days may the upright do well, living in peace as long as there is a moon in heaven.

他要执掌权柄，从这海直到那海，从大河直到地极。
Let his kingdom be from sea to sea, from the River to the ends of the earth.

住在旷野的，必在他面前下拜。他的仇敌，必要舔土。
Let those who are against him go down before him; and let his haters be low in the dust.

他施和海岛的王要进贡。示巴和西巴的王要献礼物。
Let the kings of Tarshish and of the islands come back with offerings; let the kings of Sheba and Seba give of their stores.

诸王都要叩拜他，万国都要事奉他。
Yes, let all kings go down before him; let all nations be his servants.

因为穷乏人呼求的时候，他要搭救，没有人帮助的困苦人，他也要搭救。
For he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry; and to him who is in need, without a helper.

他要怜恤贫寒和穷乏的人，拯救穷苦人的性命。
He will have pity on the poor, and be the saviour of those who are in need.

他要救赎他们脱离欺压和强暴。他们的血在他眼中看为宝贵。
He will keep their souls free from evil designs and violent attacks; and their blood will be of value in his eyes.

他们要存活。示巴的金子要奉给他。人要常常为他祷告，终日称颂他。
May he have long life, and may gold from Sheba be given to him: may prayers be made for him at all times; may blessings be on him every day.

在地的山顶上，五谷必然茂盛。（五谷必然茂盛或作有一把五谷）所结的谷实，要响动如利巴嫩的树林。城里的人，要发旺如地上的草。
May there be wide-stretching fields of grain in the land, shaking on the top of the mountains, full of fruit like Lebanon: may its stems be unnumbered like the grass of the earth.

他的名要存到永远，要留传如日之久。人要因他蒙福。万国要称他有福。
May his name go on for ever, as long as the sun: may men be blessing themselves by him; may all nations be blessing his name.

独行奇事的耶和华以色列的神，是应当称颂的。
Praise be to the Lord God, the God of Israel, the only doer of wonders.

他荣耀的名，也当称颂，直到永远。愿他的荣耀，充满全地。阿们，阿们。
Praise to the glory of his noble name for ever; let all the earth be full of his glory. So be it, So be it.

耶西的儿子大卫的祈祷完毕。
The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended. <A Psalm. Of Asaph.>

（亚萨的诗。）神实在恩待以色列那些清心的人。
Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are clean in heart.

至于我，我的脚几乎失闪。我的脚险些滑跌。
But as for me, my feet had almost gone from under me; I was near to slipping;

我见恶人和狂傲人享平安，就心怀不平。
Because of my envy of the men of pride, when I saw the well-being of the wrongdoers.

他们死的时候，没有疼痛。他们的力气，却也壮实。
For they have no pain; their bodies are fat and strong.

他们不像别人受苦，也不像别人遭灾。
They are not in trouble as others are; they have no part in the unhappy fate of men.

所以骄傲如链子戴在他们的项上。强暴像衣裳遮住他们的身体。
For this reason pride is round them like a chain; they are clothed with violent behaviour as with a robe.

他们的眼睛，因体胖而凸出。他们所得的，过于心里所想的。
Their eyes are bursting with fat; they have more than their heart's desire.

他们讥笑人，凭恶意说欺压人的话。他们说话自高。
Their thoughts are deep with evil designs; their talk from their seats of power is of cruel acts.

他们的口亵渎上天，他们的舌毁谤全地。
Their mouth goes up to heaven; their tongues go walking through the earth.

所以神的民归到这里，喝尽了满杯的苦水。
For this reason they are full of bread; and water is ever flowing for them.

他们说，神怎能晓得？至高者岂有知识呢？
And they say, How will the Lord see this? is there knowledge in the Most High?

看哪，这就是恶人。他们既是常享安逸，财宝便加增。
Truly, such are the sinners; they do well at all times, and their wealth is increased.

我实在徒然洁净了我的心，徒然洗手表明无辜。
As for me, I have made my heart clean to no purpose, washing my hands in righteousness;

因为我终日遭灾难，每早晨受惩治。
For I have been troubled all the day; every morning have I undergone punishment.

我若说，我要这样讲，这就是以奸诈待你的众子。
If I would make clear what it is like, I would say, You are false to the generation of your children.

我思索怎能明白这事，眼看实系为难。
When my thoughts were turned to see the reason of this, it was a weariness in my eyes;

等我进了神的圣所，思想他们的结局。
Till I went into God's holy place, and saw the end of the evil-doers.

你实在把他们安在滑地，使他们掉在沉沦之中。
You put their feet where there was danger of slipping, so that they go down into destruction.

他们转眼之间，成了何等的荒凉。他们被惊恐灭尽了。
How suddenly are they wasted! fears are the cause of their destruction.

人睡醒了怎样看梦，主阿，你醒了，也必照样轻看他们的影像。
As a dream when one is awake, they are ended; they are like an image gone out of mind when sleep is over.

因而我心里发酸，肺腑被刺。
My heart was made bitter, and I was pained by the bite of grief:

我这样愚昧无知，在你面前如畜类一般。
As for me, I was foolish, and without knowledge; I was like a beast before you.

然而我常与你同在。你搀着我的右手。
But still I am ever with you; you have taken me by my right hand.

你要以你的训言引导我，以后必接我到荣耀里。
Your wisdom will be my guide, and later you will put me in a place of honour.

除你以外，在天上我有谁呢？除你以外，在地上我也没有所爱慕的。
Whom have I in heaven but you? and having you I have no desire for anything on earth.

我的肉体，和我的心肠衰残。但神是我心里的力量，又是我的福分，直到永远。
My flesh and my heart are wasting away: but God is the Rock of my heart and my eternal heritage.

远离你的，必要死亡。凡离弃你行邪淫的，你都灭绝了。
For those who are far away from you will come to destruction: you will put an end to all those who have not kept faith with you.

但我亲近神是与我有益。我以主耶和华为我的避难所，好叫我述说你一切的作为。
But it is good for me to come near to God: I have put my faith in the Lord God, so that I may make clear all his works.

（亚萨的训诲诗。）神阿，你为何永远丢弃我们呢？你为何向你草场的羊发怒如烟冒出呢？
<Maschil. Of Asaph.> Of God, why have you put us away from you for ever? why is the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who are your care?

求你记念你古时所得来的会众，就是你所赎作你产业支派的。并记念你向来所居住的锡安山。
Keep in mind your band of worshippers, for whom you gave payment in the days which are past, whom you took for yourself as the people of your heritage; even this mountain of Zion, which has been your resting-place.

求你举步去看那日久荒凉之地，仇敌在圣所中所行的一切恶事。
Go up and see the unending destruction; all the evil which your haters have done in the holy place;

你的敌人在你会中吼叫。他们竖了自己的旗为记号。
Sending out their voices like lions among your worshippers; they have put up their signs to be seen.

他们好像人扬起斧子，砍伐林中的树。
They are cutting down, like a man whose blade is lifted up against the thick trees.

圣所中一切雕刻的，他们现在用斧子锤子打坏了。
Your doors are broken down with hammers and iron blades.

他们用火焚烧你的圣所，亵渎你名的居所，拆毁到地。
They have put on fire your holy place; they have made the place of your name unclean, pulling it down to the earth.

他们心里说，我们要尽行毁灭，他们就在遍地把神的会所都烧毁了。
They have said in their hearts, Let us put an end to them all together; they have given over to the fire all God's places of worship in the land.

我们不见我们的标帜。不再有先知。我们内中也没有人知道这灾祸要到几时呢？
We do not see our signs: there is no longer any prophet, or anyone among us to say how long.

神阿，敌人辱骂要到几时呢？仇敌亵渎你的名，要到永远吗？
O God, how long will those who are against us say cruel things? will the hater go on looking down on your name for ever?

你为什么缩回你的右手。求你从怀中伸出来，毁灭他们。
Why are you keeping back your hand, and covering your right hand in your robe?

神自古以来为我的王，在地上施行拯救。
For from the past God is my King, working salvation in the earth.

你曾用能力将海分开，将水中大鱼的头打破。
The sea was parted in two by your strength; the heads of the great sea-beasts were broken.

你曾砸碎鳄鱼的头，把他给旷野的禽兽为食物。（禽兽原文作民）
The heads of the great snake were crushed by you; you gave them as food to the fishes of the sea.

你曾分裂磐石，水便成了溪河，你使长流的江河干了。
You made valleys for fountains and springs; you made the ever-flowing rivers dry.

白昼属你，黑夜也属你。亮光和日头，是你所预备的。
The day is yours and the night is yours: you made the light and the sun.

地的一切疆界，是你所立的。夏天和冬天是你所定的。
By you all the limits of the earth were fixed; you have made summer and winter.

耶和华阿，仇敌辱骂，愚顽民亵渎了你的名，求你记念这事。
Keep this in mind, O Lord, that your haters have said cruel things, and that your name has been looked down on by a people of evil behaviour.

不要将你斑鸠的性命交给野兽。不要永远忘记你困苦人的性命。
O give not the soul of your dove to the hawk; let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever.

求你顾念所立的约。因为地上黑暗之处，都满了强暴的居所。
Keep in mind your undertaking; for the dark places of the earth are full of pride and cruel acts.

不要叫受欺压的人蒙羞回去。要叫困苦穷乏的人赞美你的名。
O let not the crushed be turned back in shame; let the low man and the poor give praise to your name.

神阿，求你起来，为自己伸诉。要记念愚顽人怎样终日辱骂你。
Up! O God, be the judge of your cause; keep in mind the bitter things which the man of evil behaviour says against you every day.

不要忘记你敌人的声音。那起来敌你之人的喧哗时常上升。
Keep in mind the voice of your haters; the outcry of those who come against you goes up every day.

（亚萨的诗歌，交与伶长，调用休要毁坏。）神阿，我们称谢你，我们称谢你，因为你的名相近，人都述说你奇妙的作为。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.> To you, O God, we give praise, to you we give praise: and those who give honour to your name make clear your works of power.

我到了所定的日期，必按正直施行审判。
When the right time has come, I will be the judge in righteousness.

地和其上的居民，都消化了。我曾立了地的柱子。（细拉）
When the earth and all its people become feeble, I am the support of its pillars. (Selah.)

我对狂傲人说，不要行事狂傲。对凶恶人说，不要举角。
I say to the men of pride, Let your pride be gone: and to the sinners, Let not your horn be lifted up.

不要把你们的角高举。不要挺着颈项说话。
Let not your horn be lifted up: let no more words of pride come from your outstretched necks.

因为高举非从东，非从西，也非从南而来。
For honour does not come from the east, or from the west, or uplifting from the south;

惟有神断定。他使这人降卑，使那人升高。
But God is the judge, putting down one, and lifting up another.

耶和华手里有杯。其中的酒起沫。杯内满了搀杂的酒。他倒出来。地上的恶人必都喝这酒的渣滓，而且喝尽。
For in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red; it is well mixed, overflowing from his hand: he will make all the sinners of the earth take of it, even to the last drop.

但我要宣扬，直到永远。我要歌颂雅各的神。
But I will ever be full of joy, making songs of praise to the God of Jacob.

恶人一切的角，我要砍断。惟有义人的角，必被高举。
By him will all the horns of the sinners be cut off; but the horns of the upright will be lifted up.

（亚萨的诗歌，交与伶长，用丝弦的乐器。）在犹大神为人所认识。在以色列他的名为大。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Neginoth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.> In Judah is the knowledge of God; his name is great in Israel,

在撒冷有他的帐幕，在锡安有他的居所。
In Salem is his tent, his resting-place in Zion.

他在那里折断弓上的火箭，并盾牌，刀剑，和争战的兵器。（细拉）
There were the arrows of the bow broken, there he put an end to body-cover, sword, and fight. (Selah.)

你从有野食之山而来，有光华和荣美。
You are shining and full of glory, more than the eternal mountains.

心中勇敢的人，都被抢夺。他们睡了长觉。没有一个英雄能措手。
Gone is the wealth of the strong, their last sleep has overcome them; the men of war have become feeble.

雅各的神阿，你的斥责一发坐车的，骑马的，都沉睡了。
At the voice of your wrath, O God of Jacob, deep sleep has overcome carriage and horse.

惟独你是可畏的。你怒气一发，谁能在你面前站得住呢？
You, you are to be feared; who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath?

你从天上使人听判断。神起来施行审判，要救地上一切谦卑的人。那时地就惧怕而静默。（细拉）
From heaven you gave your decision; the earth, in its fear, gave no sound,


When God took his place as judge, for the salvation of the poor on the earth. (Selah.)

人的忿怒，要成全你的荣美。人的余怒，你要禁止。
The ... will give you praise; the rest of ...

你们许愿，当向耶和华你们的神还愿。在他四面的人，都当拿贡物献给那可畏的主。
Give to the Lord your God what is his by right; let all who are round him give offerings to him who is to be feared.

他要挫折王子的骄气。他向地上的君王，显威可畏。
He puts an end to the wrath of rulers; he is feared by the kings of the earth.

（亚萨的诗，照耶杜顿的作法，交与伶长。）我要向神发声呼求。我向神发声，他必留心听我。
<To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.> I was crying to God with my voice; even to God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.

我在患难之日寻求主。我在夜间不住地举手祷告。我的心不肯受安慰。
In the day of my trouble, my heart was turned to the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night without resting; my soul would not be comforted.

我想念神，就烦躁不安。我沉吟悲伤，心便发昏。（细拉）
I will keep God in memory, with sounds of grief; my thoughts are troubled, and my spirit is overcome. (Selah.)

你叫我不能闭眼。我烦乱不安，甚至不能说话。
You keep my eyes from sleep; I am so troubled that no words come.

我追想古时之日，上古之年。
My thoughts go back to the days of the past, to the years which are gone.

我想起我夜间的歌曲，扪心自问。我心里也仔细省察。
The memory of my song comes back to me in the night; my thoughts are moving in my heart; my spirit is searching with care.

难道主要永远丢弃我，不再施恩吗？
Will the Lord put me away for ever? will he be kind no longer?

难道他的慈爱永远穷尽，他的应许世世废弃吗？
Is his mercy quite gone for ever? has his word come to nothing?

难道神忘记开恩。因发怒就止住他的慈悲吗？（细拉）
Has God put away the memory of his pity? are his mercies shut up by his wrath? (Selah.)

我便说，这是我的懦弱。但我要追念至高者显出右手之年代。
And I said, It is a weight on my spirit; but I will keep in mind the years of the right hand of the Most High.

我要提说耶和华所行的。我要记念你古时的奇事。
I will keep in mind the works of Jah: I will keep the memory of your wonders in the past.

我也要思想你的经营，默念你的作为。
I will give thought to all your work, while my mind goes over your acts of power.

神阿，你的作为是洁净的。有何神大如神呢？
Your way, O God, is holy: what god is so great as our God?

你是行奇事的神。你曾在列邦中彰显你的能力。
You are the God who does works of power: you have made your strength clear to the nations.

你曾用你的膀臂赎了你的民，就是雅各和约瑟的子孙。（细拉）
With your arm you have made your people free, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah.)

神阿，诸水见你，一见就都惊惶。深渊也都战抖。
The waters saw you, O God; the waters saw you, they were in fear: even the deep was troubled.

云中倒出水来。天空发出响声。你的箭也飞行四方。
The clouds sent out water; the skies gave out a sound; truly, your arrows went far and wide.

你的雷声在旋风中。电光照亮世界。大地战抖震动。
The voice of your thunder went rolling on; the world was flaming with the light of the storm; the earth was shaking.

你的道在海中，你的路在大水中，你的脚踪无人知道。
Your way was in the sea, and your road in the great waters; there was no knowledge of your footsteps.

你曾借摩西和亚伦的手，引导你的百姓，好像羊群一般。
You were guiding your people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

（亚萨的训诲诗。）我的民哪，你们要留心听我的训诲，侧耳听我口中的话。
<Maschil. Of Asaph.> Give ear, O my people, to my law; let your ears be bent down to the words of my mouth.

我要开口说比喻。我要说出古时的谜语。
Opening my mouth I will give out a story, even the dark sayings of old times;

是我们所听见所知道的，也是我们的祖宗告诉我们的。
Which have come to our hearing and our knowledge, as they were given to us by our fathers.

我们不将这些事向他们的子孙隐瞒。要将耶和华的美德和他的能力，并他奇妙的作为，述说给后代听。
We will not keep them secret from our children; we will make clear to the coming generation the praises of the Lord and his strength, and the great works of wonder which he has done.

因为他在雅各中立法度，在以色列中设律法，是他吩咐我们祖宗，要传给子孙的。
He put up a witness in Jacob, and made a law in Israel; which he gave to our fathers so that they might give knowledge of them to their children;

使将要生的后代子孙，可以晓得。他们也要起来告诉他们的子孙。
So that the generation to come might have knowledge of them, even the children of the future, who would give word of them to their children;

好叫他们仰望神，不忘记神的作为。惟要守他的命令。
So that they might put their hope in God, and not let God's works go out of their minds, but keep his laws;

不要像他们的祖宗，是顽梗悖逆居心不正之辈，向着神心不诚实。
And not be like their fathers, a stiff-necked and uncontrolled generation; a generation whose heart was hard, whose spirit was not true to God.

以法莲的子孙，带着兵器，拿着弓，临阵之日，转身退后。
The children of Ephraim, armed with bows, were turned back on the day of the fight.

他们不遵守神的约，不肯照他的律法行。
They were not ruled by God's word, and they would not go in the way of his law;

又忘记他所行的，和他显给他们奇妙的作为。
They let his works go out of their memory, and the wonders which he had made them see.

他在埃及地，在琐安田，在他们祖宗的眼前，施行奇事。
He did great works before the eyes of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.

他将海分裂，使他们过去。又叫水立起如垒。
The sea was cut in two so that they might go through; the waters were massed together on this side and on that.

他白日用云彩，终夜用火光，引导他们。
In the daytime he was guiding them in the cloud, and all through the night with a light of fire.

他在旷野分裂磐石，多多地给他们水喝，如从深渊而出。
The rocks of the waste land were broken by his power, and he gave them drink as out of the deep waters.

他使水从磐石涌出，叫水如江河下流。
He made streams come out of the rock; and waters came flowing down like rivers.

他们却仍旧得罪他，在干燥之地悖逆至高者。
And they went on sinning against him even more, turning away from the Most High in the waste land;

他们心中试探神，随自己所欲的求食物。
Testing God in their hearts, requesting meat for their desire.

并且妄论神，说，神在旷野岂能摆设筵席吗？
They said bitter words against God, saying, Is God able to make ready a table in the waste land?

他曾击打磐石，使水涌出，成了江河。他还能赐粮食吗？还能为他的百姓预备肉吗？
See, the rock was cut open by his power, so that the water came rushing out, and overflowing streams; is he able to give us bread? is he able to get meat for his people?

所以耶和华听见，就发怒。有烈火向雅各烧起，有怒气向以色列上腾。
So these things came to the Lord's ears, and he was angry; and a fire was lighted against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel;

因为他们不信服神，不倚赖他的救恩。
Because they had no faith in God, and no hope in his salvation.

他却吩咐天空，又敞开天上的门。
And he gave orders to the clouds on high, and the doors of heaven were open;

降吗哪像雨给他们吃，将天上的粮食赐给他们。
And he sent down manna like rain for their food, and gave them the grain of heaven.

各人（或作人）吃大能者的食物。他赐下粮食，使他们饱足。
Man took part in the food of strong ones; he sent them meat in full measure.

他领东风起在天空，又用能力引了南风来。
He sent an east wind from heaven, driving on the south wind by his power.

他降肉像雨在他们当中，多如尘土，又降飞鸟，多如海沙。
He sent down meat on them like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the sea,

落在他们的营中，在他们住处的四面。
And he let it come down into their resting-place, round about their tents.

他们吃了，而且饱足。这样，就随了他们所欲的。
So they had food and were full; for he gave them their desire;

他们贪而无厌，食物还在他们口中的时候，
But they were not turned from their desires; and while the food was still in their mouths,

神的怒气，就向他们上腾，杀了他们内中的肥壮人。打倒以色列的少年人。
The wrath of God came on them, and put to death the fattest of them, and put an end to the young men of Israel.

虽是这样，他们仍旧犯罪，不信他奇妙的作为。
For all this they went on sinning even more, and had no faith in his great wonders.

因此他叫他们的日子，全归虚空，叫他们的年岁，尽属惊恐。
So their days were wasted like a breath, and their years in trouble.

他杀他们的时候，他们才求问他，回心转意，切切地寻求神。
When he sent death on them, then they made search for him; turning to him and looking for him with care;

他们也追念神是他们的磐石，至高的神，是他们的救赎主。
In the memory that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their saviour.

他们却用口谄媚他，用舌向他说谎。
But their lips were false to him, and their tongues were untrue to him;

因他们的心向他不正，在他的约上，也不忠心。
And their hearts were not right with him, and they did not keep their agreement with him.

但他有怜悯，赦免他们的罪孽，不灭绝他们。而且屡次消他的怒气，不发尽他的忿怒。
But he, being full of pity, has forgiveness for sin, and does not put an end to man: frequently turning back his wrath, and not being violently angry.

他想到他们不过是血气，是一阵去而不返的风。
So he kept in mind that they were only flesh; a breath which is quickly gone, and will not come again.

他们在旷野悖逆他，在荒地叫他担忧，何其多呢？
How frequently did they go against him in the waste land, and give him cause for grief in the dry places!

他们再三试探神，惹动以色列的圣者。
Again they put God to the test, and gave pain to the Holy One of Israel.

他们不追念他的能力（原文作手），和赎他们脱离敌人的日子。
They did not keep in mind the work of his hand, or the day when he took them from the power of their haters;

他怎样在埃及地显神迹，在琐安田显奇事。
How he had done his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan;

把他们的江河，并河汊的水，都变为血，使他们不能喝。
So that their rivers were turned to blood, and they were not able to get drink from their streams.

他叫苍蝇成群，落在他们当中，嘬尽他们。又叫青蛙灭了他们。
He sent different sorts of flies among them, poisoning their flesh; and frogs for their destruction.

把他们的土产交给蚂蚱，把他们辛苦得来的交给蝗虫。
He gave the increase of their fields to worms, the fruits of their industry to the locusts.

他降冰雹打坏他们的葡萄树。下严霜打坏他们的桑树。
He sent ice for the destruction of their vines; their trees were damaged by the bitter cold.

又把他们的牲畜交给冰雹，把他们的群畜交给闪电。
Ice was rained down on their cattle; thunderstorms sent destruction among the flocks.

他使猛烈的怒气，和忿怒，恼恨，苦难，成了一群降灾的使者，临到他们。
He sent on them the heat of his wrath, his bitter disgust, letting loose evil angels among them.

他为自己的怒气修平了路，将他们交给瘟疫，使他们死亡。
He let his wrath have its way; he did not keep back their soul from death, but gave their life to disease.

在埃及击杀一切长子，在含的帐棚中，击杀他们强壮时头生的。
He gave to destruction all the first sons of Egypt; the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;

他却领出自己的民如羊，在旷野引他们如羊群。
But he took his people out like sheep, guiding them in the waste land like a flock.

他领他们稳稳妥妥的，使他们不至害怕。海却淹没他们的仇敌。
He took them on safely so that they had no fear; but their haters were covered by the sea.

他带他们到自己圣地的边界，到他右手所得的这山地。
And he was their guide to his holy land, even to the mountain, which his right hand had made his;

他在他们面前赶出外邦人，用绳子将外邦的地量给他们为业，叫以色列支派的人，住在他们的帐棚里。
Driving out nations before them, marking out the line of their heritage, and giving the people of Israel their tents for a resting-place.

他们仍旧试探悖逆至高的神，不守他的法度。
But they were bitter against the Most High God, testing him, and not keeping his laws;

反倒退后，行诡诈，像他们的祖宗一样。他们改变，如同翻背的弓。
Their hearts were turned back and untrue like their fathers; they were turned to one side like a twisted bow.

因他们的丘坛，惹了他的怒气，因他们雕刻的偶像，触动他的愤恨。
They made him angry with their high places; moving him to wrath with their images.

神听见，就发怒，极其憎恶以色列人。
When this came to God's ears he was very angry, and gave up Israel completely;

甚至他离弃示罗的帐幕，就是他在人间所搭的帐棚。
So that he went away from the holy place in Shiloh, the tent which he had put among men;

又将他的约柜（原文作能力）交与人掳去，将他的荣耀交在敌人手中。
And he let his strength be taken prisoner, and gave his glory into the hands of his hater.

并将他的百姓交与刀剑，向他的产业发怒。
He gave his people up to the sword, and was angry with his heritage.

少年人被火烧灭。处女也无喜歌。
Their young men were burned in the fire; and their virgins were not praised in the bride-song.

祭司倒在刀下。寡妇却不哀哭。
Their priests were put to death by the sword, and their widows made no weeping for them.

那时主像世人睡醒，像勇士饮酒呼喊。
Then was the Lord like one awaking from sleep, and like a strong man crying out because of wine.

他就打退了他的敌人，叫他们永蒙羞辱。
His haters were turned back by his blows and shamed for ever.

并且他弃掉约瑟的帐棚，不拣选以法莲支派，
And he put the tent of Joseph on one side, and took not the tribe of Ephraim;

却拣选犹大支派，他所喜爱的锡安山。
But he took the tribe of Judah for himself, and the mountain of Zion, in which he had pleasure.

盖造他的圣所，好像高峰，又像他建立永存之地。
And he made his holy place like the high heaven, like the earth which is fixed by him for ever.

又拣选他的仆人大卫，从羊圈中将他召来。
He took David to be his servant, taking him from the place of the flocks;

叫他不再跟从那些带奶的母羊，为要牧养自己的百姓雅各，和自己的产业以色列。
From looking after the sheep which were giving milk, he took him to give food to Jacob his people, and to Israel his heritage.

于是他按心中的纯正，牧养他们，用手中的巧妙，引导他们。
So he gave them food with an upright heart, guiding them by the wisdom of his hands.

（亚萨的诗。）神阿，外邦人进入你的产业，污秽你的圣殿，使耶路撒冷变成荒堆。
<A Psalm. Of Asaph.> O God, the nations have come into your heritage; they have made your holy Temple unclean; they have made Jerusalem a mass of broken walls.

把你仆人的尸首，交与天空的飞鸟为食，把你圣民的肉，交与地上的野兽。
They have given the bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the air, and the flesh of your saints to the beasts of the earth.

在耶路撒冷周围流他们的血如水，无人葬埋。
Their blood has been flowing like water round about Jerusalem; there was no one to put them in their last resting-place.

我们成为邻国的羞辱，成为我们四围人的嗤笑讥刺。
We are looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and made sport of by those who are round us.

耶和华阿，这到几时呢？你要动怒到永远吗？你的愤恨要如火焚烧吗？
How long, O Lord? will you be angry for ever? will your wrath go on burning like fire?

愿你将你的忿怒倒在那不认识你的外邦，和那不求告你名的国度。
Let your wrath be on the nations who have no knowledge of you, and on the kingdoms who have not made prayer to your name.

因为他们吞了雅各，把他的住处变为荒场。
For they have taken Jacob for their meat, and made waste his house.

求你不要记念我们先祖的罪孽，向我们追讨。愿你的慈悲快迎着我们。因为我们落到极卑微的地步。
Do not keep in mind against us the sins of our fathers; let your mercy come to us quickly, for we have been made very low.

拯救我们的神阿，求你因你名的荣耀，帮助我们，为你名的缘故，搭救我们，赦免我们的罪。
Give us help, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; take us out of danger and give us forgiveness for our sins, because of your name.

为何容外邦人说，他们的神在哪里呢？愿你使外邦人知道你在我们眼前，伸你仆人流血的冤。
Why may the nations say, Where is their God? Let payment for the blood of your servants be made openly among the nations before our eyes.

愿被囚之人的叹息，达到你面前。愿你按你的大能力，存留那些将要死的人。
Let the cry of the prisoner come before you; with your strong arm make free the children of death;

主阿，愿你将我们邻邦所羞辱你的羞辱，加七倍归到他们身上。
And give punishment seven times over into the breast of our neighbours for the bitter words which they have said against you, O Lord.

这样，你的民，你草场的羊，要称谢你，直到永远。要述说赞美你的话，直到万代。
So we your people, and the sheep of your flock, will give you glory for ever: we will go on praising you through all generations.

（亚萨的诗，交与伶长，调用为证的百合花。）领约瑟如领羊群之以色列的牧者阿，求你留心听。坐在二基路伯上的阿，求你发出光来。
<To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim-eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.> Give ear, O Keeper of Israel, guiding Joseph like a flock; you who have your seat on the winged ones, let your glory be seen.

在以法莲便雅悯玛拿西前面施展你的大能，来救我们。
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, let your strength be awake from sleep, and come as our salvation.

神阿，求你使我们回转（回转或作复兴），使你的脸发光，我们便要得救。
Take us back again, O God; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.

耶和华万军之神阿，你向你百姓的祷告发怒，要到几时呢？
O Lord God of armies, how long will your wrath be burning against the rest of your people?

你以眼泪当食物给他们吃，又多量出眼泪给他们喝。
You have given them the bread of weeping for food; for their drink you have given them sorrow in great measure.

你使邻邦因我们分争。我们的仇敌彼此戏笑。
You make us a cause of war among our neighbours; our haters are laughing at us among themselves.

万军之神阿，求你使我们回转，使你的脸发光，我们便要得救。
Take us back again, O God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.

你从埃及挪出一棵葡萄树，赶出外邦人，把这树栽上。
You took a vine out of Egypt: driving out the nations, and planting it in their land.

你在这树根前预备了地方，他就深深扎根，爬满了地。
You made ready a place for it, so that it might take deep root, and it sent out its branches over all the land.

他的影子遮满了山，枝子好像佳美的香柏树。
The mountains were covered with its shade, and the great trees with its branches.

他发出枝子，长到大海，发出蔓子，延到大河。
It sent out its arms to the Sea, and its branches to the River.

你为何拆毁这树的篱笆，任凭一切过路的人摘取。
Why are its walls broken down by your hands, so that all who go by may take its fruit?

林中出来的野猪，把他糟踏，野地的走兽，拿他当食物。
It is uprooted by the pigs from the woods, the beasts of the field get their food from it.

万军之神阿，求你回转，从天上垂看，眷顾这葡萄树，
Come back, O God of armies: from heaven let your eyes be turned to this vine, and give your mind to it,

保护你右手所栽的，和你为自己所坚固的枝子。
Even to the tree which was planted by your right hand, and to the branch which you made strong for yourself.

这树已经被火焚烧被刀砍伐，他们因你脸上的怒容就灭亡了。
It is burned with fire; it is cut down: they are made waste by the wrath of your face.

愿你的手扶持你右边的人，就是你为自己所坚固的人子。
Let your hand be on the man of your right hand, on the son of man whom you made strong for yourself.

这样，我们便不退后离开你。求你救活我们，我们就要求告你的名。
So will we not be turned back from you; keep us in life, and we will give praise to your name.

耶和华万军之神阿，求你使我们回转，使你的脸发光，我们便要得救。
Take us back, O Lord God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.

（亚萨的诗，交与伶长。用迦特乐器。）你们当向神我们的力量大声欢呼，向雅各的神发声欢乐，
<To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith. Of Asaph.> Make a song to God our strength: make a glad cry to the God of Jacob.

唱起诗歌，打手鼓，弹美琴与瑟。
Take up the melody, playing on an instrument of music, even on corded instruments.

当在月朔，并月望，我们过节的日期，吹角。
Let the horn be sounded in the time of the new moon, at the full moon, on our holy feast-day:

因这是为以色列定的律例，是雅各神的典章。
For this is a rule for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.

他去攻击埃及地的时候，在约瑟中间立此为证。我在那里听见我所不明白的言语。
He gave it to Joseph as a witness, when he went out over the land of Egypt; then the words of a strange tongue were sounding in my ears.

神说，我使你的肩得脱重担，你的手放下筐子。
I took the weight from his back; his hands were made free from the baskets.

你在急难中呼求，我就搭救你。我在雷的隐密处应允你，在米利巴水那里试验你。（细拉）
You gave a cry in your trouble, and I made you free; I gave you an answer in the secret place of the thunder; I put you to the test at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.)

我的民哪，你当听。我要劝戒你。以色列阿，甚愿你肯听从我。
Give ear, O my people, and I will give you my word, O Israel, if you will only do as I say!

在你当中不可有别的神。外邦的神，你也不可下拜。
There is to be no strange god among you; you are not to give worship to any other god.

我是耶和华你的神，曾把你从埃及地领上来。你要大大张口，我就给你充满。
I am the Lord your God, who took you up from the land of Egypt: let your mouth be open wide, so that I may give you food.

无奈我的民不听我的声音。以色列全不理我。
But my people did not give ear to my voice; Israel would have nothing to do with me.

我便任凭他们心里刚硬，随自己的计谋而行。
So I gave them up to the desires of their hearts; that they might go after their evil purposes.

甚愿我的民肯听从我，以色列肯行我的道。
If only my people would give ear to me, walking in my ways!

我便速速治服他们的仇敌，反手攻击他们的敌人。
I would quickly overcome their haters: my hand would be turned against those who make war on them.

恨耶和华的人必来投降，但他的百姓，必永久长存。
The haters of the Lord would be broken, and their destruction would be eternal.

他也必拿上好的麦子给他们吃。又拿从磐石出的蜂蜜，叫他们饱足。
I would give them the best grain for food; you would be full of honey from the rock.

（亚萨的诗。）神站在有权力者的会中。在诸神中行审判。
<A Psalm. Of Asaph.> God is in the meeting-place of God; he is judging among the gods.

说，你们审判不秉公义，徇恶人的情面，要到几时呢？（细拉）
How long will you go on judging falsely, having respect for the persons of evil-doers? (Selah.)

你们当为贫寒的人和孤儿伸冤。当为困苦和穷乏的人施行公义。
Give ear to the cause of the poor and the children without fathers; let those who are troubled and in need have their rights.

当保护贫寒和穷乏的人，救他们脱离恶人的手。
Be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing: take them out of the hand of the evil-doers.

你们仍不知道，也不明白，在黑暗中走来走去。地的根基都摇动了。
They have no knowledge or sense; they go about in the dark: all the bases of the earth are moved.

我曾说，你们是神，都是至高者的儿子。
I said, You are gods; all of you are the sons of the Most High:

然而你们要死，与世人一样。要仆倒，像王子中的一位。
But you will come to death like men, falling like one of the rulers of the earth.

神阿，求你起来，审判世界。因为你要得万邦为业。
Up! O God, come as judge of the earth; for all the nations are your heritage.

（亚萨的诗歌。）神阿，求你不要静默。神阿，求你不要闭口，也不要不作声。
<A Song. A Psalm. Of Asaph.> O God, do not keep quiet: let your lips be open and take no rest, O God.

因为你的仇敌喧嚷。恨你的抬起头来。
For see! those who make war on you are out of control; your haters are lifting up their heads.

他们同谋奸诈，要害你的百姓，彼此商议，要害你所隐藏的人。
They have made wise designs against your people, talking together against those whom you keep in a secret place.

他们说，来吧，我们将他们剪灭，使他们不再成国。使以色列的名，不再被人记念。
They have said, Come, let us put an end to them as a nation; so that the name of Israel may go out of man's memory.

他们同心商议，彼此结盟，要抵挡你。
For they have all come to an agreement; they are all joined together against you:

就是住帐棚的以东人，和以实玛利人。摩押和夏甲人。
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarites;

迦巴勒，亚扪，和亚玛力，非利士，并推罗的居民。
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek; the Philistines and the people of Tyre;

亚述也与他们连合。他们作罗得子孙的帮手。（细拉）
Assur is joined with them; they have become the support of the children of Lot. (Selah.)

求你待他们如待米甸，如在基顺河待西西拉和耶宾一样。
Do to them what you did to the Midianites; what you did to Sisera and Jabin, at the stream of Kishon:

他们在隐多珥灭亡，成了地上的粪土。
Who came to destruction at En-dor; their bodies became dust and waste.

求你叫他们的首领，像俄立和西伊伯，叫他们的王子，都像西巴和撒慕拿。
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna:

他们说，我们要得神的住处，作为自己的产业。
Who have said, Let us take for our heritage the resting-place of God.

我的神阿，求你叫他们像旋风的尘土，像风前的碎秸。
O my God, make them like the rolling dust; like dry stems before the wind.

火怎样焚烧树林，火焰怎样烧着山岭。
As fire burning a wood, and as a flame causing fire on the mountains,

求你也照样用狂风追赶他们，用暴雨恐吓他们。
So go after them with your strong wind, and let them be full of fear because of your storm.

愿你使他们满面羞耻，好叫他们寻求你耶和华的名。
Let their faces be full of shame; so that they may give honour to your name, O Lord.

愿他们永远羞愧惊惶。愿他们惭愧灭亡。
Let them be overcome and troubled for ever; let them be put to shame and come to destruction;

使他们知道惟独你名为耶和华的，是全地以上的至高者。
So that men may see that you only, whose name is Yahweh, are Most High over all the earth.

（可拉后裔的诗，交与伶长。用迦特乐器。）万军之耶和华阿，你的居所何等可爱。
<To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.> How dear are your tents, O Lord of armies!

我羡慕渴想耶和华的院宇。我的心肠，我的肉体，向永生神呼吁（或作欢呼）。
The passion of my soul's desire is for the house of the Lord; my heart and my flesh are crying out for the living God.

万军之耶和华我的王，我的神阿，在你祭坛那里，麻雀为自己找着房屋。燕子为自己找着抱雏之窝。
The little birds have places for themselves, where they may put their young, even your altars, O Lord of armies, my King and my God.

如此住在你殿中的，便为有福。他们仍要赞美你。（细拉）
Happy are they whose resting-place is in your house: they will still be praising you. (Selah.)

靠你有力量心中想往锡安大道的，这人便为有福。
Happy is the man whose strength is in you; in whose heart are the highways to Zion.

他们经过流泪谷，叫这谷变为泉源之地。并有秋雨之福，盖满了全谷。
Going through the valley of balsam-trees, they make it a place of springs; it is clothed with blessings by the early rain.

他们行走，力上加力，各人到锡安朝见神。
They go from strength to strength; every one of them comes before God in Zion.

耶和华万军之神阿，求你听我的祷告。雅各的神阿，求你留心听。（细拉）
O Lord God of armies, let my prayer come to you: give ear, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)

神阿，你是我们的盾牌。求你垂顾观看你受膏者的面。
O God, let your eyes be on him who is our safe cover, and let your heart be turned to your king.

在你的院宇住一日，胜似在别处住千日。宁可在我神殿中看门，不愿住在恶人的帐棚里。
For a day in your house is better than a thousand. It is better to be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to be living in the tents of sin.

因为耶和华神是日头，是盾牌，要赐下恩惠和荣耀。他未尝留下一样好处，不给那些行动正直的人。
The Lord God is our sun and our strength: the Lord will give grace and glory: he will not keep back any good thing from those whose ways are upright.

万军之耶和华阿，倚靠你的人，便为有福。
O Lord of armies, happy is the man whose hope is in you.

（可拉后裔的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，你已经向你的地施恩，救回被掳的雅各。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.> Lord, you were good to your land: changing the fate of Jacob.

你赦免了你百姓的罪孽，遮盖了他们一切的过犯。（细拉）
The wrongdoing of your people had forgiveness; all their sin had been covered. (Selah.)

你收转了所发的忿怒，和你猛烈的怒气。
You were no longer angry: you were turned from the heat of your wrath.

拯救我们的神阿，求你使我们回转，叫你的恼恨向我们止息。
Come back to us, O God of our salvation, and be angry with us no longer.

你要向我们发怒到永远吗？你要将你的怒气延留到万代吗？
Will you go on being angry with us for ever? will you keep your wrath against us through all the long generations?

你不再将我们救活，使你的百姓靠你欢喜吗？
Will you not give us life again, so that your people may be glad in you?

耶和华阿，求你使我们得见你的慈爱，又将你的救恩赐给我们。
Let us see your mercy, O Lord, and give us your salvation.

我要听神耶和华所说的话。因为他必应许将平安赐给他的百姓，他的圣民。他们却不可再转去妄行。
I will give ear to the voice of the Lord; for he will say words of peace to his people and to his saints; but let them not go back to their foolish ways.

他的救恩，诚然与敬畏他的人相近，叫荣耀住在我们的地上。
Truly, his salvation is near to his worshippers; so that glory may be in our land.

慈爱和诚实，彼此相遇。公义和平安，彼此相亲。
Mercy and faith have come together; righteousness and peace have given one another a kiss.

诚实从地而生，公义从天而现。
Faith comes up from the earth like a plant; righteousness is looking down from heaven.

耶和华必将好处赐给我们。我们的地，也要多出土产。
The Lord will give what is good; and our land will give its increase.

公义要行在他面前，叫他的脚踪，成为可走的路。
Righteousness will go before him, making a way for his footsteps.

（大卫的祈祷。）耶和华阿，求你侧耳应允我，因我是困苦穷乏的。
<A Prayer. Of David.> Let your ears be open to my voice, O Lord, and give me an answer; for I am poor and in need.

求你保存我的性命。因我是虔诚人。我的神阿，求你拯救这倚靠你的仆人。
Keep my soul, for I am true to you; O my God, give salvation to your servant, whose hope is in you.

主阿，求你怜悯我，因我终日求告你。
Have mercy on me, O Lord; for my cry goes up to you all the day.

主阿，求你使仆人心里欢喜。因为我的心仰望你。
Make glad the soul of your servant; for it is lifted up to you, O Lord.

主阿，你本为良善，乐意饶恕人，有丰盛的慈爱，赐给凡求告你的人。
You are good, O Lord, and full of forgiveness; your mercy is great to all who make their cry to you.

耶和华阿，求你留心听我的祷告，垂听我恳求的声音。
O Lord, give ear to my prayer; and take note of the sound of my requests.

我在患难之日要求告你。因为你必应允我。
In the day of my trouble I send up my cry to you; for you will give me an answer.

主阿，诸神之中，没有可比你的。你的作为也无可比。
There is no god like you, O Lord; there are no works like your works.

主阿，你所造的万民，都要来敬拜你。他们也要荣耀你的名。
Let all the nations whom you have made come and give worship to you, O Lord, giving glory to your name.

因你为大，且行奇妙的事。惟独你是神。
For you are great, and do great works of wonder; you only are God.

耶和华阿，求你将你的道指教我。我要照你的真理行。求你使我专心敬畏你的名。
Make your way clear to me, O Lord; I will go on my way in your faith: let my heart be glad in the fear of your name.

主我的神阿，我要一心称赞你。我要荣耀你的名，直到永远。
I will give you praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will give glory to your name for ever.

因为你向我发的慈爱是大的。你救了我的灵魂，免入极深的阴间。
For your mercy to me is great; you have taken my soul up from the deep places of the underworld.

神阿，骄傲的人起来攻击我，又有一党强横的人寻索我的命。他们没有将你放在眼中。
O God, men of pride have come up against me, and the army of violent men would take my life; they have not put you before them.

主阿，你是有怜悯有恩典的神，不轻易发怒，并有丰盛的慈爱和诚实。
But you, O Lord, are a God full of pity and forgiveness, slow to get angry, great in mercy and wisdom.

求你向我转脸，怜恤我，将你的力量赐给仆人，救你婢女的儿子。
O be turned to me and have mercy on me: give your strength to your servant, and your salvation to the son of her who is your servant.

求你向我显出恩待我的凭据，叫恨我的人看见，便羞愧，因为你耶和华帮助我，安慰我。
Give me a sign for good; so that my haters may see it and be shamed; because you, Lord, have been my help and comfort.

（可拉后裔的诗歌。）耶和华所立的根基在圣山上。
<Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.> This house is resting on the holy mountain.

他爱锡安的门，胜于爱雅各一切的住处。
The Lord has more love for the doors of Zion than for all the tents of Jacob.

神的城阿，有荣耀的事乃指着你说的。（细拉）
Noble things are said of you, O town of God. (Selah.)

我要提起拉哈伯，和巴比伦人是在认识我之中的，看哪，非利士，和推罗，并古实人，个个生在那里。
Rahab and Babylon will be named among those who have knowledge of me; see, Philistia and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man had his birth there.

论到锡安必说，这一个那一个都生在其中。而且至高者必亲自坚立这城。
And of Zion it will be said, This or that man had his birth there; and the Most High will make her strong.

当耶和华记录万民的时候，他要点出这一个生在那里。（细拉）
The Lord will keep in mind, when he is writing the records of the people, that this man had his birth there. (Selah.)

歌唱的，跳舞的，都要说，我的泉源都在你里面。
The players on instruments will be there, and the dancers will say, All my springs are in you.

（可拉后裔的诗歌，就是以斯拉人希幔的训诲诗，交与伶长。调用麻哈拉利暗俄。）耶和华拯救我的神阿，我昼夜在你面前呼吁。
<A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah. To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.> O Lord, God of my salvation, I have been crying to you for help by day and by night:

愿我的祷告达到你面前。求你侧耳听我的呼求。
Let my prayer come before you; give ear to my cry:

因为我心里满了患难，我的性命临近阴间。
For my soul is full of evils, and my life has come near to the underworld.

我算和下坑的人同列，如同无力的人一样。（无力或作没有帮助）
I am numbered among those who go down into the earth; I have become like a man for whom there is no help:

我被丢在死人中，好像被杀的人，躺在坟墓里。他们是你不再记念的，与你隔绝了。
My soul is among the dead, like those in the underworld, to whom you give no more thought; for they are cut off from your care.

你把我放在极深的坑里，在黑暗地方，在深处。
You have put me in the lowest deep, even in dark places.

你的忿怒重压我身。你用一切的波浪困住我。（细拉）
The weight of your wrath is crushing me, all your waves have overcome me. (Selah.)

你把我所认识的隔在远处，使我为他们所憎恶。我被拘困，不得出来。
You have sent my friends far away from me; you have made me a disgusting thing in their eyes: I am shut up, and not able to come out.

我的眼睛，因困苦而干瘪。耶和华阿，我天天求告你，向你举手。
My eyes are wasting away because of my trouble: Lord, my cry has gone up to you every day, my hands are stretched out to you.

你岂要行奇事给死人看吗？难道阴魂还能起来称赞你吗？（细拉）
Will you do works of wonder for the dead? will the shades come back to give you praise? (Selah.)

岂能在坟墓里述说你的慈爱吗？岂能在灭亡中述说你的信实吗？
Will the story of your mercy be given in the house of the dead? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction?

你的奇事，岂能在幽暗里被知道吗？你的公义，岂能在忘记之地被知道吗？
May there be knowledge of your wonders in the dark? or of your righteousness where memory is dead?

耶和华阿，我呼求你。我早晨的祷告要达到你面前。
But to you did I send up my cry, O Lord; in the morning my prayer came before you.

耶和华阿，你为何丢弃我。为何掩面不顾我。
Lord, why have you sent away my soul? why is your face covered from me?

我自幼受苦，几乎死亡。我受你的惊恐，甚至慌张。
I have been troubled and in fear of death from the time when I was young; your wrath is hard on me, and I have no strength.

你的烈怒漫过我身。你的惊吓，把我剪除。
The heat of your wrath has gone over me; I am broken by your cruel punishments.

这些终日如水环绕我，一齐都来围困我。
They are round me all the day like water; they have made a circle about me.

你把我的良朋密友隔在远处，使我所认识的人，进入黑暗里。
You have sent my friends and lovers far from me; I am gone from the memory of those who are dear to me.

（以斯拉人以探的训诲诗。）我要歌唱耶和华的慈爱，直到永远。我要用口将你的信实传与万代。
<Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.> My song will be of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make his faith clear to all generations.

因我曾说，你的慈悲，必建立到永远。你的信实，必坚立在天上。
For you have said, Mercy will be made strong for ever; my faith will be unchanging in the heavens.

我与我所拣选的人立了约，向我的仆人大卫起了誓。
I have made an agreement with the man of my selection, I have made an oath to David my servant;

我要建立你的后裔，直到永远，要建立你的宝座，直到万代。
I will make your seed go on for ever, your kingdom will be strong through all generations. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，诸天要称赞你的奇事。在圣者的会中，要称赞你的信实。
In heaven let them give praise for your wonders, O Lord; and your unchanging faith among the saints.

在天空谁能比耶和华呢？神的众子中，谁能像耶和华呢？
For who is there in the heavens in comparison with the Lord? who is like the Lord among the sons of the gods?

他在圣者的会中，是大有威严的神，比一切在他四围的更可畏惧。
God is greatly to be feared among the saints, and to be honoured over all those who are about him.

耶和华万军之神阿，哪一个大能者象你耶和华？你的信实，是在你的四围。
O Lord God of armies, who is strong like you, O Jah? and your unchanging faith is round about you.

你管辖海的狂傲。波浪翻腾，你就使他平静了。
You have rule over the sea in storm; when its waves are troubled, you make them calm.

你打碎了拉哈伯似乎是已杀的人。你用有能的膀臂打散了你的仇敌。
Rahab was crushed by you like one wounded to death; with your strong arm you put to flight all your haters.

天属你，地也属你。世界和其中所充满的，都为你所建立。
Yours are the heavens, and the earth is yours; you have made the world, and everything which is in it.

南北为你所创造。他泊和黑门都因你的名欢呼。
You have made the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon are sounding with joy at your name.

你有大能的膀臂。你的手有力，你的右手也高举。
Yours is an arm of power; strong is your hand and high your right hand.

公义和公平，是你宝座的根基。慈爱和诚实，行在你前面。
The seat of your kingdom is resting on righteousness and right judging: mercy and good faith come before your face.

知道向你欢呼的，那民是有福的。耶和华阿，他们在你脸上的光里行走。
Happy are the people who have knowledge of the holy cry: the light of your face, O Lord, will be shining on their way.

他们因你的名终日欢乐，因你的公义得以高举。
In your name will they have joy all the day: in your righteousness will they be lifted up.

你是他们力量的荣耀。因为你喜悦我们，我们的角必被高举。
For you are the glory of their strength; in your pleasure will our horn be lifted up.

我们的盾牌属耶和华。我们的王属以色列的圣者。
For our breastplate is the Lord; and our king is the Holy One of Israel's.

当时你在异象中晓谕你的圣民，说，我已把救助之力，加在那有能者的身上。我高举那从民中所拣选的。
Then your voice came to your holy one in a vision, saying, I have put the crown on a strong one, lifting up one taken from among the people.

我寻得我的仆人大卫，用我的圣膏膏他。
I have made discovery of David my servant; I have put my holy oil on his head.

我的手必使他坚立。我的膀臂也必坚固他。
My hand will be his support; my arm will give him strength.

仇敌必不勒索他，凶恶之子，也不苦害他。
The deceit of those who are against him will not overcome him; he will not be troubled by the sons of evil.

我要在他面前打碎他的敌人，击杀那恨他的人。
I will have those who are against him broken before his face, and his haters will be crushed under my blows.

只是我的信实，和我的慈爱，要与他同在。因我的名，他的角必被高举。
But my faith and my mercy will be with him; and in my name will his horn be lifted up.

我要使他的左手伸到海上，右手伸到河上。
I will put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.

他要称呼我说，你是我的父是我的神，是拯救我的磐石。
He will say to me, You are my father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation.

我也要立他为长子，为世上最高的君王。
And I will make him the first of my sons, most high over the kings of the earth.

我要为他存留我的慈爱，直到永远。我与他立的约，必要坚定。
I will keep my mercy for him for ever; my agreement with him will not be changed.

我也要使他的后裔，存到永远，使他的宝座，如天之久。
His seed will keep their place for ever; his kingdom will be eternal, like the heavens.

倘若他的子孙离弃我的律法，不照我的典章行。
If his children give up my law, and are not ruled by my decisions;

背弃我的律例，不遵守我的诫命。
If my rules are broken, and my orders are not kept;

我就要用杖责罚他们的过犯，用鞭责罚他们的罪孽。
Then I will send punishment on them for their sin; my rod will be the reward of their evil-doing.

只是我必不将我的慈爱，全然收回，也必不叫我的信实废弃。
But I will not take away my mercy from him, and will not be false to my faith.

我必不背弃我的约，也不改变我口中所出的。
I will be true to my agreement; the things which have gone out of my lips will not be changed.

我一次指着自己的圣洁起誓。我决不向大卫说谎。
I have made an oath once by my holy name, that I will not be false to David.

他的后裔要存到永远，他的宝座在我面前，如日之恒一般。
His seed will not come to an end for ever; the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me.

又如月亮永远坚立，如天上确实的见证。（细拉）
It will be fixed for ever like the moon; and the witness in heaven is true. (Selah.)

但你恼怒你的受膏者，就丢掉弃绝他。
But you have put him away in disgust; you have been angry with the king of your selection.

你厌恶了与仆人所立的约，将他的冠冕践踏于地。
You have made your agreement with your servant of no effect: you have had no respect for his crown, it has come down even to the earth.

你拆毁了他一切的篱笆。使他的保障，变为荒场。
All his walls are broken down; you have given his strong towers to destruction.

凡过路的人，都抢夺他。他成为邻邦的羞辱。
All those who come by take away his goods; he is laughed at by his neighbours.

你高举了他敌人的右手。你叫他一切的仇敌欢喜。
You have given power to the right hand of his haters; you have made glad all those who are against him.

你叫他的刀剑卷刃，叫他在争战之中站立不住。
His sword is turned back; you have not been his support in the fight.

你使他的光辉止息，将他的宝座推倒于地。
You have put an end to his glory: the seat of his kingdom has been levelled to the earth.

你减少他青年的日子。又使他蒙羞。（细拉）
You have made him old before his time; he is covered with shame. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，这要到几时呢？你要将自己隐藏到永远吗？你的忿怒如火焚烧，要到几时呢？
How long, O Lord, will you Keep yourself for ever from our eyes? how long will your wrath be burning like fire?

求你想念我的时候是何等的短少。你创造世人，要使他们归何等的虚空呢？（细拉）
See how short my time is; why have you made all men for no purpose?

谁能常活免死，救他的灵魂脱离阴间的权柄呢？（细拉）
What man now living will not see death? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld? (Selah.)

主阿，你从前凭你的信实向大卫立誓，要施行的慈爱在哪里呢？
Lord, where are your earlier mercies? where is the oath which you made to David in unchanging faith?

主阿，求你记念仆人们所受的羞辱，记念我怎样将一切强盛民的羞辱存在我怀里。
Keep in mind, O Lord, the shame of your servants, and how the bitter words of all the people have come into my heart;

耶和华阿，你的仇敌，用这羞辱，羞辱了你的仆人，羞辱了你受膏者的脚踪。
The bitter words of your haters, O Lord, shaming the footsteps of your king.

耶和华是应当称颂的，直到永远。阿们，阿们。
Let the Lord be praised for ever. So be it, So be it.

（神人摩西的祈祷。）主阿，你世世代代作我们的居所。
<A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.> Lord, you have been our resting-place in all generations.

诸山未曾生出，地与世界你未曾造成，从亘古到永远，你是神。
Before the mountains were made, before you had given birth to the earth and the world, before time was, and for ever, you are God.

你使人归于尘土，说，你们世人要归回。
You send man back to his dust; and say, Go back, you children of men.

在你看来，千年如已过的昨日，又如夜间的一更。
For to you a thousand years are no more than yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night.

你叫他们如水冲去。他们如睡一觉。早晨他们如生长的草。
...

早晨发芽生长，晚上割下枯干。
In the morning it is green; in the evening it is cut down, and becomes dry.

我们因你的怒气而消灭，因你的忿怒而惊惶。
We are burned up by the heat of your passion, and troubled by your wrath.

你将我们的罪孽摆在你面前，将我们的隐恶摆在你面光之中。
You have put our evil doings before you, our secret sins in the light of your face.

我们经过的日子，都在你震怒之下。我们度尽的年岁好像一声叹息。
For all our days have gone by in your wrath; our years come to an end like a breath.

我们一生的年日是七十岁。若是强壮可到八十岁。但其中所矜夸的，不过是劳苦愁烦。转眼成空，我们便如飞而去。
The measure of our life is seventy years; and if through strength it may be eighty years, its pride is only trouble and sorrow, for it comes to an end and we are quickly gone.

谁晓得你怒气的权势？谁按着你该受的敬畏晓得你的忿怒呢？
Who has knowledge of the power of your wrath, or who takes note of the weight of your passion?

求你指教我们怎样数算自己的日子，好叫我们得着智慧的心。
So give us knowledge of the number of our days, that we may get a heart of wisdom.

耶和华阿，我们要等到几时呢？求你转回，为你的仆人后悔。
Come back, O Lord; how long? let your purpose for your servants be changed.

求你使我们早早饱得你的慈爱，好叫我们一生一世欢呼喜乐。
In the morning give us your mercy in full measure; so that we may have joy and delight all our days.

求你照着你使我们受苦的日子，和我们遭难的年岁，叫我们喜乐。
Make us glad in reward for the days of our sorrow, and for the years in which we have seen evil.

愿你的作为向你仆人显现。愿你的荣耀向他们子孙显明。
Make your work clear to your servants, and your glory to their children.

愿主我们神的荣美，归于我们身上。愿你坚立我们手所作的工。我们手所作的工，愿你坚立。
Let the pleasure of the Lord our God be on us: O Lord, give strength to the work of our hands.

住在至高者隐密处的，必住在全能者的荫下。
Happy is he whose resting-place is in the secret of the Lord, and under the shade of the wings of the Most High;

我要论到耶和华说，他是我的避难所，是我的山寨，是我的神，是我所倚靠的。
Who says of the Lord, He is my safe place and my tower of strength: he is my God, in whom is my hope.

他必救你脱离捕鸟人的网罗，和毒害的瘟疫。
He will take you out of the bird-net, and keep you safe from wasting disease.

他必用自己的翎毛遮蔽你。你要投靠在他的翅膀底下。他的诚实，是大小的盾牌。
You will be covered by his feathers; under his wings you will be safe: his good faith will be your salvation.

你必不怕黑夜的惊骇，或是白日飞的箭。
You will have no fear of the evil things of the night, or of the arrow in flight by day,

也不怕黑夜行的瘟疫，或是午间灭人的毒病。
Or of the disease which takes men in the dark, or of the destruction which makes waste when the sun is high.

虽有千人仆倒在你旁边，万人仆倒在你右边，这灾却不得临近你。
You will see a thousand falling by your side, and ten thousand at your right hand; but it will not come near you.

你惟亲眼观看，见恶人遭报。
Only with your eyes will you see the reward of the evil-doers.

耶和华是我的避难所。你已将至高者当你的居所。
Because you have said, I am in the hands of the Lord, the Most High is my safe resting-place;

祸患必不临到你，灾害也不挨近你的帐棚。
No evil will come on you, and no disease will come near your tent.

因他要为你吩咐他的使者，在你行的一切道路上保护你。
For he will give you into the care of his angels to keep you wherever you go.

他们要用手托着你，免得你的脚碰在石头上。
In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.

你要踹在狮子和虺蛇的身上，践踏少壮狮子和大蛇。
You will put your foot on the lion and the snake; the young lion and the great snake will be crushed under your feet.

神说，因为他专心爱我，我就要搭救他。因为他知道我的名，我要把他安置在高处。
Because he has given me his love, I will take him out of danger: I will put him in a place of honour, because he has kept my name in his heart.

他若求告我，我就应允他。他在急难中，我要与他同在。我要搭救他，使他尊贵。
When his cry comes up to me, I will give him an answer: I will be with him in trouble; I will make him free from danger and give him honour.

我要使他足享长寿，将我的救恩显明给他。
With long life will he be rewarded; and I will let him see my salvation.

（安息日的诗歌。）称谢耶和华，歌颂你至高者的名。
<A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath.> It is a good thing to give praise to the Lord, and to make melody to your name, O Most High;

用十弦的乐器和瑟，用琴弹幽雅的声音，早晨传扬你的慈爱，每夜传扬你的信实，这本为美事。
To make clear your mercy in the morning, and your unchanging faith every night;


On a ten-corded instrument, and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound.

因你耶和华借着你的作为，叫我高兴。我要因你手的工作欢呼。
For you, O Lord, have made me glad through your work; I will have joy in the works of your hands.

耶和华阿，你的工作何其大，你的心思极其深。
O Lord, how great are your works! and your thoughts are very deep.

畜类人不晓得，愚顽人也不明白。
A man without sense has no knowledge of this; and a foolish man may not take it in.

恶人茂盛如草，一切作孽之人发旺的时候，正是他们要灭亡，直到永远。
When the sinners come up like the grass, and all the workers of evil do well for themselves, it is so that their end may be eternal destruction.

惟你耶和华是至高，直到永远。
But you, O Lord, are on high for ever.

耶和华阿，你的仇敌都要灭亡，一切作孽的也要离散。
For see! your haters, O Lord, will be put to death; all the workers of evil will be put to flight;

你却高举了我的角，如野牛的角。我是被新油膏了的。
But my horn is lifted up like the horn of the ox: the best oil is flowing on my head.

我眼睛看见仇敌遭报，我耳朵听见那些起来攻击我的恶人受罚。
My eyes have seen trouble come on my haters; my ears have news of the fate of the evil-doers who have come up against me.

义人要发旺如棕树，生长如利巴嫩的香柏树。
The good man will be like a tall tree in his strength; his growth will be as the wide-stretching trees of Lebanon.

他们栽于耶和华的殿中，发旺在我们神的院里。
Those who are planted in the house of the Lord will come up tall and strong in his gardens.

他们年老的时候，仍要结果子。要满了汁浆而常发青。
They will give fruit even when they are old; they will be fertile and full of growth;

好显明耶和华是正直的，他是我的磐石，在他毫无不义。
For a sign that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no deceit in him.

耶和华作王。他以威严为衣穿上。耶和华以能力为衣，以能力束腰。世界就坚定，不得动摇。
The Lord is King; he is clothed with glory; the Lord is clothed with strength; power is the cord of his robe; the world is fixed, so that it may not be moved.

你的宝座从太初立定。你从亘古就有。
The seat of your power has been from the past; you are eternal.

耶和华阿，大水扬起，大水发声，波浪澎湃。
The rivers send up, O Lord, the rivers send up their voices; they send them up with a loud cry.

耶和华在高处大有能力，胜过诸水的响声，洋海的大浪。
The Lord in heaven is stronger than the noise of great waters, yes, he is stronger than the great waves of the sea.

耶和华阿，你的法度最的确。你的殿永称为圣，是合宜的。
Your witness is most certain; it is right for your house to be holy, O Lord, for ever.

耶和华阿，你是伸冤的神。伸冤的神阿，求你发出光来。
O God, in whose hands is punishment, O God of punishment, let your shining face be seen.

审判世界的主阿，求你挺身而立，使骄傲人受应得的报应。
Be lifted up, O judge of the earth; let their reward come to the men of pride.

耶和华阿，恶人夸胜要到几时呢？要到几时呢？
How long will sinners, O Lord, how long will sinners have joy over us?

他们絮絮叨叨，说傲慢的话。一切作孽的人，都自己夸张。
Words of pride come from their lips; all the workers of evil say great things of themselves.

耶和华阿，他们强压你的百姓，苦害你的产业。
Your people are crushed by them, O Lord, your heritage is troubled,

他们杀死寡妇和寄居的，又杀害孤儿。
They put to death the widow and the guest, they take the lives of children who have no father;

他们说，耶和华必不看见，雅各的神必不思念。
And they say, Jah will not see it, the God of Jacob will not give thought to it.

你们民间的畜类人当思想。你们愚顽人，到几时才有智慧呢？
Give your mind to my words, you who are without wisdom among the people; you foolish men, when will you be wise?

造耳朵的，难道自己不听见吗？造眼睛的，难道自己不看见吗？
Has he by whom your ears were planted no hearing? or is he blind by whom your eyes were formed?

管教列邦的，就是叫人得知识的，难道自己不惩治人吗？
He who is the judge of the nations, will he not give men the reward of their acts, even he who gives knowledge to man?

耶和华知道人的意念是虚妄的。
The Lord has knowledge of the thoughts of man, for they are only a breath.

耶和华阿，你所管教，用律法所教训的人，是有福的。
Happy is the man who is guided by you, O Jah, and to whom you give teaching out of your law;

你使他在遭难的日子，得享平安。惟有恶人陷在所挖的坑中。
So that you may give him rest from the days of evil, till a hole is made ready for the destruction of the sinners.

因为耶和华必不丢弃他的百姓，也不离弃他的产业。
The Lord will not give up his people, or take away his support from his heritage;

审判要转向公义。心里正直的，必都随从。
But decisions will again be made in righteousness; and they will be kept by all whose hearts are true.

谁肯为我起来攻击作恶的。谁肯为我站起抵挡作孽的。
Who will give me help against the sinners? and who will be my support against the workers of evil?

若不是耶和华帮助我，我就住在寂静之中了。
If the Lord had not been my helper, my soul would quickly have gone down into death.

我正说我失了脚，耶和华阿，那时你的慈爱扶助我。
If I say, My foot is slipping; your mercy, O Lord, is my support.

我心里多忧多疑，你安慰我，就使我欢乐。
Among all my troubled thoughts, your comforts are the delight of my soul.

那借着律例架弄残害，在位上行奸恶的，岂能与你相交吗？
What part with you has the seat of sin, which makes evil into a law?

他们大家聚集攻击义人，将无辜的人定为死罪。
They are banded together against the soul of the upright, to give decisions against those who have done no wrong.

但耶和华向来作了我的高台。我的神作了我投靠的磐石。
But the Lord is my safe resting-place; my God is the Rock where I am safe.

他叫他们的罪孽归到他们身上。他们正在行恶之中，他要剪除他们。耶和华我们的神要把他们剪除。
And he has made their evil designs come back on themselves, cutting them off in their sin; the Lord our God will put an end to them.

来阿，我们要向耶和华歌唱，向拯救我们的磐石欢呼。
O come, let us make songs to the Lord; sending up glad voices to the Rock of our salvation.

我们要来感谢他，用诗歌向他欢呼。
Let us come before his face with praises; and make melody with holy songs.

因耶和华为大神，为大王，超乎万神之上。
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all gods.

地的深处在他手中。山的高峰也属他。
The deep places of the earth are in his hand; and the tops of the mountains are his.

海洋属他。是他造的。旱地也是他手造成的。
The sea is his, and he made it; and the dry land was formed by his hands.

来阿，我们要屈身敬拜，在造我们的耶和华面前跪下。
O come, let us give worship, falling down on our knees before the Lord our Maker.

因为他是我们的神。我们是他草场的羊，是他手下的民。惟愿你们今天听他的话。
For he is our God; and we are the people to whom he gives food, and the sheep of his flock. Today, if you would only give ear to his voice!

你们不可硬着心，像当日在米利巴，就是在旷野的玛撒。
Let not your hearts be hard, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the waste land;

那时你们的祖宗试我探我，并且观看我的作为。
When your fathers put me to the test and saw my power and my work.

四十年之久，我厌烦那世代，说，这是心里迷糊的百姓，竟不晓得我的作为。
For forty years I was angry with this generation, and said, They are a people whose hearts are turned away from me, for they have no knowledge of my ways;

所以我在怒中起誓，说，他们断不可进入我的安息。
And I made an oath in my wrath, that they might not come into my place of rest.

你们要向耶和华唱新歌。全地都要向耶和华歌唱。
O make a new song to the Lord; let all the earth make melody to the Lord.

要向耶和华歌唱，称颂他的名，天天传扬他的救恩。
Make songs to the Lord, blessing his name; give the good news of his salvation day by day.

在列邦中述说他的荣耀，在万民中述说他的奇事。
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.

因耶和华为大，当受极大的赞美。他在万神之上当受敬畏。
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is more to be feared than all other gods.

外邦的神都属虚无。惟独耶和华创造诸天。
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.

有尊荣和威严在他面前。有能力与华美在他圣所。
Honour and glory are before him: strong and fair is his holy place.

民中的万族阿，你们要将荣耀能力归给耶和华，都归给耶和华。
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.

要将耶和华的名所当得的荣耀归给他，拿供物来进入他的院宇。
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come into his house.

当以圣洁的妆饰（的或作为），敬拜耶和华。全地要在他面前战抖。
O give worship to the Lord in holy robes; be in fear before him, all the earth.

人在列邦中要说，耶和华作王，世界就坚定，不得动摇。他要按公正审判众民。
Say among the nations, The Lord is King; yes, the world is ordered so that it may not be moved; he will be an upright judge of the peoples.

愿天欢喜，愿地快乐。愿海和其中所充满的澎湃。
Let the heavens have joy and the earth be glad; let the sea be thundering with all its waters;

愿田和其中所有的都欢乐。那时林中的树木，都要在耶和华面前欢呼。
Let the field be glad, and everything which is in it; yes, let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy,

因为他来了。他来要审判全地。他要按公义审判世界，按他的信实审判万民。
Before the Lord, for he is come; he is come to be the judge of the earth; the earth will be judged in righteousness, and the peoples with unchanging faith.

耶和华作王。愿地快乐，愿众海岛欢喜。
The Lord is King, let the earth have joy; let all the sea-lands be glad.

密云和幽暗，在他的四围。公义和公平，是他宝座的根基。
Dark clouds are round him; his kingdom is based on righteousness and right judging.

有烈火在他前头行，烧灭他四围的敌人。
Fire goes before him, burning up all those who are against him round about.

他的闪电光照世界。大地看见便震动。
His bright flames give light to the world; the earth saw it with fear.

诸山见耶和华的面，就是全地之主的面，便消化如蜡。
The mountains became like wax at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the Lord of all the earth.

诸天表明他的公义，万民看见他的荣耀。
The heavens gave out the news of his righteousness, and all the people saw his glory.

愿一切事奉雕刻的偶像，靠虚无之神自夸的，都蒙羞愧。万神哪，你们都当拜他。
Shamed be all those who give worship to images, and take pride in false gods; give him worship, all you gods.

耶和华阿，锡安听见你的判断，就欢喜，犹大的城邑（原文作女子），也都快乐。
Zion gave ear and was glad; and the daughters of Judah were full of joy, because of your decisions, O Lord.

因为你耶和华至高超乎全地。你被尊崇，远超万神之上。
For you, Lord, are most high over the earth; you are lifted up over all other gods.

你们爱耶和华的，都当恨恶罪恶。他保护圣民的性命，搭救他们脱离恶人的手。
You who are lovers of the Lord, be haters of evil; he keeps the souls of his saints; he takes them out of the hand of sinners.

散布亮光，是为义人。预备喜乐，是为正直人。
Light is shining on the lovers of righteousness, and for the upright in heart there is joy.

你们义人当靠耶和华欢喜，称谢他可记念的圣名。
Be glad in the Lord, you upright men; praising the memory of his holy name.

（一篇诗。）你们要向耶和华唱新歌。因为他行过奇妙的事。他的右手和圣臂，施行救恩。
<A Psalm.> O make a new song to the Lord, because he has done works of wonder; with his right hand, and with his holy arm, he has overcome.

耶和华发明了他的救恩，在列邦人眼前显出公义。
The Lord has given to all the knowledge of his salvation; he has made clear his righteousness in the eyes of the nations.

记念他向以色列家所发的慈爱，所凭的信实。地的四极，都看见我们神的救恩。
He has kept in mind his mercy and his unchanging faith to the house of Israel; all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

全地都要向耶和华欢乐。要发起大声欢呼歌颂。
Let all the earth send out a glad cry to the Lord; sounding with a loud voice, and praising him with songs of joy.

要用琴歌颂耶和华，用琴和诗歌的声音歌颂他。
Make melody to the Lord with instruments of music; with a corded instrument and the voice of song.

用号和角声，在大君王耶和华面前欢呼。
With wind instruments and the sound of the horn, make a glad cry before the Lord, the King.

愿海和其中所充满的澎湃。世界和住在其间的，也要发声。
Let the sea be thundering, with all its waters; the world, and all who are living in it;

愿大水拍手。愿诸山在耶和华面前一同欢呼。
Let the streams make sounds of joy with their hands; let the mountains be glad together,

因为他来，要审判遍地。他要按公义审判世界，按公正审判万民。
Before the Lord, for he has come as judge of the earth; judging the world in righteousness, and giving true decisions for the peoples.

耶和华作王，万民当战抖。他坐在二基路伯上，地当动摇。
The Lord is King; let the peoples be in fear: his seat is on the winged ones; let the earth be moved.

耶和华在锡安为大。他超乎万民之上。
The Lord is great in Zion; he is high over all the nations.

他们当称赞他大而可畏的名。他本为圣。
Let them give praise to your name, for it is great and to be feared; holy is he.

王有能力喜爱公平，坚立公正，在雅各中施行公平和公义。
The king's power is used for righteousness; you give true decisions, judging rightly in the land of Jacob.

你们当尊崇耶和华我们的神，在他脚凳前下拜。他本为圣。
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping at his feet; holy is he.

在他的祭司中有摩西和亚伦，在求告他名的人中有撒母耳，他们求告耶和华，他就应允他们。
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who gave honour to his name; they made prayers to the Lord, and he gave answers to them.

他在云柱中对他们说话。他们遵守他的法度，和他所赐给他们的律例。
His voice came to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept his witness, and the law which he gave them.

耶和华我们的神阿，你应允他们。你是赦免他们的神，却按他们所行的报应他们。
You gave them an answer, O Lord our God; you took away their sin, though you gave them punishment for their wrongdoing.

你们要尊崇耶和华我们的神，在他的圣山下拜。因为耶和华我们的神本为圣。
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping with your faces turned to his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.

（称谢诗。）普天下当向耶和华欢呼。
<A Psalm of Praise.> Make a glad sound to the Lord, all the earth.

你们当乐意事奉耶和华。当来向他歌唱。
Give worship to the Lord with joy; come before him with a song.

你们当晓得耶和华是神。我们是他造的，也是属他的。我们是他的民，也是他草场的羊。
Be certain that the Lord is God; it is he who has made us, and we are his; we are his people, and the sheep to whom he gives food.

当称谢进入他的门，当赞美进入他的院。当感谢他，称颂他的名。
Come into his doors with joy, and into his house with praise; give him honour, blessing his name.

因为耶和华本为善，他的慈爱，存到永远，他的信实，直到万代。
For the Lord is good, and his mercy is never-ending; his faith is unchanging through all generations.

（大卫的诗。）我要歌唱慈爱和公平。耶和华阿，我要向你歌颂。
<A Psalm. Of David.> I will make a song of mercy and righteousness; to you, O Lord, will I make melody.

我要用智慧行完全的道。你几时到我这里来呢？我要存完全的心，行在我家中。
I will do wisely in the way of righteousness: O when will you come to me? I will be walking in my house with a true heart.

邪僻的事，我都不摆在我眼前。悖逆人所做的事，我甚恨恶，不容沾在我身上。
I will not put any evil thing before my eyes; I am against all turning to one side; I will not have it near me.

弯曲的心思，我必远离。一切的恶人（或作恶事），我不认识。
The false heart I will send away from me: I will not have an evil-doer for a friend.

在暗中谗谤他邻居的，我必将他灭绝。眼目高傲，心里骄纵的，我必不容他。
I will put to death anyone who says evil of his neighbour secretly; the man with a high look and a heart of pride is disgusting to me.

我眼要看国中的诚实人，叫他们与我同住。行为完全的，他要伺候我。
My eyes will be on those of good faith in the land, so that they may be living in my house; he who is walking in the right way will be my servant.

行诡诈的，必不得住在我家里。说谎话的，必不得立在我眼前。
The worker of deceit will not come into my house; the false man will have no place before my eyes.

我每日早晨，要灭绝国中所有的恶人。好把一切作孽的，从耶和华的城里剪除。
Morning by morning will I put to death all the sinners in the land, so that all evil-doers may be cut off from Jerusalem.

（困苦人发昏的时候，在耶和华面前吐露苦情的祷告。）耶和华阿，求你听我的祷告，容我的呼求达到你面前。
<A Prayer of the man who is in trouble, when he is overcome, and puts his grief before the Lord.> Give ear to my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come to you.

我在急难的日子，求你向我侧耳，不要向我掩面。我呼求的日子，求你快快应允我。
Let not your face be veiled from me in the day of my trouble; give ear to me, and let my cry be answered quickly.

因为，我的年日如烟云消灭，我的骨头，如火把烧着。
My days are wasted like smoke, and my bones are burned up as in a fire.

我的心被伤，如草枯干，甚至我忘记吃饭。
My heart is broken; it has become dry and dead like grass, so that I give no thought to food.

因我唉哼的声音，我的肉紧贴骨头。
Because of the voice of my sorrow, my flesh is wasted to the bone.

我如同旷野的鹈鹕。我好像荒场的？？鸟。
I am like a bird living by itself in the waste places; like the night-bird in a waste of sand.

我儆醒不睡。我像房顶上孤单的麻雀。
I keep watch like a bird by itself on the house-top.

我的仇敌终日辱骂我。向我猖狂的人指着我赌咒。
My haters say evil of me all day; those who are violent against me make use of my name as a curse.

我吃过炉灰，如同吃饭。我所喝的与眼泪搀杂。
I have had dust for bread and my drink has been mixed with weeping:

这都因你的恼恨和忿怒。你把我拾起来，又把我摔下去。
Because of your passion and your wrath, for I have been lifted up and then made low by you.

我的年日，如日影偏斜。我也如草枯干。
My days are like a shade which is stretched out; I am dry like the grass.

惟你耶和华必存到永远。你可记念的名，也存到万代。
But you, O Lord, are eternal; and your name will never come to an end.

你必起来怜恤锡安，因现在是可怜她的时候。日期已经到了。
You will again get up and have mercy on Zion: for the time has come for her to be comforted.

你的仆人原来喜悦她的石头，可怜她的尘土。
For your servants take pleasure in her stones, looking with love on her dust.

列国要敬畏耶和华的名。世上诸王都敬畏你的荣耀。
So the nations will give honour to the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth will be in fear of his glory:

因为耶和华建造了锡安，在他荣耀里显现。
When the Lord has put up the walls of Zion, and has been been in his glory;

他垂听穷人的祷告，并不藐视他们的祈求。
When he has given ear to the prayer of the poor, and has not put his request on one side.

这必为后代的人记下。将来受造的民，要赞美耶和华。
This will be put in writing for the coming generation, and the people of the future will give praise to the Lord.

因为他从至高的圣所垂看。耶和华从天向地观察。
For from his holy place the Lord has seen, looking down on the earth from heaven;

要垂听被囚之人的叹息。要释放将要死的人。
Hearing the cry of the prisoner, making free those for whom death is ordered;

使人在锡安传扬耶和华的名，在耶路撒冷传扬赞美他的话。
So that they may give out the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;

就是在万民和列国聚会事奉耶和华的时候。
When the peoples are come together, and the kingdoms, to give worship to the Lord.

他使我的力量，中道衰弱，使我的年日短少。
He has taken my strength from me in the way; he has made short my days.

我说，我的神阿，不要使我中年去世。你的年数世世无穷。
I will say, O my God, take me not away before my time; your years go on through all generations:

你起初立了地的根基。天也是你手所造的。
In the past you put the earth on its base, and the heavens are the work of your hands.

天地都要灭没，你却要长存。天地都要如外衣渐渐旧了。你要将天地如里衣更换，天地就改变了。
They will come to an end, but you will still go on; they all will become old like a coat, and like a robe they will be changed:

惟有你永不改变。你的年数，没有穷尽。
But you are the unchanging One, and your years will have no end.

你仆人的子孙要长存。他们的后裔，要坚立在你面前。
The children of your servants will have a safe resting-place, and their seed will be ever before you.

（大卫的诗。）我的心哪，你要称颂耶和华。凡在我里面的，也要称颂他的圣名。
<Of David.> Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let everything in me give praise to his holy name.

我的心哪，你要称颂耶和华，不可忘记他的一切恩惠。
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let not all his blessings go from your memory.

他赦免你的一切罪孽，医治你的一切疾病。
He has forgiveness for all your sins; he takes away all your diseases;

他救赎你的命脱离死亡，以仁爱和慈悲为你的冠冕。
He keeps back your life from destruction, crowning you with mercy and grace.

他用美物，使你所愿的得以知足，以致你如鹰返老还童。
He makes your mouth full of good things, so that your strength is made new again like the eagle's.

耶和华施行公义，为一切受屈的人伸冤。
The Lord gives decisions in righteousness for all who are in trouble.

他使摩西知道他的法则，叫以色列人晓得他的作为。
He gave knowledge of his way to Moses, and made his acts clear to the children of Israel.

耶和华有怜悯，有恩典，不轻易发怒，且有丰盛的慈爱。
The Lord is kind and full of pity, not quickly made angry, but ever ready to have mercy.

他不长久责备，也不永远怀怒。
His feeling will no longer be bitter; he will not keep his wrath for ever.

他没有按我们的罪过待我们，也没有照我们的罪孽报应我们。
He has not given us the punishment for our sins, or the reward of our wrongdoing.

天离地何等的高，他的慈爱向敬畏他的人，也是何等的大。
For as the heaven is high over the earth, so great is his mercy to his worshippers.

东离西有多远，他叫我们的过犯，离我们也有多远。
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he put our sins from us.

父亲怎样怜恤他的儿女，耶和华也怎样怜恤敬畏他的人。
As a father has pity on his children, so the Lord has pity on his worshippers.

因为他知道我们的本体，思念我们不过是尘土。
For he has knowledge of our feeble frame; he sees that we are only dust.

至于世人，他的年日如草一样。他发旺如野地的花。
As for man, his days are as grass: his beautiful growth is like the flower of the field.

经风一吹，便归无有。他的原处，也不再认识他。
The wind goes over it and it is gone; and its place sees it no longer.

但耶和华的慈爱，归于敬畏他的人，从亘古到永远。他的公义，也归于子子孙孙。
But the mercy of the Lord is eternal for his worshippers, and their children's children will see his righteousness;

就是那些遵守他的约，记念他的训词而遵行的人。
If they keep his agreement, and have his laws in mind to do them.

耶和华在天上立定宝座。他的权柄（原文作国）统管万有。
The Lord has made ready his high seat in the heavens; his kingdom is ruling over all.

听从他命令成全他旨意有大能的天使，都要称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, you his angels, who are great in strength, doing his orders, and waiting for his voice.

你们作他的诸军作他的仆役行他所喜悦的，都要称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, all you his armies; and you his servants who do his pleasure.

你们一切被他造的，在他所治理的各处，都要称颂耶和华。我的心哪，你要称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, all his works, in all places under his rule: give praise to the Lord, O my soul.

我的心哪，你要称颂耶和华。耶和华我的神阿，你为至大。你以尊荣威严为衣服。
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great; you are robed with honour and power.

披上亮光，如披外袍，铺张穹苍，如铺幔子。
You are clothed with light as with a robe; stretching out the heavens like a curtain:

在水中立楼阁的栋梁，用云彩为车辇，借着风的翅膀而行。
The arch of your house is based on the waters; you make the clouds your carriage; you go on the wings of the wind:

以风为使者，以火焰为仆役。
He makes winds his angels, and flames of fire his servants.

将地立在根基上，使地永不动摇。
He has made the earth strong on its bases, so that it may not be moved for ever and ever;

你用深水遮盖地面，犹如衣裳。诸水高过山岭。
Covering it with the sea as with a robe: the waters were high over the mountains;

你的斥责一发，水便奔逃。你的雷声一发，水便奔流。
At the voice of your word they went in flight; at the sound of your thunder they went away in fear;

（诸山升上，诸谷沉下（或作随山上翻，随谷下流）），归你为它所安定之地
The mountains came up and the valleys went down into the place which you had made ready for them.

你定了界限，使水不能过去，不再转回遮盖地面。
You made a limit over which they might not go, so that the earth would never again be covered by them.

耶和华使泉源涌在山谷，流在山间。
You sent the springs into the valleys; they are flowing between the hills.

使野地的走兽有水喝，野驴得解其渴。
They give drink to every beast of the field; the mountain asses come to them for water.

天上的飞鸟在水旁住宿，在树枝上啼叫。
The birds of the air have their resting-places by them, and make their song among the branches.

他从楼阁中浇灌山岭。因他作为的功效，地就丰足。
He sends down rain from his store-houses on the hills: the earth is full of the fruit of his works.

他使草生长，给六畜吃。使菜蔬发长，供给人用。使人从地里能得食物。
He makes the grass come up for the cattle, and plants for the use of man; so that bread may come out of the earth;

又得酒能悦人心，得油能润人面，得粮能养人心。
And wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shining, and bread giving strength to his heart.

佳美的树木，就是利巴嫩的香柏树，是耶和华所栽种的，都满了汁浆。
The trees of the Lord are full of growth, the cedars of Lebanon of his planting;

雀鸟在其上搭窝。至于鹤，松树是它的房屋。
Where the birds have their resting-places; as for the stork, the tall trees are her house.

高山为野山羊的住所。岩石为沙番的藏处。
The high hills are a safe place for the mountain goats, and the rocks for the small beasts.

你安置月亮为定节令。日头自知沉落。
He made the moon for a sign of the divisions of the year; teaching the sun the time of its going down.

你造黑暗为夜，林中的百兽就都爬出来。
When you make it dark, it is night, when all the beasts of the woods come quietly out of their secret places.

少壮狮子吼叫，要抓食，向神寻求食物。
The young lions go thundering after their food; searching for their meat from God.

日头一出，兽便躲避，卧在洞里。
The sun comes up, and they come together, and go back to their secret places to take their rest.

人出去做工，劳碌直到晚上。
Man goes out to his work, and to his business, till the evening.

耶和华阿，你所造的何其多，都是你用智慧造成的。遍地满了你的丰富。
O Lord, how great is the number of your works! in wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of the things you have made.

那里有海，又大又广。其中有无数的动物。大小活物都有。
There is the great, wide sea, where there are living things, great and small, more than may be numbered.

那里有船行走。有你所造的鳄鱼游泳在其中。
There go the ships; there is that great beast, which you have made as a plaything.

这都仰望你按时给它食物。
All of them are waiting for you, to give them their food in its time.

你给它们，它们便拾起来；你张手，它们饱得美食。
They take what you give them; they are full of the good things which come from your open hand.

你掩面，它们便惊惶。你收回它们的气，它们就死亡，归于尘土。
If your face is veiled, they are troubled; when you take away their breath, they come to an end, and go back to the dust.

你发出你的灵，它们便受造。你使地面更换为新。
If you send out your spirit, they are given life; you make new the face of the earth.

愿耶和华的荣耀存到永远。愿耶和华喜悦自己所造的。
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever; let the Lord have joy in his works:

他看地，地便震动。他摸山，山就冒烟。
At whose look the earth is shaking; at whose touch the mountains send out smoke.

我要一生向耶和华唱诗。我还活的时候，要向我神歌颂。
I will make songs to the Lord all my life; I will make melody to my God while I have my being.

愿他以我的默念为甘甜。我要因耶和华欢喜。
Let my thoughts be sweet to him: I will be glad in the Lord.

愿罪人从世上消灭。愿恶人归于无有。我的心哪，要称颂耶和华。你们要赞美耶和华。（原文作哈利路亚下同）
Let sinners be cut off from the earth, and let all evil-doers come to an end. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. Give praise to the Lord.

你们要称谢耶和华，求告他的名，在万民中传扬他的作为。
O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.

要向他唱诗歌颂，谈论他一切奇妙的作为。
Let your voice be sounding in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.

要以他的圣名夸耀。寻求耶和华的人，心中应当欢喜。
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.

要寻求耶和华与他的能力，时常寻求他的面。
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.

他仆人亚伯拉罕的后裔，他所拣选雅各的子孙哪，你们要记念他奇妙的作为和他的奇事，并他口中的判语。
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;


O you seed of Abraham, his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.

他是耶和华我们的神。全地都有他的判断。
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.

他记念他的约，直到永远，他所吩咐的话，直到千代。
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;

就是与亚伯拉罕所立的约，向以撒所起的誓。
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;

他又将这约向雅各定为律例，向以色列定为永远的约，
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;

说，我必将迦南地赐给你，作你产业的分。
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:

当时，他们人丁有限，数目稀少，并且在那地为寄居的。
When they were still small in number, and strange in the land;

他们从这邦游到那邦，从这国行到那国。
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people.

他不容什么人欺负他们，为他们的缘故责备君王，
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,

说，不可难为我受膏的人，也不可恶待我的先知。
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.

他命饥荒降在那地上，将所倚靠的粮食全行断绝。
And he took away all food from the land, so that the people were without bread.

在他们以先打发一个人去。约瑟被卖为奴仆。
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was given as a servant for a price:

人用脚镣伤他的脚，他被铁链捆拘。
His feet were fixed in chains; his neck was put in iron bands;

耶和华的话试炼他，直等到他所说的应验了。
Till the time when his word came true; he was tested by the word of the Lord.

王打发人把他解开，就是治理众民的，把他释放。
The king sent men to take off his chains; even the ruler of the people, who let him go free.

立他作王家之主，掌管他一切所有的。
He made him lord of his house, and ruler over everything he had;

使他随意捆绑他的臣宰，将智慧教导他的长老。
To give his chiefs teaching at his pleasure, and so that his law-givers might get wisdom from him.

以色列也到了埃及，雅各在含地寄居。
Then Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was living in the land of Ham.

耶和华使他的百姓生养众多，使他们比敌人强盛。
And his people were greatly increased, and became stronger than those who were against them.

使敌人的心转去恨他的百姓，并用诡计待他的仆人。
Their hearts were turned to hate against his people, so that they made secret designs against them.

他打发他的仆人摩西，和他所拣选的亚伦。
He sent Moses, his servant, and Aaron, the man of his selection.

在敌人中间显他的神迹，在含地显他的奇事。
He let his signs be seen among the people, and his wonders in the land of Ham.

他命黑暗，就有黑暗。没有违背他话的。
He sent black night and made it dark; and they did not go against his word.

他叫埃及的水变为血，叫他们的鱼死了。
At his word their waters were turned to blood, and he sent death on all their fish.

在他们的地上，以及王宫的内室，青蛙多多滋生。
Their land was full of frogs, even in the rooms of the king.

他说一声，苍蝇就成群而来，并有虱子进入他们四境。
He gave the word, and there came the dog-fly, and insects over all the land.

他给他们降下冰雹为雨，在他们的地上降下火焰。
He gave them ice for rain, and flaming fire in their land.

他也击打他们的葡萄树和无花果树，毁坏他们境内的树木。
He gave their vines and their fig-trees to destruction, and the trees of their land were broken down.

他说一声，就有蝗虫蚂蚱上来，不计其数，
At his word the locusts came, and young locusts more than might be numbered,

吃尽了他们地上各样的菜蔬，和田地的出产。
And put an end to all the plants of their land, taking all the fruit of the earth for food.

他又击杀他们国内一切的长子，就是他们强壮时头生的。
He put to death the first child of every family in the land, the first-fruits of their strength.

他领自己的百姓带银子金子出来。他支派中没有一个软弱的。
He took his people out with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among them.

他们出来的时候，埃及人便欢喜。原来埃及人惧怕他们。
Egypt was glad when they went; for the fear of them had come down on them.

他铺张云彩当遮盖，夜间使火光照。
A cloud was stretched over them for a cover; and he sent fire to give light in the night.

他们一求，他就使鹌鹑飞来，并用天上的粮食，叫他们饱足。
At the people's request he sent birds, and gave them the bread of heaven for food.

他打开磐石，水就涌出。在干旱之处，水流成河。
His hand made the rock open, and the waters came streaming out; they went down through the dry places like a river.

这都因他记念他的圣言，和他的仆人亚伯拉罕。
For he kept in mind his holy word, and Abraham, his servant.

他带领百姓欢乐而出，带领选民欢呼前往。
And he took his people out with joy, the men of his selection with glad cries:

他将列国的地赐给他们，他们便承受众民劳碌得来的。
And gave them the lands of the nations; and they took the work of the peoples for a heritage;

好使他们遵他的律例，守他的律法。你们要赞美耶和华。
So that they might keep his orders, and be true to his laws. Give praise to the Lord.

你们要赞美耶和华。要称谢耶和华，因他本为善。他的慈爱永远长存。
Let the Lord be praised. O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

谁能传说耶和华的大能，谁能表明他一切的美德。
Who is able to give an account of the great acts of the Lord, or to make clear all his praise?

凡遵守公平，常行公义的，这人便为有福。
Happy are they whose decisions are upright, and he who does righteousness at all times.

耶和华阿，你用恩惠待你的百姓，求你也用这恩惠记念我，开你的救恩眷顾我，
Keep me in mind, O Lord, when you are good to your people; O let your salvation come to me;

使我见你选民的福，乐你国民的乐，与你的产业一同夸耀。
So that I may see the well-being of the people of your selection, and have a part in the joy of your nation, and take pride in your heritage.

我们与我们的祖宗一同犯罪。我们作了孽，行了恶。
We are sinners like our fathers, we have done wrong, our acts are evil.

我们的祖宗在埃及不明白你的奇事，不记念你丰盛的慈爱，反倒在红海行了悖逆。
Our fathers did not give thought to your wonders in Egypt; they did not keep in memory the great number of your mercies, but gave you cause for wrath at the sea, even at the Red Sea.

然而，他因自己的名拯救他们，为要彰显他的大能。
But he was their saviour because of his name, so that men might see his great power.

并且斥责红海，海便干了；他带领他们经过深处，如同经过旷野。
By his word the Red Sea was made dry: and he took them through the deep waters as through the waste land.

他拯救他们脱离恨他们人的手，从仇敌手中救赎他们。
And he took them safely out of the hands of their haters, and kept them from the attacks of those who were against them.

水淹没他们的敌人，没有一个存留。
And the waters went over their haters; all of them came to an end.

那时，他们才信了他的话，歌唱赞美他。
Then they had faith in his words; they gave him songs of praise.

等不多时，他们就忘了他的作为，不仰望他的指教，
But their memory of his works was short; not waiting to be guided by him,

反倒在旷野大起欲心，在荒地试探神。
They gave way to their evil desires in the waste land, and put God to the test in the dry places.

他将他们所求的赐给他们，却使他们的心灵软弱。
And he gave them their request, but sent a wasting disease into their souls.

他们又在营中嫉妒摩西，和耶和华的圣者亚伦。
They were full of envy against Moses among the tents, and against Aaron, the holy one of the Lord.

地裂开，吞下大坍，掩盖亚比兰一党的人。
The earth opening put an end to Dathan, covering up Abiram and his band.

有火在他们的党中发起，有火焰烧毁了恶人。
And a fire was lighted among their tents; the sinners were burned up by the flames.

他们在何烈山造了牛犊，叩拜铸成的像。
They made a young ox in Horeb, and gave worship to an image of gold.

如此将他们荣耀的主，换为吃草之牛的像。
And their glory was changed into the image of an ox, whose food is grass.

忘了神他们的救主。他曾在埃及行大事。
They had no memory of God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;

在含地行奇事，在红海行可畏的事。
Works of wonder in the land of Ham, and things of fear by the Red Sea.

所以，他说要灭绝他们。若非有他所拣选的摩西站在当中（原文作破口），使他的忿怒转消，恐怕他就灭绝他们。
And he was purposing to put an end to them if Moses, his special servant, had not gone up before him, between him and his people, turning back his wrath, to keep them from destruction.

他们又藐视那美地，不信他的话，
They were disgusted with the good land; they had no belief in his word;

在自己帐棚内发怨言，不听耶和华的声音。
Talking against him secretly in their tents, they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord.

所以，他对他们起誓，必叫他们倒在旷野，
So he made an oath against them, to put an end to them in the waste land:

叫他们的后裔倒在列国之中，分散在各地。
That their children might be mixed among the nations, and sent away into other lands.

他们又与巴力毗珥连合，且吃了祭死神（或作人）的物。
And they were joined to Baal-peor, and took part in the offerings to the dead.

他们这样行，惹耶和华发怒，便有瘟疫流行在他们中间。
So they made him angry by their behaviour; and he sent disease on them.

那时，非尼哈站起，刑罚恶人，瘟疫这才止息。
Then Phinehas got up, and made prayer for them; and the disease went no farther.

那就算为他的义，世世代代，直到永远。
And all the generations coming after him kept the memory of his righteousness for ever.

他们在米利巴水又叫耶和华发怒，甚至摩西也受了亏损。
They made God angry again at the waters of Meribah, so that Moses was troubled because of them;

是因他们惹动他的灵，摩西（原文作他）用嘴说了急躁的话。
For they made his spirit bitter, and he said unwise things.

他们不照耶和华所吩咐的灭绝外邦人，
They did not put an end to the peoples, as the Lord had said;

反与他们混杂相合，学习他们的行为，
But they were joined to the nations, learning their works.

事奉他们的偶像，这就成了自己的网罗。
And they gave worship to images; which were a danger to them:

把自己的儿女祭祀鬼魔，
They even made offerings of their sons and their daughters to evil spirits,

流无辜人的血，就是自己儿女的血，把他们祭祀迦南的偶像，那地就被血污秽了。
And gave the blood of their sons and their daughters who had done no wrong, offering them to the images of Canaan; and the land was made unclean with blood.

这样，他们被自己所做的污秽了，在行为上犯了邪淫。
So they became unclean through their works, going after their evil desires.

所以，耶和华的怒气，向他的百姓发作，憎恶他的产业。
Then the wrath of the Lord was burning against his people, and he was angry with his heritage.

将他们交在外邦人的手里；恨他们的人就辖制他们。
And he gave them into the hands of the nations; and they were ruled by their haters.

他们的仇敌也欺压他们，他们就伏在敌人手下。
By them they were crushed, and made low under their hands.

他屡次搭救他们，他们却设谋背逆，因自己的罪孽降为卑下。
Again and again he made them free; but their hearts were turned against his purpose, and they were overcome by their sins.

然而，他听见他们哀告的时候，就眷顾他们的急难。
But when their cry came to his ears, he had pity on their trouble:

为他们记念他的约，照他丰盛的慈爱后悔。
And kept in mind his agreement with them, and in his great mercy gave them forgiveness.

他也使他们在凡掳掠他们的人面前蒙怜恤。
He put pity into the hearts of those who made them prisoners.

耶和华我们的神阿，求你拯救我们，从外邦中招聚我们，我们好称赞你的圣名，以赞美你为夸胜。
Be our saviour, O Lord our God, and let us come back together from among the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name, and have glory in your praise.

耶和华以色列的神是应当称颂的，从亘古直到永远。愿众民都说，阿们。你们要赞美耶和华。
Praise be to the Lord God of Israel for ever and for ever; and let all the people say, So be it. Give praise to the Lord.

你们要称谢耶和华，因他本为善。他的慈爱，永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

愿耶和华的赎民说这话，就是他从敌人手中所救赎的，
Let those whose cause the Lord has taken up say so, his people whom he has taken out of the hands of their haters;

从各地，从东从西，从南从北，所招聚来的。
Making them come together out of all the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.

他们在旷野荒地漂流，寻不见可住的城邑。
They were wandering in the waste places; they saw no way to a resting-place.

又饥又渴，心里发昏。
Their souls became feeble for need of food and drink.

于是，他们在苦难中哀求耶和华，他从他们的祸患中搭救他们。
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles;

又领他们行走直路，使他们往可居住的城邑。
Guiding them in the right way, so that they might come into the town of their resting-place.

但愿人因耶和华的慈爱和他向人所行的奇事都称赞他。
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!

因他使心里渴慕的人，得以知足，使心里饥饿的人，得饱美物。
He gives its desire to the unresting soul, so that it is full of good things.

那些坐在黑暗中死荫里的人，被困苦和铁链捆锁，
Those who were in the dark, in the black night, in chains of sorrow and iron;

是因他们违背神的话语，藐视至高者的旨意。
Because they went against the words of God, and gave no thought to the laws of the Most High:

所以，他用劳苦治服他们的心。他们仆倒，无人扶助。
So that he made their hearts weighted down with grief; they were falling, and had no helper.

于是，他们在苦难中哀求耶和华，他从他们的祸患中拯救他们。
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles.

他从黑暗中，和死荫里，领他们出来，折断他们的绑索。
He took them out of the dark and the black night, and all their chains were broken.

但愿人因耶和华的慈爱，和他向人所行的奇事都称赞他。
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!

因为他打破了铜门，砍断了铁闩。
The doors of brass are broken by his arm, and the bands of iron are cut in two.

愚妄人因自己的过犯，和自己的罪孽便受苦楚。
Foolish men, because of their sins, and because of their wrongdoing, are troubled;

他们心里厌恶各样的食物，就临近死门。
They are disgusted by all food, and they come near to the doors of death.

于是，他们在苦难中哀求耶和华，他从他们的祸患中拯救他们。
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.

他发命医治他们，救他们脱离死亡。
He sent his word and made them well, and kept them safe from the underworld.

但愿人因耶和华的慈爱，和他向人所行的奇事都称赞他。
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!

愿他们以感谢为祭献给他，欢呼述说他的作为。
Let them make offerings of praise, giving news of his works with cries of joy.

在海上坐船，在大水中经理事务的。
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in the great waters;

他们看见耶和华的作为，并他在深水中的奇事。
They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

因他一吩咐，狂风就起来，海中的波浪也扬起。
For at his word comes up the storm-wind, lifting high the waves.

他们上到天空，下到海底，他们的心因患难便消化。
The sailors go up to heaven, and down into the deep; their souls are wasted because of their trouble.

他们摇摇幌幌。东倒西歪，好像醉酒的人。他们的智慧无法可施。
They are turned here and there, rolling like a man who is full of wine; and all their wisdom comes to nothing.

于是，他们在苦难中哀求耶和华，他从他们的祸患中领出他们来。
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.

他使狂风止息，波浪就平静。
He makes the storm into a calm, so that the waves are at peace.

风息浪静，他们便欢喜。他就引他们到所愿去的海口。
Then they are glad, because the sea is quiet, and he takes them to the harbour of their desire.

但愿人因耶和华的慈爱，和他向人所行的奇事都称赞他。
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!

愿他们在民的会中尊崇他，在长老的位上赞美他。
Let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people, and praise among the chiefs.

他使江河变为旷野，叫水泉变为干渴之地。
He makes rivers into waste places, and springs of water into a dry land;

使肥地变为碱地。这都因其间居民的罪恶。
He makes a fertile country into a salt waste, because of the sins of those who are living there.

他使旷野变为水潭，叫旱地变为水泉。
He makes a waste land into a place of water, and a dry land into water-springs.

他使饥饿的人住在那里，好建造可住的城邑。
And there he gives the poor a resting-place, so that they may make themselves a town;

又种田地，栽葡萄园，得享所出的土产。
And put seed in the fields and make vine-gardens, to give them fruit.

他又赐福给他们，叫他们生养众多。也不叫他们的牲畜减少。
He gives them his blessing so that they are increased greatly, and their cattle do not become less.

他们又因暴虐，患难，愁苦，就减少且卑下。
And when they are made low, and crushed by trouble and sorrow,

他使君王蒙羞被辱，使他们在荒废无路之地漂流。
He puts an end to the pride of kings, and sends them wandering in the waste lands where there is no way.

他却将穷乏人安置在高处，脱离苦难，使他的家属多如羊群。
But he puts the poor man on high from his troubles, and gives him families like a flock.

正直人看见，就欢喜。罪孽之辈，必塞口无言。
The upright see it and are glad: the mouth of the sinner is stopped.

凡有智慧的，必在这些事上留心，也必思想耶和华的慈爱。
Let the wise give thought to these things, and see the mercies of the Lord.

（大卫的诗歌。）神阿，我心坚定。我口（原文作荣耀）要唱诗歌颂。
<A Song. A Psalm. Of David.> O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs and melody, even with my glory.

琴瑟阿，你们当醒起。我自己要极早醒起。
Give out your sounds, O corded instruments: the dawn will be awaking with my song.

耶和华阿，我要在万民中称谢你，在列邦中歌颂你。
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make melody to you among the nations.

因为，你的慈爱，大过诸天；你的诚实，达到穹苍。
For your mercy is higher than the heavens: and your unchanging faith than the clouds.

神阿，愿你崇高过于诸天。愿你的荣耀，高过全地。
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.

求你应允我们，用右手拯救我们，好叫你所亲爱的人得救。
Let your right hand be stretched out for salvation, and give me an answer, so that your loved ones may be safe from danger.

神已经指着他的圣洁说（说或作应许我），我要欢乐。我要分开示剑，丈量疏割谷。
This is the word of the holy God: I will be glad; I will make Shechem a heritage, measuring out the valley of Succoth.

基列是我的。玛拿西是我的。以法莲是护卫我头的。犹大是我的杖。
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;

摩押是我的沐浴盆。我要向以东抛鞋。我必因胜非利士呼喊。
Moab is my washpot; on Edom is the resting-place of my shoe; over Philistia will I send out a glad cry.

谁能领我进坚固城。谁能引我到以东地。
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?

神阿，你不是丢弃了我们吗？神阿，你不和我们的军兵同去吗？
Have you not sent us away from you, O God? and you go not out with our armies.

求你帮助我们攻击敌人，因为人的帮助是枉然的。
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.

我们倚靠神，才得施展大能，因为践踏我们敌人的就是他。
With God we will do great things; for by him will our haters be crushed underfoot.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）我所赞美的神阿，求你不要闭口不言。
<To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.> God of my praise, let my prayer be answered;

因为恶人的嘴，和诡诈人的口，已经张开攻击我。他们用撒谎的舌头对我说话。
For the mouth of the sinner is open against me in deceit: his tongue has said false things against me.

他们围绕我，说怨恨的话，又无故地攻打我。
Words of hate are round about me; they have made war against me without cause.

他们与我为敌以报我爱。但我专心祈祷。
For my love they give me back hate; but I have given myself to prayer.

他们向我以恶报善，以恨报爱。
They have put on me evil for good; hate in exchange for my love.

愿你派一个恶人辖制他，派一个对头站在他右边。
Put an evil man over him; and let one be placed at his right hand to say evil of him.

他受审判的时候，愿他出来担当罪名。愿他的祈祷反成为罪。
When he is judged, let the decision go against him; and may his prayer become sin.

愿他的年日短少。愿别人得他的职分。
Let his life be short; let another take his position of authority.

愿他的儿女为孤儿，他的妻子为寡妇。
Let his children have no father, and his wife be made a widow.

愿他的儿女漂流讨饭，从他们荒凉之处出来求食。
Let his children be wanderers, looking to others for their food; let them be sent away from the company of their friends.

愿强暴的债主牢笼他一切所有的。愿外人抢他劳碌得来的。
Let his creditor take all his goods; and let others have the profit of his work.

愿无人向他延绵施恩。愿无人可怜他的孤儿。
Let no man have pity on him, or give help to his children when he is dead.

愿他的后人断绝，名字被涂抹，不传于下代。
Let his seed be cut off; in the coming generation let their name go out of memory.

愿他祖宗的罪孽被耶和华记念。愿他母亲的罪过不被涂抹。
Let the Lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his fathers; and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness.

愿这些罪常在耶和华面前，使他的名号断绝于世。
Let them be ever before the eyes of the Lord, so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth.

因为他不想施恩，却逼迫困苦穷乏的，和伤心的人，要把他们治死。
Because he had no mercy, but was cruel to the low and the poor, designing the death of the broken-hearted.

他爱咒骂，咒骂就临到他。他不喜爱福乐，福乐就与他远离。
As he took pleasure in cursing, so let it come on him; and as he had no delight in blessing, let it be far from him.

他拿咒骂当衣服穿上。这咒骂就如水进他里面，像油入他的骨头。
He put on cursing like a robe, and it has come into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.

愿这咒骂当他遮身的衣服，当他常束的腰带。
Let it be to him as a robe which he puts on, let it be like a band which is round him at all times.

这就是我对头，和用恶言议论我的人，从耶和华那里所受的报应。
Let this be the reward given to my haters from the Lord, and to those who say evil of my soul.

主耶和华阿，求你为你的名恩待我。因你的慈爱美好，求你搭救我。
But, O Lord God, give me your help, because of your name; take me out of danger, because your mercy is good.

因为我困苦穷乏，内心受伤。
For I am poor and in need, and my heart is wounded in me.

我如日影渐渐偏斜而去。我如蝗虫被抖出来。
I am gone like the shade when it is stretched out: I am forced out of my place like a locust.

我因禁食，膝骨软弱；我身上的肉也渐渐瘦了。
My knees are feeble for need of food; there is no fat on my bones.

我受他们的羞辱。他们看见我，便摇头。
As for me, they make sport of me; shaking their heads when they see me.

耶和华我的神阿，求你帮助我，照你的慈爱拯救我。
Give me help, O Lord my God; in your mercy be my saviour;

使他们知道这是你的手，是你耶和华所行的事。
So that they may see that it is the work of your hand; that you, Lord, have done it.

任凭他们咒骂。惟愿你赐福。他们几时起来就必蒙羞，你的仆人却要欢喜。
They may give curses but you give blessing; when they come up against me, put them to shame; but let your servant be glad.

愿我的对头，披戴羞辱。愿他们以自己的羞愧为外袍遮身。
Let my haters be clothed with shame, covering themselves with shame as with a robe.

我要用口极力称谢耶和华。我要在众人中间赞美他。
I will give the Lord great praise with my mouth; yes, I will give praise to him among all the people.

因为他必站在穷乏人的右边，要救他脱离审判他灵魂的人。
For he is ever at the right hand of the poor, to take him out of the hands of those who go after his soul.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华对我主说，你坐在我的右边，等我使你仇敌作你的脚凳。
<A Psalm. Of David.> The Lord said to my lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put all those who are against you under your feet.

耶和华必使你从锡安伸出能力的杖来。你要在你仇敌中掌权。
The Lord will send out the rod of your strength from Zion; be king over your haters.

当你掌权的日子（或作行军的日子），你的民要以圣洁的妆饰为衣（或作以圣洁为妆饰），甘心牺牲自己。你的民多如清晨的甘露（或作你少年时光耀如清晨的甘露）。
Your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power; like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains is the army of your young men.

耶和华起了誓，决不后悔，说，你是照着麦基洗德的等次，永远为祭司。
The Lord has made an oath, and will not take it back. You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.

在你右边的主，当他发怒的日子，必打伤列王。
In the day of his wrath kings will be wounded by the Lord at your right hand.

他要在列邦中刑罚恶人，尸首就遍满各处。他要在许多国中打破仇敌的头
He will be judge among the nations, the valleys will be full of dead bodies; the head over a great country will be wounded by him.

他要喝路旁的河水，因此必抬起头来。
He will take of the stream by the way; so his head will be lifted up.

你们要赞美耶和华。我要在正直人的大会中，并公会中，一心称谢耶和华。
Let the Lord be praised. I will give praise to the Lord with all my heart, among the upright, and in the meeting of the people.

耶和华的作为本为大。凡喜爱的都必考察。
The works of the Lord are great, searched out by all those who have delight in them.

他所行的是尊荣和威严。他的公义存到永远。
His work is full of honour and glory; and his righteousness is unchanging for ever.

他行了奇事，使人记念。耶和华有恩惠，有怜悯。
Certain for ever is the memory of his wonders: the Lord is full of pity and mercy.

他赐粮食给敬畏他的人。他必永远记念他的约。
He has given food to his worshippers; he will keep his agreement in mind for ever.

他向百姓显出大能的作为，把外邦的地赐给他们为业。
He has made clear to his people the power of his works, giving them the heritage of the nations.

他手所行的，是诚实公平。他的训词都是确实的。
The works of his hands are faith and righteousness; all his laws are unchanging.

是永永远远坚定的，是按诚实正直设立的。
They are fixed for ever and ever, they are done in faith and righteousness.

他向百姓施行救赎，命定他的约，直到永远。他的名圣而可畏。
He has sent salvation to his people; he has given his word for ever: holy is his name and greatly to be feared.

敬畏耶和华是智慧得开端。凡遵行。他命令的，是聪明人。耶和华是永远当赞美的。
The fear of the Lord is the best part of wisdom: all those who keep his laws are wise: his praise is eternal.

你们要赞美耶和华。敬畏耶和华，甚喜爱他命令的，这人便为有福。
Let the Lord be praised. Happy is the man who gives honour to the Lord, and has great delight in his laws.

他的后裔在世必强盛。正直人的后代，必要蒙福。
His seed will be strong on the earth; blessings will be on the generation of the upright.

他家中有货物，有钱财。他的公义存到永远。
A store of wealth will be in his house, and his righteousness will be for ever.

正直人在黑暗中，有光向他发现。他有恩惠，有怜悯，有公义。
For the upright there is a light shining in the dark; he is full of grace and pity.

施恩与人，借贷与人的，这人事情顺利。他被审判的时候，要诉明自己的冤。
All is well for the man who is kind and gives freely to others; he will make good his cause when he is judged.

他永不动摇。义人被记念，直到永远。
He will not ever be moved; the memory of the upright will be living for ever.

他必不怕凶恶的信息。他心坚定，倚靠耶和华。
He will have no fear of evil news; his heart is fixed, for his hope is in the Lord.

他心确定，总不惧怕，直到他看见敌人遭报。
His heart is resting safely, he will have no fear, till he sees trouble come on his haters.

他施舍钱财，周济贫穷。他的仁义存到永远。他的角必被高举，大有荣耀。
He has given with open hands to the poor; his righteousness is for ever; his horn will be lifted up with honour.

恶人看见便恼恨。必咬牙而消化。恶人的心愿，要归灭绝。
The sinner will see it with grief; he will be wasted away with envy; the desire of the evil-doers will come to nothing.

你们要赞美耶和华。耶和华的仆人哪，你们要赞美，赞美耶和华的名。
Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.

耶和华的名，是应当称颂的，从今时直到永远。
Let blessing be on the name of the Lord, from this time and for ever.

从日出之地，到日落之处，耶和华的名是应当赞美的。
From the coming up of the sun to its going down, the Lord's name is to be praised.

耶和华超乎万民之上。他的荣耀高过诸天。
The Lord is high over all nations, and his glory is higher than the heavens.

谁像耶和华我们的神呢？他坐在至高之处，
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high,

自己谦卑，观看天上地下的事。
Looking down on the heavens, and on the earth?

他从灰尘里抬举贫寒人，从粪堆中提拔穷乏人。
He takes the poor man out of the dust, lifting him up from his low position;

使他们与王子同坐，就是与本国的王子同坐。
To give him a place among the rulers, even with the rulers of his people.

他使不能生育的妇人安居家中，为多子的乐母。你们要赞美耶和华。
He gives the unfertile woman a family, making her a happy mother of children. Give praise to the Lord.

以色列出了埃及，雅各家离开说异言之民。
When Israel came out of Egypt, the children of Jacob from a people whose language was strange to them;

那时，犹大为主的圣所，以色列为他所治理的国度。
Judah became his holy place, and Israel his kingdom.

沧海看见就奔逃。约旦河也倒流。
The sea saw it, and went in flight; Jordan was turned back.

大山踊跃，如公羊。小山跳舞，如羊羔。
The mountains were jumping like goats, and the little hills like lambs.

沧海阿，你为何奔逃。约旦哪，你为何倒流。
What was wrong with you, O sea, that you went in flight? O Jordan, that you were turned back?

大山哪，你为何踊跃，如公羊。小山哪，你为何跳舞，如羊羔。
You mountains, why were you jumping like goats, and you little hills like lambs?

大地阿，你因见主的面，就是雅各神的面，便要震动。
Be troubled, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob;

他叫磐石变为水池，叫坚石变为泉源。
Who made the rock into a water-spring, and the hard stone into a fountain.

耶和华阿，荣耀不要归与我们，不要归与我们。要因你的慈爱和诚实归在你的名下。
Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name let glory be given, because of your mercy and your unchanging faith.

为何容外邦人说，他们的神在哪里呢？
Why may the nations say, Where is now their God?

然而，我们的神在天上。都随自己的意旨行事。
But our God is in heaven: he has done whatever was pleasing to him.

他们的偶像，是金的，银的，是人手所造的。
Their images are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

有口却不能言，有眼却不能看。
They have mouths, but no voice; they have eyes, but they see not;

有耳却不能听。有鼻却不能闻。
They have ears, but no hearing; they have noses, but no sense of smell;

有手却不能摸。有脚却不能走。有喉咙也不能出声。
They have hands without feeling, and feet without power of walking; and no sound comes from their throat.

造他的要和他一样。凡靠他的也要如此。
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his faith in them.

以色列阿，你要倚靠耶和华。他是你的帮助，和你的盾牌。
O Israel, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.

亚伦家阿，你们要倚靠耶和华。他是你们的帮助，和你们的盾牌。
O house of Aaron, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.

你们敬畏耶和华的，要倚靠耶和华。他是你们的帮助，和你们的盾牌。
You worshippers of the Lord, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.

耶和华向来眷念我们。他还要赐福给我们，要赐福给以色列的家，赐福给亚伦的家。
The Lord has kept us in mind and will give us his blessing; he will send blessings on the house of Israel and on the house of Aaron.

凡敬畏耶和华的，无论大小，主必赐福给他。
He will send blessings on the worshippers of the Lord, on the small and on the great.

愿耶和华叫你们和你们的子孙，日见加增。
May the Lord give you and your children still greater increase.

你们蒙了造天地之耶和华的福。
May you have the blessing of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

天，是耶和华的天。地，他却给了世人。
The heavens are the Lord's; but the earth he has given to the children of men.

死人不能赞美耶和华。下到寂静中的也都不能。
The dead do not give praise to the Lord; or those who go down to the underworld.

但我们要称颂耶和华，从今时直到永远。你们要赞美耶和华。
But we will give praise to the Lord now and for ever. Praise be to the Lord.

我爱耶和华，因为他听了我的声音，和我的恳求。
I have given my love to the Lord, because he has given ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer.

他既向我侧耳，我一生要求告他。
He has let my request come before him, and I will make my prayer to him all my days.

死亡的绳索缠绕我，阴间的痛苦抓住我。我遭遇患难愁苦。
The nets of death were round me, and the pains of the underworld had me in their grip; I was full of trouble and sorrow.

那时，我便求告耶和华的名，说，耶和华阿，求你救我的灵魂。
Then I made my prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, take my soul out of trouble.

耶和华有恩惠，有公义。我们的神以怜悯为怀。
The Lord is full of grace and righteousness; truly, he is a God of mercy.

耶和华保护愚人。我落到卑微的地步，他救了我。
The Lord keeps the simple; I was made low, and he was my saviour.

我的心哪，你要仍归安乐，因为耶和华用厚恩待你。
Come back to your rest, O my soul; for the Lord has given you your reward.

主阿，你救我的命，免了死亡，救我的眼，免了流泪，救我的脚，免了跌倒。
You have taken my soul from the power of death, keeping my eyes from weeping, and my feet from falling.

我要在耶和华面前，行活人之路。
I will go before the Lord in the land of the living.

我因信，所以如此说话。我受了极大的困苦。
I still had faith, though I said, I am in great trouble;

我曾急促地说，人都是说谎的。
Though I said in my fear, All men are false.

我拿什么报答耶和华向我所赐的一切厚恩。
What may I give to the Lord for all the good things which he has done for me?

我要举起救恩的杯，称扬耶和华的名。
I will take the cup of salvation, and give praise to the name of the Lord.

我要在他众民面前向耶和华还我的愿。
I will make the offering of my oath to the Lord, even before all his people.

在耶和华眼中，看圣民之死，极为宝贵。
Dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.

耶和华阿，我真是你的仆人。我是你的仆人，是你婢女的儿子。你已经解开我的绑索。
O Lord, truly I am your servant; I am your servant, the son of her who is your servant; by you have my cords been broken.

我要以感谢为祭献给你，又要求告耶和华的名。
I will give an offering of praise to you, and make my prayer in the name of the Lord.

我要在他众民面前，在耶和华殿的院内，在耶路撒冷当中，向耶和华还我的愿。你们要赞美耶和华。
I will make the offerings of my oath, even before all his people;


In the Lord's house, even in Jerusalem. Praise be to the Lord.

万国阿，你们都当赞美耶和华。万民哪，你们都当颂赞他。
Let all the nations give praise to the Lord: let all the people give him praise.

因为他向我们大施慈爱。耶和华的诚实存到永远。你们要赞美耶和华。
For great is his mercy to us, and his faith is unchanging for ever. Praise be to the Lord.

你们要称谢耶和华，因他本为善。他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

愿以色列说，他的慈爱永远长存。
Let Israel now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.

愿亚伦的家说，他的慈爱永远长存。
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.

愿敬畏耶和华的说，他的慈爱永远长存。
Let all worshippers of the Lord now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.

我在急难中求告耶和华，他就应允我，把我安置在宽阔之地。
I made my prayer to the Lord in my trouble: and the Lord gave me an answer, and put me in a wide place.

有耶和华帮助我。我必不惧怕。人能把我怎么样呢？
The Lord is on my side; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?

在那帮助我的人中，有耶和华帮助我，所以我要看见那恨我的人遭报。
The Lord is my great helper: I will see my desire against my haters.

投靠耶和华，强似倚赖人。
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in man.

投靠耶和华，强似倚赖王子。
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in rulers.

万民围绕我。我靠耶和华的名，必剿灭他们。
All the nations have come round me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.

他们环绕我，围困我。我靠耶和华的名，必剿灭他们。
They are round me, yes, they are all about me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.

他们如同蜂子围绕我，好像烧荆棘的火，必被熄灭。我靠耶和华的名，必剿灭他们。
They are round me like bees; but they are put out like a fire among thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.

你推我，要叫我跌倒，但耶和华帮助了我。
I have been hard pushed by you, so that I might have a fall: but the Lord was my helper.

耶和华是我的力量，是我的诗歌。他也成了我的拯救。
The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation.

在义人的帐棚里，有欢呼拯救的声音。耶和华的右手施展大能。
The sound of joy and salvation is in the tents of the upright; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.

耶和华的右手高举。耶和华的右手施展大能。
The right hand of the Lord is lifted up; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.

我必不至死，仍要存活，并要传扬耶和华的作为。
Life and not death will be my part, and I will give out the story of the works of the Lord.

耶和华虽严严地惩治我，却未曾将我交于死亡。
The hand of Jah has been hard on me; but he has not given me up to death.

给我敞开义门。我要进去称谢耶和华。
Let the doors of righteousness be open to me; I will go in and give praise to the Lord.

这是耶和华的门。义人要进去。
This is the door of the Lord's house; the workers of righteousness will go in through it.

我要称谢你，因为你已经应允我，又成了我的拯救。
I will give you praise, for you have given me an answer, and have become my salvation.

匠人所弃的石头，已成了房角的头块石头。
The stone which the builders put on one side has become the chief stone of the building.

这是耶和华所做的，在我们眼中看为希奇。
This is the Lord's doing; it is a wonder in our eyes.

这是耶和华所定的日子。我们在其中要高兴欢喜。
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will be full of joy and delight in it.

耶和华阿，求你拯救。耶和华阿，求你使我们亨通。
Send salvation now, O Lord; Lord, send us your blessing.

奉耶和华名来的，是应当称颂的。我们从耶和华的殿中，为你们祝福。
A blessing be on him who comes in the name of the Lord; we give you blessing from the house of the Lord.

耶和华是神。他光照了我们。理当用绳索把祭牲拴住，牵到坛角那里。
The Lord is God, and he has given us light; let the holy dance be ordered with branches, even up to the horns of the altar.

你是我的神，我要称谢你。你是我的神，我要尊崇你。
You are my God, and I will give you praise; my God, and I will give honour to your name.

你们要称谢耶和华，因他本为善。他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

行为完全，遵行耶和华律法的，这人便为有福。
<ALEPH> Happy are they who are without sin in their ways, walking in the law of the Lord.

遵守他的法度，一心寻求他的，这人便为有福。
Happy are they who keep his unchanging word, searching after him with all their heart.

这人不做非义的事，但遵行他的道。
They do no evil; they go in his ways.

耶和华阿，你曾将你的训词吩咐我们，为要我们殷勤遵守。
You have put your orders into our hearts, so that we might keep them with care.

但愿我行事坚定，得以遵守你的律例。
If only my ways were ordered so that I might keep your rules!

我看重你的一切命令，就不至于羞愧。
Then I would not be put to shame, as long as I have respect for all your teaching.

我学了你公义的判语，就要以正直的心称谢你。
I will give you praise with an upright heart in learning your right decisions.

我必守你的律例。求你总不要丢弃我。
I will keep your rules: O give me not up completely.

少年人用什么洁净他的行为呢？是要遵行你的话。
<BETH> How may a young man make his way clean? by guiding it after your word.

我一心寻求了你。求你不要叫我偏离你的命令。
I have made search for you with all my heart: O let me not go wandering far from your teaching.

我将你的话藏在心里，免得我得罪你。
I have kept your sayings secretly in my heart, so that I might do no sin against you.

耶和华阿，你是应当称颂的。求你将你的律例教训我。
Praise be to you, O Lord: give me knowledge of your rules.

我用嘴唇传扬你口中的一切典章。
With my lips have I made clear all the decisions of your mouth.

我喜悦你的法度，如同喜悦一切的财物。
I have taken as much delight in the way of your unchanging word, as in all wealth.

我要默想你的训词，看重你的道路。
I will give thought to your orders, and have respect for your ways.

我要在你的律例中自乐。我不忘记你的话。
I will have delight in your rules; I will not let your word go out of my mind.

求你用厚恩待你的仆人，使我存活。我就遵守你的话。
<GIMEL> Give me, your servant, the reward of life, so that I may keep your word;

求你开我的眼睛，使我看出你律法中的奇妙。
Let my eyes be open to see the wonders of your law.

我是在地上作寄居的。求你不要向我隐瞒你的命令。
I am living in a strange land: do not let your teachings be kept secret from me.

我时常切慕你的典章，甚至心碎。
My soul is broken with desire for your decisions at all times.

受咒诅偏离你命令的骄傲人，你已经责备他们。
Your hand has been against the men of pride, a curse is on those who go wandering out of your way.

求你除掉我所受的羞辱和藐视。因我遵守你的法度。
Take away from me shame and bitter words; for I have kept your unchanging word in my heart.

虽有首领坐着妄论我。你仆人却思想你的律例。
Rulers make evil designs against me; but your servant gives thought to your rules.

你的法度，是我所喜乐的，是我的谋士。
Your unchanging word is my delight, and the guide of my footsteps.

我的性命几乎归于尘土。求你照你的话，将我救活。
<DALETH> My soul is joined to the dust: O give me life, in keeping with your word.

我述说我所行的，你应允了我。求你将你的律例教训我。
I put the record of my ways before you, and you gave me an answer: O give me knowledge of your rules.

求你使我明白你的训词，我就思想你的奇事。
Make the way of your orders clear to me; then my thoughts will be ever on your wonders.

我的心因愁苦而消化。求你照你的话使我坚立。
My soul is wasted with sorrow; give me strength again in keeping with your word

求你使我离开奸诈的道，开恩将你的律法赐给我。
Take from me every false way; and in mercy give me your law.

我拣选了忠信的道，将你的典章摆在我面前。
I have taken the way of faith: I have kept your decisions before me.

我持守你的法度。耶和华阿，求你不要叫我羞愧。
I have been true to your unchanging word; O Lord, do not put me to shame.

你开广我心的时候，我就往你命令的道上直奔。
I will go quickly in the way of your teaching, because you have given me a free heart.

耶和华阿，求你将你的律例指教我，我必遵守到底。
<HE> O Lord, let me see the way of your rules, and I will keep it to the end.

求你赐我悟性，我便遵守你的律法。且要一心遵守。
Give me wisdom, so that I may keep your law; going after it with all my heart.

求你叫我遵行你的命令。因为这是我所喜乐的。
Make me go in the way of your teachings; for they are my delight.

求你使我的心，趋向你的法度，不趋向非义之财。
Let my heart be turned to your unchanging word, and not to evil desire.

求你叫我转眼不看虚假，又叫我在你的道中生活。
Let my eyes be turned away from what is false; give me life in your ways.

你向敬畏你的人所应许的话，求你向仆人坚定。
Give effect to your word to your servant, in whose heart is the fear of you.

求你使我所怕的羞辱远离我，因你的典章本为美。
Take away the shame which is my fear; for your decisions are good.

我羡慕你的训词。求你使我在你的公义上生活。
See how great is my desire for your orders: give me life in your righteousness.

耶和华阿，愿你照你的话，使你的慈爱，就是你的救恩，临到我身上。
<VAU> Let your mercies come to me, O Lord, even your salvation, as you have said.

我就有话回答那羞辱我的。因我倚靠你的话。
So that I may have an answer for the man who would put me to shame; for I have faith in your word.

求你叫真理的话，总不离开我口。因我仰望你的典章。
Take not your true word quite out of my mouth; for I have put my hope in your decisions.

我要常守你的律法，直到永永远远。
So that I may keep your law for ever and ever;

我要自由而行（或作我要行在宽阔之地）。因我素来考究你的训词。
So that my way may be in a wide place: because my search has been for your orders.

我也要在君王面前，论说你的法度，并不至于羞愧。
So that I may give knowledge of your unchanging word before kings, and not be put to shame.

我要在你的命令中自乐。这命令素来是我所爱的。
And so that I may take delight in your teachings, to which I have given my love.

我又要遵行（原文作举手）你的命令。这命令素来是我所爱的。我也要思想你的律例。
And so that my hands may be stretched out to you; and I will give thought to your rules.

求你记念向你仆人所应许的话，叫我有盼望。
<ZAIN> Keep in mind your word to your servant, for on it has my hope been fixed.

这话将我救活了。我在患难中，因此得安慰。
This is my comfort in my trouble; that your sayings have given me life.

骄傲的人甚侮慢我。我却未曾偏离你的律法。
The men of pride have made great sport of me; but I have not been turned from your law.

耶和华阿，我记念你从古以来的典章，就得了安慰。
I have kept the memory of your decisions from times past, O Lord; and they have been my comfort.

我见恶人离弃你的律法，就怒气发作，犹如火烧。
I am burning with wrath, because of the sinners who have given up your law.

我在世寄居，素来以你的律例为诗歌。
Your rules have been melodies to me, while I have been living in strange lands.

耶和华阿，我夜间记念你的名，遵守你的律法。
I have given thought to your name in the night, O Lord, and have kept your law.

我所以如此，是因我守你的训词。
This has been true of me, that I have kept your orders in my heart.

耶和华是我的福分。我曾说，我要遵守你的言语。
<CHETH> The Lord is my heritage: I have said that I would be ruled by your words.

我一心求过你的恩。愿你照你的话怜悯我。
I have given my mind to do your pleasure with all my heart; have mercy on me, as you have said.

我思想我所行的道，就转步归向你的法度。
I gave thought to my steps, and my feet were turned into the way of your unchanging word.

我急忙遵守你的命令，并不迟延。
I was quick to do your orders, and let no time be wasted.

恶人的绳索缠绕我。我却没有忘记你的律法。
The cords of evil-doers are round me; but I have kept in mind your law.

我因你公义的典章，半夜必起来称谢你。
In the middle of the night I will get up to give you praise, because of all your right decisions.

凡敬畏你，守你训词的人，我都与他作伴。
I keep company with all your worshippers, and those who have your orders in their memory.

耶和华阿，你的慈爱遍满大地。求你将你的律例教训我。
The earth, O Lord, is full of your mercy: give me knowledge of your rules.

耶和华阿，你向来是照你的话善待仆人。
<TETH> You have done good to your servant, O Lord, in keeping with your word.

求你将精明和知识赐给我。因我信了你的命令。
Give me knowledge and good sense; for I have put my faith in your teachings.

我未受苦以先，走迷了路，现在却遵守你的话。
Before I was in trouble I went out of the way; but now I keep your word.

你本为善，所行的也善。求你将你的律例教训我。
You are good, and your works are good; give me knowledge of your rules.

骄傲人编造谎言攻击我。我却要一心守你的训词。
The men of pride have said false things about me; but I will keep your orders in my heart.

他们心蒙脂油。我却喜爱你的律法。
Their hearts are shut up with fat; but my delight is in your law.

我受苦是与我有益，为要使我学习你的律例。
It is good for me to have been through trouble; so that I might come to the knowledge of your rules.

你口中的训言（或作律法），与我有益，胜于千万的金银。
The law of your mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.

你的手制造我，建立我。求你赐我悟性，可以学习你的命令。
<JOD> Your hands have made me, and given me form: give me wisdom, so that I may have knowledge of your teaching.

敬畏你的人见我，就要欢喜。因我仰望你的话。
Your worshippers will see me and be glad; because my hope has been in your word.

耶和华阿，我知道你的判语是公义的。你使我受苦，是以诚实待我。
I have seen, O Lord, that your decisions are right, and that in unchanging faith you have sent trouble on me.

求你照着应许仆人的话，以慈爱安慰我。
Let your mercy now be my comfort, as you have said to your servant.

愿你的慈悲临到我，使我存活。因你的律法是我所喜爱的。
Let your gentle mercies come to me, so that I may have life; for your law is my delight.

愿骄傲人蒙羞。因为他们无理地倾覆我。但我要思想你的训词。
Let the men of pride be shamed; because they have falsely given decision against me; but I will give thought to your orders.

愿敬畏你的人归向我，他们就知道你的法度。
Let your worshippers be turned to me, and those who have knowledge of your words.

愿我的心在你的律例上完全，使我不至蒙羞。
Let all my heart be given to your orders, so that I may not be put to shame.

我心渴想你的救恩，仰望你的应许。
<CAPH> My soul is wasted with desire for your salvation: but I have hope in your word.

我因盼望你的应许，眼睛失明，说，你何时安慰我。
My eyes are full of weariness with searching for your word, saying, When will you give me comfort?

我好像烟薰的皮袋。却不忘记你的律例。
For I have become like a wine-skin black with smoke; but I still keep the memory of your rules.

你仆人的年日有多少呢？你几时向逼迫我的人施行审判呢？
How short is the life of your servant! when will you give your decision against those who are attacking me?

不从你律法的骄傲人，为我掘了坑。
The men of pride, who are turned away from your law, have put nets for me.

你的命令尽都诚实。他们无理地逼迫我，求你帮助我。
All your teachings are certain; they go after me with evil design; give me your help.

他们几乎把我从世上灭绝，但我没有离弃你的训词。
They had almost put an end to me on earth; but I did not give up your orders.

求你照你的慈爱将我救活。我就遵守你口中的法度。
Give me life in your mercy; so that I may be ruled by the unchanging word of your mouth.

耶和华阿，你的话安定在天，直到永远。
<LAMED> For ever, O Lord, your word is fixed in heaven.

你的诚实存到万代。你坚定了地，地就长存。
Your faith is unchanging from generation to generation: you have put the earth in its place, and it is not moved.

天地照你的安排，存到今日。万物都是你的仆役。
They are ruled this day by your decisions; for all things are your servants.

我若不是喜爱你的律法，早就在苦难中灭绝了。
If your law had not been my delight, my troubles would have put an end to me.

我永不忘记你的训词。因你用这训词将我救活了。
I will ever keep your orders in mind; for in them I have life.

我是属你的，求你救我，因我寻求了你的训词。
I am yours, O be my saviour; for my desire has been for your rules.

恶人等待我，要灭绝我，我却要揣摩你的法度。
The sinners have been waiting for me to give me up to destruction; but I will give all my mind to your unchanging word.

我看万事尽都有限。惟有你的命令，极其宽广。
I have seen that nothing on earth is complete; but your teaching is very wide.

我何等爱慕你的律法，终日不住地思想。
<MEM> O what love I have for your law! I give thought to it all the day.

你的命令常存在我心里，使我比仇敌有智慧。
Your teaching has made me wiser than my haters: for it is mine for ever.

我比我的师傅更通达。因我思想你的法度。
I have more knowledge than all my teachers, because I give thought to your unchanging word.

我比年老的更明白，因我守了你的训词。
I have more wisdom than the old, because I have kept your orders.

我禁止我脚走一切的邪路，为要遵守你的话。
I have kept back my feet from all evil ways, so that I might be true to your word.

我没有偏离你的典章，因为你教训了我。
My heart has not been turned away from your decisions; for you have been my teacher.

你的言语，在我上膛何等甘美。在我口中比蜜更甜。
How sweet are your sayings to my taste! truly, they are sweeter than honey in my mouth!

我借着你的训词，得以明白。所以我恨一切的假道。
Through your orders I get wisdom; for this reason I am a hater of every false way.

你的话是我脚前的灯，是我路上的光。
<NUN> Your word is a light for my feet, ever shining on my way.

你公义的典章，我曾起誓遵守，我必按誓而行。
I have made an oath and kept it, to be guided by your upright decisions.

我甚是受苦。耶和华阿，求你照你的话将我救活。
I am greatly troubled, O Lord, give me life in keeping with your word.

耶和华阿，求你悦纳我口中的赞美为供物，又将你的典章教训我。
Take, O Lord, the free offerings of my mouth, and give me knowledge of your decisions.

我的性命常在危险之中，我却不忘记你的律法。
My soul is ever in danger; but I still keep the memory of your law.

恶人为我设下网罗。我却没有偏离你的训词。
Sinners have put a net to take me; but I was true to your orders.

我以你的法度为永远的产业。因这是我心中所喜爱的。
I have taken your unchanging word as an eternal heritage; for it is the joy of my heart.

我的心专向你的律例，永远遵行，一直到底。
My heart is ever ready to keep your rules, even to the end.

心怀二意的人，为我所恨。但你的律法，为我所爱。
<SAMECH> I am a hater of men of doubting mind; but I am a lover of your law.

你是我藏身之处，又是我的盾牌。我甚仰望你的话语。
You are my secret place and my breastplate against danger; my hope is in your word.

作恶的人哪，你们离开我吧，我好遵守我神的命令。
Go far from me, you evil-doers; so that I may keep the teachings of my God.

求你照你的话扶持我，使我存活，也不叫我因失望而害羞。
Be my support as you have said, and give me life; let not my hope be turned to shame.

求你扶持我，我便得救，时常看重你的律例。
Let me not be moved, and I will be safe, and ever take delight in your rules.

凡偏离你律例的人，你都轻弃他们。因为他们的诡诈必归虚空。
You have overcome all those who are wandering from your rules; for all their thoughts are false.

凡地上的恶人，你除掉他，好像除掉渣滓。因此我爱你的法度。
All the sinners of the earth are like waste metal in your eyes; and for this cause I give my love to your unchanging word.

我因惧怕你，肉就发抖。我也怕你的判语。
My flesh is moved for fear of you; I give honour to your decisions.

我行过公平和公义。求你不要撇下我给欺压我的人。
<AIN> I have done what is good and right: you will not give me into the hands of those who are working against me.

求你为仆人作保，使我得好处。不容骄傲人欺压我。
Take your servant's interests into your keeping; let me not be crushed by the men of pride.

我因盼望你的救恩，和你公义的话，眼睛失明。
My eyes are wasted with desire for your salvation, and for the word of your righteousness.

求你照你的慈爱待仆人，将你的律例教训我。
Be good to your servant in your mercy, and give me teaching in your rules.

我是你的仆人。求你赐我悟性，使我得知你的法度。
I am your servant; give me wisdom, so that I may have knowledge of your unchanging word.

这是耶和华降罚的时候，因人废了你的律法。
It is time, O Lord, for you to let your work be seen; for they have made your law without effect.

所以，我爱你的命令胜于金子，更胜于精金。
For this reason I have greater love far your teachings than for gold, even for shining gold.

你一切的训词，在万事上我都以为正直。我却恨恶一切假道。
Because of it I keep straight in all things by your orders; and I am a hater of every false way.

你的法度奇妙，所以我一心谨守。
<PE> Your unchanging word is full of wonder; for this reason my soul keeps it.

你的言语一解开，就发出亮光，使愚人通达。
The opening of your words gives light; it gives good sense to the simple.

我张口而气喘。因我切慕你的命令。
My mouth was open wide, waiting with great desire for your teachings.

求你转向我，怜悯我，好象你素常待那些爱你名的人。
Let your eyes be turned to me, and have mercy on me, as it is right for you to do to those who are lovers of your name.

求你用你的话，使我脚步稳当，不许什么罪孽辖制我。
Let my steps be guided by your word; and let not sin have control over me.

求你救我脱离人的欺压。我要遵守你的训词。
Make me free from the cruel rule of man; then I will keep your orders.

求你用脸光照仆人。又将你的律例教训我。
Let your servant see the shining of your face; give me knowledge of your rules.

我的眼泪下流成河，因为他们不守你的律法。
Rivers of water are flowing from my eyes, because men do not keep your law.

耶和华阿，你是公义的，你的判语也是正直的。
<TZADE> O Lord, great is your righteousness, and upright are your decisions.

你所命定的法度，是凭公义和至诚。
You have given your unchanging word in righteousness, and it is for ever.

我心焦急，如同火烧，因我敌人忘记你的言语。
My passion has overcome me; because my haters are turned away from your words.

你的话极其精炼。所以你的仆人喜爱。
Your word is of tested value; and it is dear to your servant.

我微小，被人藐视。却不忘记你的训词。
I am small and of no account; but I keep your orders in mind.

你的公义永远长存。你的律法尽都真实。
Your righteousness is an unchanging righteousness, and your law is certain.

我遭遇患难愁苦。你的命令却是我所喜爱的。
Pain and trouble have overcome me: but your teachings are my delight.

你的法度永远是公义的。求你赐我悟性，我就活了。
The righteousness of your unchanging word is eternal; give me wisdom so that I may have life.

耶和华阿，我一心呼吁你。求你应允我，我必谨守你的律例。
<KOPH> I have made my prayer with all my heart; give answer to me, O Lord: I will keep your rules.

我向你呼吁，求你救我。我要遵守你的法度。
My cry has gone up to you; take me out of trouble, and I will be guided by your unchanging word.

我趁天未亮呼求。我仰望了你的言语。
Before the sun is up, my cry for help comes to your ear; my hope is in your words.

我趁夜更未换，将眼睁开，为要思想你的话语。
In the night watches I am awake, so that I may give thought to your saying.

求你照你的慈爱听我的声音。耶和华阿，求你照你的典章，将我救活。
Let my voice come to you, in your mercy; O Lord, by your decisions give me life.

追求奸恶的人临近了。他们远离你的律法。
Those who have evil designs against me come near; they are far from your law.

耶和华阿，你与我相近。你一切的命令尽都真实。
You are near, O Lord; and all your teachings are true.

我因学你的法度，久已知道是你永远立定的。
I have long had knowledge that your unchanging word is for ever.

求你看顾我的苦难，搭救我，因我不忘记你的律法。
<RESH> O see my trouble, and be my saviour; for I keep your law in my mind,

求你为我辨屈，救赎我，照你的话将我救活。
Undertake my cause, and come to my help, give me life, as you have said.

救恩远离恶人。因为他们不寻求你的律例。
Salvation is far from evil-doers; for they have made no search for your rules.

耶和华阿，你的慈悲本为大。求你照你的典章将我救活。
Great is the number of your mercies, O Lord; give me life in keeping with your decisions.

逼迫我的，抵挡我的，很多，我却没有偏离你的法度。
Great is the number of those who are against me; but I have not been turned away from your unchanging word.

我看见奸恶的人，就甚憎恶，因为他们不遵守你的话。
I saw with hate those who were untrue to you; for they did not keep your saying.

你看我怎样爱你的训词。耶和华阿，求你照你的慈爱将我救活。
See how great is my love for your orders: give me life, O Lord, in keeping with your mercy.

你话的总纲是真实。你一切公义的典章是永远长存。
Your word is true from the first; and your upright decision is unchanging for ever.

首领无故地逼迫我。但我的心畏惧你的言语。
<SHIN> Rulers have been cruel to me without cause; but I have the fear of your word in my heart.

我喜爱你的话，好像人得了许多掳物。
I am delighted by your saying, like a man who makes discovery of great wealth.

谎话是我所恨恶所憎嫌的。惟你的律法，是我所爱的。
I am full of hate and disgust for false words; but I am a lover of your law.

我因你公义的典章，一天七次赞美你。
Seven times a day do I give you praise, because of your upright decisions.

爱你律法的人，有大平安。什么都不能使他们绊脚。
Great peace have lovers of your law; they have no cause for falling.

耶和华阿，我仰望了你的救恩，遵行了你的命令。
Lord, my hope has been in your salvation; and I have kept your teachings.

我心里守了你的法度。这法度我甚喜爱。
My soul has kept your unchanging word; great is my love for it.

我遵守了你的训词和法度。因我一切所行的，都在你面前。
I have been ruled by your orders; for all my ways are before you.

耶和华阿，愿我的呼吁达到你面前，照你的话赐我悟性。
<TAU> Let my cry come before you, O Lord; give me wisdom in keeping with your word.

愿我的恳求达到你面前，照你的话搭救我。
Let my prayer come before you; take me out of trouble, as you have said.

愿我的嘴发出赞美的话。因为你将律例教训我。
Let my lips be flowing with praise, because you have given me knowledge of your rules.

愿我的舌头歌唱你的话。因你一切的命令尽都公义。
Let my tongue make songs in praise of your word; for all your teachings are righteousness.

愿你用手帮助我。因我拣选了你的训词。
Let your hand be near for my help; for I have given my heart to your orders.

耶和华阿，我切慕你的救恩。你的律法也是我所喜爱的。
All my desire has been for your salvation, O Lord; and your law is my delight.

愿我的性命存活，得以赞美你。愿你的典章帮助我。
Give life to my soul so that it may give you praise; and let your decisions be my support.

我如亡羊走迷了路。求你寻找仆人。因我不忘记你的命令。
I have gone out of the way like a wandering sheep; make search for your servant; for I keep your teachings ever in mind.

（上行（或作登阶。下同）之诗。）我在急难中求告耶和华，他就应允我。
<A Song of the going up.> In my trouble my cry went up to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.

耶和华阿，求你救我脱离说谎的嘴唇，和诡诈的舌头。
O Lord, be the saviour of my soul from false lips, and from the tongue of deceit.

诡诈的舌头阿，要给你什么呢？要拿什么加给你呢？
What punishment will he give you? what more will he do to you, you false tongue?

就是勇士的利箭，和罗腾木的炭火（罗腾小树名松类）。
Sharp arrows of the strong, and burning fire.

我寄居在米设，住在基达帐棚之中，有祸了。
Sorrow is mine because I am strange in Meshech, and living in the tents of Kedar.

我与那恨恶和睦的人，许久同住。
My soul has long been living with the haters of peace.

我愿和睦。但我发言，他们就要争战。
I am for peace: but when I say so, they are for war.

（上行之诗。）我要向山举目。我的帮助从何而来。
<A Song of the going up.> My eyes are lifted up to the hills: O where will my help come from?

我的帮助从造天地的耶和华而来。
Your help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

他必不叫你的脚摇动。保护你的必不打盹。
May he not let your foot be moved: no need of sleep has he who keeps you.

保护以色列的，也不打盹，也不睡觉。
See, the eyes of Israel's keeper will not be shut in sleep.

保护你的是耶和华。耶和华在你右边荫庇你。
The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade on your right hand.

白日太阳必不伤你，夜间月亮必不害你。
You will not be touched by the sun in the day, or by the moon at night.

耶和华要保护你，免受一切的灾害。他要保护你的性命。
The Lord will keep you safe from all evil; he will take care of your soul.

你出你入耶和华要保护你，从今时直到永远。
The Lord will keep watch over your going out and your coming in, from this time and for ever.

（大卫上行之诗。）人对我说，我们往耶和华的殿去，我就欢喜。
<A Song of the going up. Of David.> I was glad because they said to me, We will go into the house of the Lord.

耶路撒冷阿，我们的脚站在你的门内。
At last our feet were inside your doors, O Jerusalem.

耶路撒冷被建造，如同连络整齐的一座城。
O Jerusalem, you are like a town which is well joined together;

众支派，就是耶和华的支派，上那里去，按以色列的常例（或作作以色列的证据）称赞耶和华的名。
To which the tribes went up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a witness to Israel, to give praise to the name of the Lord.

因为在那里设立审判的宝座，就是大卫家的宝座。
For there seats for the judges were placed, even the rulers' seats of the line of David.

你们要为耶路撒冷求平安。耶路撒冷阿，爱你的人必然兴旺。
O make prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; may they whose love is given to you do well.

愿你城中平安，愿你宫内兴旺。
May peace be inside your walls, and wealth in your noble houses.

因我弟兄和同伴的缘故，我要说，愿平安在你中间。
Because of my brothers and friends, I will now say, Let peace be with you.

因耶和华我们神殿的缘故，我要为你求福。
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will be working for your good.

（上行之诗。）坐在天上的主阿，我向你举目。
<A Song of the going up.> To you my eyes are lifted up, even to you whose seat is in the heavens.

看哪，仆人的眼睛怎样望主人的手，使女的眼睛怎样望主母的手，我们的眼睛也照样望耶和华我们的神，直到他怜悯我们。
See! as the eyes of servants are turned to the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a servant-girl to her owner, so our eyes are waiting for the Lord our God, till he has mercy on us.

耶和华阿，求你怜悯我们，怜悯我们。因为我们被藐视，已到极处。
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: for all men are looking down on us.

我们被那些安逸人的讥诮，和骄傲人的藐视，已到极处。
For long enough have men of pride made sport of our soul.

（大卫上行之诗。）以色列人要说，若不是耶和华帮助我们，
<A Song of the going up. Of David.> If it had not been the Lord who was on our side (let Israel now say);

若不是耶和华帮助我们，当人起来攻击我们，
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men came up against us;

向我们发怒的时候，就把我们活活地吞了。
They would have made a meal of us while still living, in the heat of their wrath against us:

那时，波涛必漫过我们，河水必淹没我们。
We would have been covered by the waters; the streams would have gone over our soul;

狂傲的水必淹没我们。
Yes, the waters of pride would have gone over our soul.

耶和华是应当称颂的。他没有把我们当野食交给他们吞吃（原文作牙齿）。
Praise be to the Lord, who has not let us be wounded by their teeth.

我们好像雀鸟，从捕鸟人的网罗里逃脱。网罗破裂，我们逃脱了。
Our soul has gone free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her: the net is broken, and we are free.

我们得帮助，是在乎倚靠造天地之耶和华的名。
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth.

（上行之诗。）倚靠耶和华的人，好像锡安山，永不动摇。
<A Song of the going up.> Those whose hope is in the Lord are like the mountain of Zion, which may not be moved, but keeps its place for ever.

众山怎样围绕耶路撒冷，耶和华也照样围绕他的百姓，从今时直到永远。
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from this time and for ever.

恶人的杖不常落在义人的分上，免得义人伸手作恶。
For the rod of sinners will not be resting on the heritage of the upright; so that the upright may not put out their hands to evil.

耶和华阿，求你善待那些为善，和心里正直的人。
Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in heart.

至于那偏行弯曲道路的人，耶和华必使他和作恶的人一同出去受刑。愿平安归于以色列。
But as for such as are turned out of the straight way, the Lord will take them away with the workers of evil. Let peace be on Israel.

（上行之诗。）当耶和华将那些被掳的带回锡安的时候，我们好像做梦的人。
<A Song of the going up.> When the Lord made a change in Zion's fate, we were like men in a dream.

我们满口喜笑，满舌欢呼的时候，外邦中就有人说，耶和华为他们行了大事。
Then our mouths were full of laughing, and our tongues gave a glad cry; they said among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them.

耶和华果然为我们行了大事，我们就欢喜。
The Lord has done great things for us; because of which we are glad.

耶和华阿，求你使我们被掳的人归回，好像南地的河水复流。
Let our fate be changed, O Lord, like the streams in the South.

流泪撒种的，必欢呼收割。
Those who put in seed with weeping will get in the grain with cries of joy.

那带种流泪出去的，必要欢欢乐乐地带禾捆回来。
Though a man may go out weeping, taking his vessel of seed with him; he will come again in joy, with the corded stems of grain in his arms.

（所罗门上行之诗。）若不是耶和华建造房屋，建造的人就枉然劳力。若不是耶和华看守城池，看守的人就枉然儆醒。
<A Song of the going up. Of Solomon.> If the Lord is not helping the builders, then the building of a house is to no purpose: if the Lord does not keep the town, the watchman keeps his watch for nothing.

你们清晨早起，夜晚安歇，吃劳碌得来的饭，本是枉然。惟有耶和华所亲爱的，必叫他安然睡觉。
It is of no use for you to get up early, and to go late to your rest, with the bread of sorrow for your food; for the Lord gives to his loved ones in sleep.

儿女是耶和华所赐的产业。所怀的胎是他所给的赏赐。
See, sons are a heritage from the Lord; the fruit of the body is his reward.

少年时所生的儿女，好像勇士手中的箭。
Like arrows in the hand of a man of war, are the children of the young.

箭袋充满的人便为有福。他们在城门口和仇敌说话的时候，必不至于羞愧。
Happy is the man who has a good store of them; he will not be put to shame, but his cause will be supported by them against his haters.

（上行之诗。）凡敬畏耶和华，遵行他道的人便为有福。
<A Song of the going up.> Happy is the worshipper of the Lord, who is walking in his ways.

你要吃劳碌得来的。你要享福，事情顺利。
You will have the fruit of the work of your hands: happy will you be, and all will be well for you.

你妻子在你的内室，好像多结果子的葡萄树。你儿女围绕你的桌子，好像橄榄栽子。
Your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost parts of your house: your children will be like olive plants round your table.

看哪，敬畏耶和华的人，必要这样蒙福。
See! this is the blessing of the worshipper of the Lord.

愿耶和华从锡安赐福给你。愿你一生一世，看见耶路撒冷的好处。
May the Lord send you blessing out of Zion: may you see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life.

愿你看见你儿女的儿女。愿平安归于以色列。
May you see your children's children. Peace be on Israel.

（上行之诗。）以色列当说，从我幼年以来，敌人屡次苦害我，
<A Song of the going up.> Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young (let Israel now say);

从我幼年以来，敌人屡次苦害我，却没有胜了我。
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young, but my troubles have not overcome me.

如同扶犁的在我背上扶犁而耕，耕的犁沟甚长。
The ploughmen were ploughing on my back; long were the wounds they made.

耶和华是公义的。他砍断了恶人的绳索。
The Lord is true: the cords of the evil-doers are broken in two.

愿恨恶锡安的，都蒙羞退后。
Let all the haters of Zion be shamed and turned back.

愿他们像房顶上的草，未长成而枯干。
Let them be like the grass on the house-tops, which is dry before it comes to full growth.

收割的不够一把，捆禾的也不满怀。
He who gets in the grain has no use for it; and they do not make bands of it for the grain-stems.

过路的也不说，愿耶和华所赐的福，归与你们。我们奉耶和华的名，给你们祝福。
And those who go by do not say, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we give you blessing in the name of the Lord.

（上行之诗。）耶和华阿，我从深处向你求告。
<A Song of the going up.> Out of the deep have I sent up my cry to you, O Lord.

主阿，求你听我的声音。愿你侧耳听我恳求的声音。
Lord, let my voice come before you: let your ears be awake to the voice of my prayer.

主耶和华阿，你若究察罪孽，谁能站得住呢？
O Jah, if you took note of every sin, who would go free?

但在你有赦免之恩，要叫人敬畏你。
But there is forgiveness with you, so that you may be feared.

我等候耶和华，我的心等候。我也仰望他的话。
I am waiting for the Lord, my soul is waiting for him, and my hope is in his word.

我的心等候主，胜于守夜的，等候天亮，胜于守夜的，等候天亮。
My soul is watching for the Lord more than those who are watching for the morning; yes, more than the watchers for the morning.

以色列阿，你当仰望耶和华。因他有慈爱，有丰盛的救恩。
O Israel, have hope in the Lord; for with the Lord is mercy and full salvation.

他必救赎以色列脱离一切的罪孽。
And he will make Israel free from all his sins.

（大卫上行之诗。）耶和华阿，我的心不狂傲，我的眼不高大。重大和测不透的事，我也不敢行。
<A Song of the going up. Of David.> Lord, there is no pride in my heart and my eyes are not lifted up; and I have not taken part in great undertakings, or in things over-hard for me.

我的心平稳安静，好像断过奶的孩子在他母亲的怀中。我的心在我里面真像断过奶的孩子。
See, I have made my soul calm and quiet, like a child on its mother's breast; my soul is like a child on its mother's breast.

以色列阿，你当仰望耶和华，从今时直到永远。
O Israel, have hope in the Lord, from this time and for ever.

（上行之诗。）耶和华阿，求你记念大卫所受的一切苦难。
<A Song of the going up.> Lord, give thought to David, and to all his troubles;

他怎样向耶和华起誓，向雅各的大能者许愿，
How he made an oath to the Lord, and gave his word to the great God of Jacob, saying,

说，我必不进我的帐幕，也不上我的床榻。
Truly, I will not come into my house, or go to my bed,

我不容我的眼睛睡觉，也不容我的眼目打盹。
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or rest to my eyeballs,

直等我为耶和华寻得所在，为雅各的大能者寻得居所。
Till I have got a place for the Lord, a resting-place for the great God of Jacob.

我们听说约柜在以法他，我们在基列耶琳就寻见了。
We had news of it at Ephrathah: we came to it in the fields of the wood.

我们要进他的居所，在他脚凳前下拜。
Let us go into his tent; let us give worship at his feet.

耶和华阿，求你兴起，和你有能力的约柜同入安息之所。
Come back, O Lord, to your resting-place; you and the ark of your strength.

愿你的祭司披上公义。愿你的圣民欢呼。
Let your priests be clothed with righteousness; and let your saints give cries of joy.

求你因你仆人大卫的缘故，不要厌弃你的受膏者。
Because of your servant David, do not give up your king.

耶和华向大卫，凭诚实起了誓，必不反覆，说，我要使你所生的坐在你的宝座上。
The Lord gave a true oath to David, which he will not take back, saying, I will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body.

你的众子若守我的约，和我所教训他们的法度，他们的子孙，必永远坐在你的宝座上。
If your children keep my word, and the teachings which I will give them, their children will be rulers of your kingdom for ever.

因为耶和华拣选了锡安，愿意当作自己的居所，
For the Lord's heart is on Zion, desiring it for his resting-place.

说，这是我永远安息之所。我要住在这里，因为是我所愿意的。
This is my rest for ever: here will I ever be; for this is my desire.

我要使其中的粮食丰满，使其中的穷人饱足。
My blessing will be on her food; and her poor will be full of bread.

我要使祭司披上救恩，圣民大声欢呼。
Her priests will be clothed with salvation; and her saints will give cries of joy.

我要叫大卫的角，在那里发生。我为我的受膏者，预备明灯。
There I will make the horn of David fertile: I have made ready a light for my king.

我要使他的仇敌披上羞耻。但他的冠冕，要在头上发光。
His haters will be clothed with shame; but I will make his crown shining.

（大卫上行之诗。）看哪，弟兄和睦同居，是何等的善，何等的美。
<A Song of the going up. Of David.> See how good and how pleasing it is for brothers to be living together in harmony!

这好比那贵重的油，浇在亚伦的头上，流到胡须，又流到他的衣襟。
It is like oil of great price on the head, flowing down over the face, even Aaron's face: coming down to the edge of his robe;

又好比黑门的甘露，降在锡安山。因为在那里有耶和华所命定的福，就是永远的生命。
Like the dew of Hermon, which comes down on the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord gave orders for the blessing, even life for ever.

（上行之诗。）耶和华的仆人，夜间站在耶和华殿中的，你们当称颂耶和华。
<A Song of the going up.> Give praise to the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who take your places in the house of the Lord by night.

你们当向圣所举手，称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, lifting up your hands in his holy place.

愿造天地的耶和华，从锡安赐福给你们。
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, send you blessing out of Zion,

你们要赞美耶和华。你们要赞美耶和华的名。耶和华的仆人站在耶和华殿中，站在我们神殿院中的，你们要赞美他。
Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.


You who are in the house of the Lord, and in the open spaces of the house of our God,

你们要赞美耶和华。耶和华本为善。要歌颂他的名，因为这是美好的。
Give praise to Jah, for he is good: make melody to his name, for it is pleasing.

耶和华拣选雅各归自己，拣选以色列特作自己的子民。
For the Lord has taken Jacob for himself, and Israel for his property.

原来我知道耶和华为大，也知道我们的主超乎万神之上。
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is greater than all other gods.

耶和华在天上，在地下，在海中，在一切的深处，都随自己的意旨而行。
The Lord has done whatever was pleasing to him, in heaven, and on the earth, in the seas and in all the deep waters.

他使云雾从地极上腾，造电随雨而闪，从府库中带出风来。
He makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes thunder-flames for the rain; he sends out the winds from his store-houses.

他将埃及头生的，连人带牲畜都击杀了。
He put to death the first-fruits of Egypt, of man and of beast.

埃及阿，他施行神迹奇事，在你当中，在法老和他一切臣仆身上。
He sent signs and wonders among you, O Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his servants.

他击杀许多的民，又杀戮大能的王，
He overcame great nations, and put strong kings to death;

就是亚摩利王西宏，和巴珊王噩，并迦南一切的国王，
Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;

将他们的地，赏赐他的百姓以色列为业。
And gave their land for a heritage, even for a heritage to Israel his people.

耶和华阿，你的名存到永远。耶和华阿，你可记念的名存到万代。
O Lord, your name is eternal; and the memory of you will have no end.

耶和华要为他的百姓伸冤，为他的仆人后悔。
For the Lord will be judge of his people's cause; his feelings will be changed to his servants.

外邦的偶像是金的，银的，是人手所造的。
The images of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

有口却不能言，有眼却不能看，
They have mouths, but no voice, they have eyes, but they do not see;

有耳却不能听，口中也没有气息。
They have ears, but no hearing; and there is no breath in their mouths.

造他的要和他一样，凡靠他的也要如此。
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his hope in them.

以色列家阿，你们要称颂耶和华。亚伦家阿，你们要称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, O children of Israel: give praise to the Lord, O sons of Aaron:

利未家阿，你们要称颂耶和华。你们敬畏耶和华的，要称颂耶和华。
Give praise to the Lord, O sons of Levi: let all the worshippers of the Lord give him praise.

住在耶路撒冷的耶和华，该从锡安受称颂。你们要赞美耶和华。
Praise be to the Lord out of Zion, even to the Lord whose house is in Jerusalem, Let the Lord be praised.

你们要称谢耶和华，因他本为善。他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

你们要称谢万神之神，因他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the God of gods: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

你们要称谢万主之主，因他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the Lord of lords: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那独行大奇事的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who only does great wonders: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那用智慧造天的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那铺地在水以上的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him by whom the earth was stretched out over the waters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那造成大光的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who made great lights: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

他造日头管白昼，因他的慈爱永远长存。
The sun to have rule by day: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

他造月亮星宿管黑夜，因他的慈爱永远长存。
The moon and the stars to have rule by night: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那击杀埃及人之长子的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who put to death the first-fruits of Egypt: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

他领以色列人从他们中间出来，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And took out Israel from among them: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

他施展大能的手和伸出来的膀臂，因他的慈爱永远长存。
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那分裂红海的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who made a way through the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

他领以色列从其中经过，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And let Israel go through it: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

却把法老和他的军兵推翻在红海里，因他的慈爱永远长存。
By him Pharaoh and his army were overturned in the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那引导自己的民行走旷野的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who took his people through the waste land: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

称谢那击杀大君王的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
To him who overcame great kings: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

他杀戮有名的君王，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And put noble kings to death: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

就是杀戮亚摩利王西宏，因他的慈爱永远长存。
Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

又杀巴珊王噩，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And Og, king of Bashan: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:

他将他们的地赐他的百姓为业，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And gave their land to his people for a heritage: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

就是赐他的仆人以色列为业，因他的慈爱永远长存。
Even a heritage for his servant Israel: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

他顾念我们在卑微的地步，因他的慈爱永远长存。
Who kept us in mind when we were in trouble: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

他救拔我们脱离敌人，因他的慈爱永远长存。
And has taken us out of the hands of our haters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

他赐粮食给凡有血气的，因他的慈爱永远长存。
Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

你们要称谢天上的神，因他的慈爱永远长存。
O give praise to the God of heaven: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.

我们曾在巴比伦的河边坐下，一追想锡安就哭了。
By the rivers of Babylon we were seated, weeping at the memory of Zion,

我们把琴挂在那里的柳树上。
Hanging our instruments of music on the trees by the waterside.

因为在那里，掳掠我们的要我们唱歌，抢夺我们的，要我们作乐，说，给我们唱一首锡安歌吧。
For there those who had taken us prisoners made request for a song; and those who had taken away all we had gave us orders to be glad, saying, Give us one of the songs of Zion.

我们怎能在外邦唱耶和华的歌呢？
How may we give the Lord's song in a strange land?

耶路撒冷阿，我若忘记你，情愿我的右手忘记技巧。
If I keep not your memory, O Jerusalem, let not my right hand keep the memory of its art.

我若不记念你，若不看耶路撒冷过于我所最喜乐的，情愿我的舌头贴于上膛。
If I let you go out of my thoughts, and if I do not put Jerusalem before my greatest joy, let my tongue be fixed to the roof of my mouth.

耶路撒冷遭难的日子，以东人说，拆毁，拆毁，直拆到根基。耶和华阿求你记念这仇。
O Lord, keep in mind against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; how they said, Let it be uncovered, uncovered even to its base.

将要被灭的巴比伦城阿（城原文作女子），报复你象你待我们的，那人便为有福。
O daughter of Babylon, whose fate is destruction; happy is the man who does to you what you have done to us.

拿你的婴孩摔在磐石上的，那人便为有福。
Happy is the man who takes your little ones, crushing them against the rocks.

（大卫的诗。）我要一心称谢你，在诸神面前歌颂你。
<Of David.> I will give you praise with all my heart: I will make melody to you before the gods.

我要向你的圣殿下拜，为你的慈爱和诚实称赞你的名。因你使你的话显为大，过于你所应许的（或作超乎你的名声）。
I will give worship before your holy Temple, praising your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith: for you have made your word greater than all your name.

我呼求的日子，你就应允我，鼓励我，使我心里有能力。
When my cry came to your ears you gave me an answer, and made me great with strength in my soul.

耶和华阿，地上的君王，都要称谢你，因他们听见了你口中的言语。
All the kings of the earth will give you praise, O Lord, when the words of your mouth come to their ears.

他们要歌颂耶和华的作为，因耶和华大有荣耀。
They will make songs about the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.

耶和华虽高，仍看顾低微的人。他却从远处看出骄傲的人。
Though the Lord is high, he sees those who are low; and he has knowledge from far off of those who are lifted up.

我虽行在患难中，你必将我救活。我的仇敌发怒，你必伸手抵挡他们。你的右手也必救我。
Even when trouble is round me, you will give me life; your hand will be stretched out against the wrath of my haters, and your right hand will be my salvation.

耶和华必成全关乎我的事。耶和华阿，你的慈爱永远长存。求你不要离弃你手所造的。
The Lord will make all things complete for me: O Lord, your mercy is eternal; do not give up the works of your hands.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，你已经鉴察我，认识我。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> O Lord, you have knowledge of me, searching out all my secrets.

我坐下，我起来，你都晓得。你从远处知道我的意念。
You have knowledge when I am seated and when I get up, you see my thoughts from far away.

我行路，我躺卧，你都细察，你也深知我一切所行的。
You keep watch over my steps and my sleep, and have knowledge of all my ways.

耶和华阿，我舌头上的话，你没有一句不知道的。
For there is not a word on my tongue which is not clear to you, O Lord.

你在我前后环绕我，按手在我身上。
I am shut in by you on every side, and you have put your hand on me.

这样的知识奇妙，是我不能测的。至高，是我不能及的。
Such knowledge is a wonder greater than my powers; it is so high that I may not come near it.

我往那里去躲避你的灵。我往那里逃躲避你的面。
Where may I go from your spirit? how may I go in flight from you?

我若升到天上，你在那里。我若在阴间下榻，你也在那里。
If I go up to heaven, you are there: or if I make my bed in the underworld, you are there.

我若展开清晨的翅膀，飞到海极居住。
If I take the wings of the morning, and go to the farthest parts of the sea;

就是在那里，你的手必引导我，你的右手，也必扶持我。
Even there will I be guided by your hand, and your right hand will keep me.

我若说，黑暗必定遮蔽我，我周围的亮光必成为黑夜。
If I say, Only let me be covered by the dark, and the light about me be night;

黑暗也不能遮蔽我使你不见，黑夜却如白昼发亮。黑暗和光明，在你看都是一样。
Even the dark is not dark to you; the night is as bright as the day: for dark and light are the same to you.

我的肺腑是你所造的。我在母腹中，你已覆庇我。
My flesh was made by you, and my parts joined together in my mother's body.

我要称谢你，因我受造，奇妙可畏。你的作为奇妙，这是我心深知道的。
I will give you praise, for I am strangely and delicately formed; your works are great wonders, and of this my soul is fully conscious.

我在暗中受造，在地的深处被联络。那时，我的形体并不向你隐藏。
My frame was not unseen by you when I was made secretly, and strangely formed in the lowest parts of the earth.

我未成形的体质，你的眼早已看见了。你所定的日子，我尚未度一日（或作我被造的肢体尚未有其一），你都写在你的册上了。
Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book all my days were recorded, even those which were purposed before they had come into being.

神阿，你的意念向我何等宝贵。其数何等众多。
How dear are your thoughts to me, O God! how great is the number of them!

我若数点，比海沙更多。我睡醒的时候，仍和你同在。
If I made up their number, it would be more than the grains of sand; when I am awake, I am still with you.

神阿，你必要杀戮恶人。所以，你们好流人血的，离开我去吧。
If only you would put the sinners to death, O God; go far from me, you men of blood.

因为他们说恶言顶撞你。你的仇敌也妄称你的名。
For they go against you with evil designs, and your haters make sport of your name.

耶和华阿，恨恶你的，我岂不恨恶他们吗？攻击你的，我岂不憎嫌他们吗？
Are not your haters hated by me, O Lord? are not those who are lifted up against you a cause of grief to me?

我切切地恨恶他们，以他们为仇敌。
My hate for them is complete; my thoughts of them are as if they were making war on me.

神阿，求你鉴察我，知道我的心思，试炼我，知道我的意念。
O God, let the secrets of my heart be uncovered, and let my wandering thoughts be tested:

看在我里面有什么恶行没有，引导我走永生的道路。
See if there is any way of sorrow in me, and be my guide in the eternal way.

（大卫的诗，交与伶长。）耶和华阿，求你拯救我脱离凶恶的人，保护我脱离强暴的人。
<To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.> O Lord, take me out of the power of the evil man; keep me safe from the violent man:

他们心中图谋奸恶，常常聚集要争战。
For their hearts are full of evil designs; and they are ever making ready causes of war.

他们使舌头尖利如蛇，嘴里有虺蛇的毒气。（细拉）
Their tongues are sharp like the tongue of a snake; the poison of snakes is under their lips. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，求你拯救我脱离恶人的手，保护我脱离强暴的人。他们图谋推我跌倒。
O Lord, take me out of the hands of sinners; keep me safe from the violent man: for they are designing my downfall.

骄傲人为我暗设网罗和绳索。他们在路旁铺下网，设下圈套。（细拉）
The men of pride have put secret cords for my feet; stretching nets in my way, so that they may take me with their tricks. (Selah.)

我曾对耶和华说，你是我的神。耶和华阿，求你留心听我恳求的声音。
I have said to the Lord, You are my God: give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my prayer.

主耶和华，我救恩的力量阿，在争战的日子，你遮蔽了我的头。
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, you have been a cover over my head in the day of the fight.

耶和华阿，求你不要遂恶人的心愿。不要成就他们的计谋，恐怕他们自高。（细拉）
O Lord, give not the wrongdoer his desire; give him no help in his evil designs, or he may be uplifted in pride. (Selah.)

至于那些昂首围困我的人，愿他们嘴唇的奸恶陷害（原文作遮蔽）自己。
As for those who come round me, let their heads be covered by the evil of their lips.

愿火炭落在他们身上。愿他们被丢在火中，抛在深坑里，不能再起来。
Let burning flames come down on them: let them be put into the fire, and into deep waters, so that they may not get up again.

说恶言的人，在地上必坚立不住。祸患必猎取强暴的人，将他打倒。
Let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth: let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow.

我知道耶和华必为困苦人伸冤，必为穷乏人辨屈。
I am certain that the Lord will take care of the cause of the poor, and of the rights of those who are troubled.

义人必要称赞你的名。正直人必住在你面前。
Truly, the upright will give praise to your name: the holy will have a place in your house.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，我曾求告你，求你快快临到我这里。我求告你的时候，愿你留心听我的声音。
<A Psalm. Of David.> Lord, I have made my cry to you; come to me quickly; give ear to my voice, when it goes up to you.

愿我的祷告，如香陈列在你面前。愿我举手祈求，如献晚祭。
Let my prayer be ordered before you like a sweet smell; and let the lifting up of my hands be like the evening offering.

耶和华阿，求你禁止我的口，把守我的嘴。
O Lord, keep a watch over my mouth; keep the door of my lips.

求你不叫我的心，偏向邪恶，以致我和作孽的人同行恶事。也不叫我吃他们的美食。
Keep my heart from desiring any evil thing, or from taking part in the sins of the evil-doers with men who do wrong: and let me have no part in their good things.

任凭义人击打我，这算为仁慈。任凭他责备我，这算为头上的膏油。我的头不要躲闪。正在他们行恶的时候，我仍要祈祷。
Let the upright give me punishment; and let the god-fearing man put me in the right way; but I will not let the oil of sinners come on my head: when they do evil I will give myself to prayer.

他们的审判官，被扔在岩下。众人要听我的话，因为这话甘甜。
When destruction comes to their judges by the side of the rock, they will give ear to my words, for they are sweet.

我们的骨头散在墓旁，好像人耕田，刨地的土块。
Our bones are broken up at the mouth of the underworld, as the earth is broken by the plough.

主耶和华阿，我的眼目仰望你。我投靠你，求你不要将我撇得孤苦。
But my eyes are turned to you, O Lord God: my hope is in you; let not my soul be given up to death.

求你保护我脱离恶人为我设的网罗，和作孽之人的圈套。
Keep me from the net which they have put down for me, and from the designs of the workers of evil.

愿恶人落在自己的网里，我却得以逃脱。
Let the sinners be taken in the nets which they themselves have put down, while I go free.

（大卫在洞里作的训诲诗，乃是祈祷。）我发声哀告耶和华，发声恳求耶和华。
<Maschil. Of David. A prayer when he was in the hole of the rock.> The sound of my cry went up to the Lord; with my voice I made my prayer for grace to the Lord.

我在他面前吐露我的苦情，陈说我的患难。
I put all my sorrows before him; and made clear to him all my trouble.

我的灵在我里面发昏的时候，你知道我的道路。在我行的路上，敌人为我暗设网罗。
When my spirit is overcome, your eyes are on my goings; nets have been secretly placed in the way in which I go.

求你向我右边观看，因为没有人认识我。我无处避难，也没有人眷顾我。
Looking to my right side, I saw no man who was my friend: I had no safe place; no one had any care for my soul.

耶和华阿，我曾向你哀求。我说，你是我的避难所。在活人之地，你是我的福分。
I have made my cry to you, O Lord; I have said, You are my safe place, and my heritage in the land of the living.

求你侧耳听我的呼求，因我落到极卑之地。求你救我脱离逼迫我的人，因为他们比我强盛。
Give ear to my cry, for I am made very low: take me out of the hands of my haters, for they are stronger than I.

求你领我出离被囚之地，我好称赞你的名。义人必环绕我，因为你是用厚恩待我。
Take my soul out of prison, so that I may give praise to your name: the upright will give praise because of me; for you have given me a full reward.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华阿，求你听我的祷告，留心听我的恳求，凭你的信实和公义应允我。
<A Psalm. Of David.> Let my prayer come to you, O Lord; give ear to my requests for your grace; keep faith with me, and give me an answer in your righteousness;

求你不要审问仆人。因为在你面前，凡活着的人，没有一个是义的。
Let not your servant come before you to be judged; for no man living is upright in your eyes.

原来仇敌逼迫我，将我打倒在地，使我住在幽暗之处，像死了许久的人一样。
The evil man has gone after my soul; my life is crushed down to the earth: he has put me in the dark, like those who have long been dead.

所以，我的灵在我里面发昏。我的心在我里面凄惨。
Because of this my spirit is overcome; and my heart is full of fear.

我追想古时之日，思想你的一切作为，默念你手的工作。
I keep in mind the early days of the past, giving thought to all your acts, even to the work of your hands.

我向你举手。我的心渴想你，如干旱之地盼雨一样。（细拉）
My hands are stretched out to you: my soul is turned to you, like a land in need of water. (Selah.)

耶和华阿，求你速速应允我。我心神耗尽。不要向我掩面，免得我像那些下坑的人一样。
Be quick in answering me, O Lord, for the strength of my spirit is gone: let me see your face, so that I may not be like those who go down into the underworld.

求你使我清晨得听你慈爱之言，因我倚靠你。求你使我知道当行的路，因我的心仰望你。
Let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning, for my hope is in you: give me knowledge of the way in which I am to go; for my soul is lifted up to you.

耶和华阿，求你救我脱离我的仇敌。我往你那里藏身。
O Lord, take me out of the hands of my haters; my soul is waiting for you.

求你指教我遵行你的旨意，因你是我的神。你的灵本为善。求你引我到平坦之地。
Give me teaching so that I may do your pleasure; for you are my God: let your good Spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness.

耶和华阿，求你为你的名将我救活。凭你的公义，将我从患难中领出来。
Give me life, O Lord, because of your name; in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble.

凭你的慈爱剪除我的仇敌，灭绝一切苦待我的人，因我是你的仆人。
And in your mercy put an end to my haters, and send destruction on all those who are against my soul; for I am your servant.

（大卫的诗。）耶和华我的磐石，是应当称颂的。他教导我的手争战，教导我的指头打仗。
<A Psalm. Of David.> Praise be to the God of my strength, teaching my hands the use of the sword, and my fingers the art of fighting:

他是我慈爱的主，我的山寨，我的高台，我的救主，我的盾牌，是我所投靠的。他使我的百姓服在我以下。
He is my strength, and my Rock; my high tower, and my saviour; my keeper and my hope: he gives me authority over my people.

耶和华阿，人算什么，你竟认识他。世人算什么，你竟顾念他。
Lord, what is man, that you keep him in mind? or the son of man that you take him into account?

人好像一口气。他的年日，如同影儿快快过去。
Man is like a breath: his life is like a shade which is quickly gone.

耶和华阿，求你使天下垂，亲自降临，摸山，山就冒烟。
Come down, O Lord, from your heavens: at your touch let the mountains give out smoke.

求你发出闪电，使他们四散，射出你的箭，使他们扰乱。
With your storm-flames send them in flight: send out your arrows for their destruction.

求你从上伸手救拔我，救我出离大水，救我脱离外邦人的手。
Put out your hand from on high; make me free, take me safely out of the great waters, and out of the hands of strange men;

他们的口说谎话。他们的右手起假誓。
In whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.

神阿，我要向你唱新歌，用十弦瑟向你歌颂。
I will make a new song to you, O God; I will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cords.

你是那拯救君王的。你是那救仆人大卫脱离害命之刀的。
It is God who gives salvation to kings; and who kept his servant David from the wounding sword.

求你救拔我，救我脱离外邦人的手。他们的口说谎话。他们的右手起假誓。
Make me free, and take me out of the hands of strange men, in whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.

我们的儿子，从幼年好像树栽子长大。我们的女儿如同殿角石，是按建宫的样式凿成的。
Our sons are like tall young plants; and our daughters like the shining stones of a king's house;

我们的仓盈满，能出各样的粮食。我们的羊，在田间孳生千万。
Our store-houses are full of all good things; and our sheep give birth to thousands and ten thousands in our fields.

我们的牛驮着满驮，没有人闯进来抢夺，也没有人出去争战。我们的街市上，也没有哭号的声音。
Our oxen are well weighted down; our cows give birth safely; there is no going out, and there is no cry of sorrow in our open places.

遇见这光景的百姓，便为有福。有耶和华为他们的神，这百姓便为有福。
Happy is the nation whose ways are so ordered: yes, happy is the nation whose God is the Lord.

（大卫的赞美诗。）我的神我的王阿，我要尊崇你。我要永永远远称颂你的名。
<A Song of praise. Of David.> Let me give glory to you, O God, my King; and blessing to your name for ever and ever.

我要天天称颂你，也要永永远远赞美你的名。
Every day will I give you blessing, praising your name for ever and ever.

耶和华本为大，该受大赞美。其大无法测度。
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; his power may never be searched out.

这代要对那代颂赞你的作为，也要传扬你的大能。
One generation after another will give praise to your great acts, and make clear the operation of your strength.

我要默念你威严的尊荣，和你奇妙的作为。
My thoughts will be of the honour and glory of your rule, and of the wonder of your works.

人要传说你可畏之事的能力。我也要传扬你的大德。
Men will be talking of the power and fear of your acts; I will give word of your glory.

他们记念你的大恩，就要传出来，并要歌唱你的公义。
Their sayings will be full of the memory of all your mercy, and they will make songs of your righteousness.

耶和华有恩惠，有怜悯，不轻易发怒，大有慈爱。
The Lord is full of grace and pity; not quickly angry, but great in mercy.

耶和华善待万民，他的慈悲，覆庇他一切所造的。
The Lord is good to all men; and his mercies are over all his works.

耶和华阿，你一切所造，的都要称谢你。你的圣民也要称颂你，
All the works of your hands give praise to you, O Lord; and your saints give you blessing.

传说你国的荣耀，谈论你的大能，
Their words will be of the glory of your kingdom, and their talk of your strength;

好叫世人知道你大能的作为，并你国度威严的荣耀。
So that the sons of men may have knowledge of his acts of power, and of the great glory of his kingdom.

你的国是永远的国，你执掌的权柄，存到万代。
Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your rule is through all generations.

凡跌倒的，耶和华将他们扶持。凡被压下的，将他们扶起。
The Lord is the support of all who are crushed, and the lifter up of all who are bent down.

万民都举目仰望你。你随时给他们食物。
The eyes of all men are waiting for you; and you give them their food in its time.

你张手，使有生气的都随愿饱足。
By the opening of your hand, every living thing has its desire in full measure.

耶和华在他一切所行的，无不公义。在他一切所作的，都有慈爱。
The Lord is upright in all his ways, and kind in all his works.

凡求告耶和华的，就是诚心求告他的，耶和华便与他们相近。
The Lord is near all those who give honour to his name; even to all who give honour to him with true hearts.

敬畏他的，他必成就他们的心愿。也必听他们的呼求，拯救他们。
To his worshippers, he will give their desire; their cry comes to his ears, and he gives them salvation.

耶和华保护一切爱他的人，却要灭绝一切的恶人。
The Lord will keep all his worshippers from danger; but he will send destruction on all sinners.

我的口要说出赞美耶和华的话。惟愿凡有血气的，都永永远远称颂他的圣名。
My mouth will give praise to the Lord; let all flesh be blessing his holy name for ever and ever.

你们要赞美耶和华。我的心哪，你要赞美耶和华。
Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul.

我一生要赞美耶和华。我还活的时候要歌颂我的神。
While I have breath I will give praise to the Lord: I will make melody to my God while I have my being.

你们不要倚靠君王，不要倚靠世人。他一点不能帮助。
Put not your faith in rulers, or in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation.

他的气一断，就归回尘土。他所打算的，当日就消灭了。
Man's breath goes out, he is turned back again to dust; in that day all his purposes come to an end.

以雅各的神为帮助，仰望耶和华他神的，这人便为有福。
Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:

耶和华造天，地，海，和其中的万物。他守诚实，直到永远。
Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in them; who keeps faith for ever:

他为受屈的伸冤，赐食物与饥饿的。耶和华释放被囚的。
Who gives their rights to those who are crushed down; and gives food to those who are in need of it: the Lord makes the prisoners free;

耶和华开了瞎子的眼睛。耶和华扶起被压下的人。耶和华喜爱义人。
The Lord makes open the eyes of the blind; the Lord is the lifter up of those who are bent down; the Lord is a lover of the upright;

耶和华保护寄居的，扶持孤儿和寡妇，却使恶人的道路弯曲。
The Lord takes care of those who are in a strange land; he gives help to the widow and to the child who has no father; but he sends destruction on the way of sinners.

耶和华要作王，直到永远。锡安哪，你的神要作王，直到万代。你们要赞美耶和华。
The Lord will be King for ever; your God, O Zion, will be King through all generations. Praise be to the Lord.

你们要赞美耶和华，因歌颂我们的神为善为美。赞美的话是合宜的。
Give praise to the Lord; for it is good to make melody to our God; praise is pleasing and beautiful.

耶和华建造耶路撒冷，聚集以色列中被赶散的人。
The Lord is building up Jerusalem; he makes all the outlaws of Israel come together.

他医好伤心的人，裹好他们的伤处。
He makes the broken-hearted well, and puts oil on their wounds.

他数点星宿的数目，一一称它的名。
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.

我们的主为大，最有能力。他的智慧无法测度。
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.

耶和华扶持谦卑人，将恶人倾覆于地。
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.

你们要以感谢向耶和华歌唱，用琴向我们的神歌颂。
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.

他用云遮天，为地降雨，使草生长在山上。
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.

他赐食给走兽，和啼叫的小乌鸦。
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.

他不喜悦马的力大，不喜爱人的腿快。
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.

耶和华喜爱敬畏他和盼望他慈爱的人。
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.

耶路撒冷阿，你要颂赞耶和华。锡安哪，你要赞美你的神。
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.

因为他坚固了你的门闩，赐福给你中间的儿女。
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.

他使你境内平安。用上好的麦子使你满足。
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.

他发命在地。他的话颁行最快。
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.

他降雪如羊毛，撒霜如炉灰。
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.

他掷下冰雹如碎渣。他发出寒冷，谁能当得起呢？
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.

他一出令，这些就都消化。他使风刮起，水便流动。
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.

他将他的道指示雅各，将他的律例典章指示以色列。
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.

别国他都没有这样待过。至于他的典章，他们向来没有知道。你们要赞美耶和华。
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.

你们要赞美耶和华，从天上赞美耶和华，在高处赞美他。
Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.

他的众使者都要赞美他。他的诸军都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.

日头月亮，你们要赞美他。放光的星宿，你们都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.

天上的天，和天上的水，你们都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.

愿这些都赞美耶和华的名。因他一吩咐便都造成。
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.

他将这些立定，直到永永远远。他定了命，不能废去（废去或作越过）。
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.

所有在地上的，大鱼和一切深洋，
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:

火与冰雹，雪和雾气，成就他命的狂风，
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:

大山和小山，结果的树木，和一切香柏树，
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:

野兽和一切牲畜，昆虫和飞鸟，
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:

世上的君王和万民，首领和世上一切审判官，
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:

少年人和处女，老年人和孩童，都当赞美耶和华。
Young men and virgins; old men and children:

愿这些都赞美耶和华的名。因为独有他的名被尊崇。他的荣耀在天地之上。
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.

他将他百姓的角高举，因此他（因此他或作他使）一切圣民以色列人，就是与他相近的百姓，都赞美他。你们要赞美耶和华。
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.

你们要赞美耶和华，向耶和华唱新歌，在圣民的会中赞美他。
Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.

愿以色列因造他的主欢喜。愿锡安的民，因他们的王快乐。
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.

愿他们跳舞赞美他的名，击鼓弹琴歌颂他。
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.

因为耶和华喜爱他的百姓。他要用救恩当作谦卑人的妆饰。
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.

愿圣民因所得的荣耀高兴。愿他们在床上欢呼。
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.

愿他们口中称赞神为高，手里有两刃的刀。
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;

为要报复列邦，刑罚万民。
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;

要用链子捆他们的君王，用铁镣锁他们的大臣。
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;

要在他们身上施行所记录的审判。他的圣民都有这荣耀。你们要赞美耶和华。
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.

你们要赞美耶和华，在神的圣所赞美他，在他显能力的穹苍赞美他。
Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.

要因他大能的作为赞美他，按着他极美的大德赞美他。
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.

要用角声赞美他，鼓瑟弹琴赞美他。
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.

击鼓跳舞赞美他，用丝弦的乐器，和箫的声音赞美他。
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.

用大响的钹赞美他，用高声的钹赞美他。
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.

凡有气息的，都要赞美耶和华。你们要赞美耶和华。
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.uts oil on their wounds.

他数点星宿的数目，一一称它的名。
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.

我们的主为大，最有能力。他的智慧无法测度。
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.

耶和华扶持谦卑人，将恶人倾覆于地。
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.

你们要以感谢向耶和华歌唱，用琴向我们的神歌颂。
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.

他用云遮天，为地降雨，使草生长在山上。
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.

他赐食给走兽，和啼叫的小乌鸦。
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.

他不喜悦马的力大，不喜爱人的腿快。
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.

耶和华喜爱敬畏他和盼望他慈爱的人。
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.

耶路撒冷阿，你要颂赞耶和华。锡安哪，你要赞美你的神。
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.

因为他坚固了你的门闩，赐福给你中间的儿女。
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.

他使你境内平安。用上好的麦子使你满足。
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.

他发命在地。他的话颁行最快。
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.

他降雪如羊毛，撒霜如炉灰。
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.

他掷下冰雹如碎渣。他发出寒冷，谁能当得起呢？
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.

他一出令，这些就都消化。他使风刮起，水便流动。
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.

他将他的道指示雅各，将他的律例典章指示以色列。
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.

别国他都没有这样待过。至于他的典章，他们向来没有知道。你们要赞美耶和华。
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.

你们要赞美耶和华，从天上赞美耶和华，在高处赞美他。
Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.

他的众使者都要赞美他。他的诸军都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.

日头月亮，你们要赞美他。放光的星宿，你们都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.

天上的天，和天上的水，你们都要赞美他。
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.

愿这些都赞美耶和华的名。因他一吩咐便都造成。
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.

他将这些立定，直到永永远远。他定了命，不能废去（废去或作越过）。
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.

所有在地上的，大鱼和一切深洋，
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:

火与冰雹，雪和雾气，成就他命的狂风，
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:

大山和小山，结果的树木，和一切香柏树，
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:

野兽和一切牲畜，昆虫和飞鸟，
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:

世上的君王和万民，首领和世上一切审判官，
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:

少年人和处女，老年人和孩童，都当赞美耶和华。
Young men and virgins; old men and children:

愿这些都赞美耶和华的名。因为独有他的名被尊崇。他的荣耀在天地之上。
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.

他将他百姓的角高举，因此他（因此他或作他使）一切圣民以色列人，就是与他相近的百姓，都赞美他。你们要赞美耶和华。
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.

你们要赞美耶和华，向耶和华唱新歌，在圣民的会中赞美他。
Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.

愿以色列因造他的主欢喜。愿锡安的民，因他们的王快乐。
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.

愿他们跳舞赞美他的名，击鼓弹琴歌颂他。
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.

因为耶和华喜爱他的百姓。他要用救恩当作谦卑人的妆饰。
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.

愿圣民因所得的荣耀高兴。愿他们在床上欢呼。
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.

愿他们口中称赞神为高，手里有两刃的刀。
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;

为要报复列邦，刑罚万民。
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;

要用链子捆他们的君王，用铁镣锁他们的大臣。
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;

要在他们身上施行所记录的审判。他的圣民都有这荣耀。你们要赞美耶和华。
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.

你们要赞美耶和华，在神的圣所赞美他，在他显能力的穹苍赞美他。
Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.

要因他大能的作为赞美他，按着他极美的大德赞美他。
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.

要用角声赞美他，鼓瑟弹琴赞美他。
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.

击鼓跳舞赞美他，用丝弦的乐器，和箫的声音赞美他。
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.

用大响的钹赞美他，用高声的钹赞美他。
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.

凡有气息的，都要赞美耶和华。你们要赞美耶和华。
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.