论尼尼微的默示，就是伊勒歌斯人那鸿所得的默示。
The word about Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.

耶和华是忌邪施报的神。耶和华施报大有忿怒。向他的敌人施报，向他的仇敌怀怒。
The Lord is a God who takes care of his honour and gives punishment for wrong; the Lord gives punishment and is angry; the Lord sends punishment on those who are against him, being angry with his haters.

耶和华不轻易发怒，大有能力，万不以有罪的为无罪。他乘旋风和暴风而来，云彩为他脚下的尘土。
The Lord is slow to get angry and great in power, and will not let the sinner go without punishment: the way of the Lord is in the wind and the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

他斥责海，使海干了，使一切江河干涸。巴珊和迦密的树林衰残，利巴嫩的花草也衰残了。
He says sharp words to the sea and makes it dry, drying up all the rivers: Bashan is feeble, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon is without strength.

大山因他震动，小山也都消化。大地在他面前突起，世界和住在其间的，也都如此。
The mountains are shaking because of him, and the hills flowing away; the earth is falling to bits before him, the world and all who are in it.

他发忿恨，谁能立得住呢？他发烈怒，谁能当得起呢？他的忿怒如火倾倒，磐石因他崩裂。
Who may keep his place before his wrath? and who may undergo the heat of his passion? his wrath is let loose like fire and the rocks are broken open by him.

耶和华本为善，在患难的日子为人的保障。并且认得那些投靠他的人。
The Lord is good, a strong place in the day of trouble; and he has knowledge of those who take him for their safe cover.

但他必以涨溢的洪水淹没尼尼微，又驱逐仇敌进入黑暗。
But like water overflowing he will take them away; he will put an end to those who come up against him, driving his haters into the dark.

尼尼微人哪，设何谋攻击耶和华呢？他必将你们灭绝净尽。灾难不再兴起。
What are you designing against the Lord? he will put an end to it: his haters will not come up again a second time.

你们像丛杂的荆棘，像喝醉了的人，又如枯干的碎秸全然烧灭。
For though they are like twisted thorns, and are overcome as with drink, they will come to destruction like stems of grass fully dry.

有一人从你那里出来，图谋邪恶，设恶计攻击耶和华。
One has gone out from you who is designing evil against the Lord, whose purposes are of no value.

耶和华如此说，尼尼微虽然势力充足，人数繁多，也被剪除，归于无有。犹大阿，我虽然使你受苦，却不再使你受苦。
This is what the Lord has said: The days of my cause against you are ended; they are cut off and past. Though I have sent trouble on you, you will no longer be troubled.

现在我必从你颈项上折断他的轭，扭开他的绳索。
And now I will let his yoke be broken off you, and your chains be parted.

耶和华已经出令，指着尼尼微说，你名下的人必不留后。我必从你神的庙中，除灭雕刻的偶像，和铸造的偶像。我必因你鄙陋，使你归于坟墓。
The Lord has given an order about you, that no more of your name are to be planted: from the house of your gods I will have the pictured and metal images cut off; I will make your last resting-place a place of shame; for you are completely evil.

看哪，有报好信传平安之人的脚登山，说，犹大阿，可以守你的节期，还你所许的愿吧。因为那恶人不再从你中间经过。他已灭绝净尽了。
See on the mountains the feet of him who comes with good news, giving word of peace! Keep your feasts, O Judah, give effect to your oaths: for the good-for-nothing man will never again go through you; he is completely cut off.

尼尼微阿，那打碎邦国的上来攻击你。你要看守保障，谨防道路，使腰强壮，大大勉力。
A crusher has come up before your face: keep a good look-out, let the way be watched, make yourself strong, let your power be greatly increased.

耶和华复兴雅各的荣华，好像以色列的荣华一样。因为使地空虚的，已经使雅各和以色列空虚，将他们的葡萄枝毁坏了。
For the Lord will make good the vine of Jacob, as well as the vine of Israel: for the wasters have made them waste and sent destruction on the branches of their vine.

他勇士的盾牌是红的，精兵都穿朱红衣服。在他预备争战的日子，战车上的钢铁闪烁如火，柏木把的枪也抡起来了。
The body-covers of his fighting men have been made red, the men of war are clothed in bright red: the war-carriages are like flames of fire in the day when he gets ready, the horses are shaking.

车辆在街上（或作城外）急行，在宽阔处奔来奔去，形状如火把，飞跑如闪电。
The war-carriages are rushing through the streets, pushing against one another in the wide ways, looking like burning lights, running like thunder-flames.

尼尼微王招聚他的贵胄。他们步行绊跌。速上城墙，预备挡牌。
He takes the record of his great men: they go falling on their way; they go quickly to the wall, the cover is made ready.

河闸开放，宫殿冲没。
The river doorways are forced open, and the king's house is flowing away.

王后蒙羞，被人掳去，宫女捶胸，哀鸣如鸽。此乃命定之事。
And the queen is uncovered, she is taken away and her servant-girls are weeping like the sound of doves, hammering on their breasts.

尼尼微自古以来充满人民。如同聚水的池子，现在居民却都逃跑。虽有人呼喊说，站住，站住，却无人回顾。
But Nineveh is like a pool of water whose waters are flowing away; Keep your place, they say; but no one is turning back.

你们抢掠金银吧。因为所积蓄的无穷，华美的宝器无数。
Take silver, take gold; for there is no end to the store; take for yourselves a weight of things to be desired.

尼尼微现在空虚荒凉，人心消化，双膝相碰，腰都疼痛，脸都变色。
Everything has been taken from her, all is gone, she has nothing more: the heart is turned to water, the knees are shaking, all are twisted in pain, and colour has gone from all faces.

狮子的洞和少壮狮子喂养之处在哪里呢？公狮母狮小狮游行，无人惊吓之地在哪里呢？
Where is the lions' hole, the place where the young lions got their food, where the lion and the she-lion were walking with their young, without cause for fear?

公狮为小狮撕碎许多食物，为母狮掐死活物，把撕碎的，掐死的充满它的洞穴。
Food enough for his young and for his she-lions was pulled down by the lion; his hole was full of flesh and his resting-place stored with meat.

万军之耶和华说，我与你为敌，必将你的车辆焚烧成烟，刀剑也必吞灭你的少壮狮子。我必从地上除灭你所撕碎的，你使者的声音必不再听见。
See, I am against you, says the Lord of armies, and I will have your war-carriages burned in the smoke, and your young lions will be food for the sword: you will no longer get your food by force on the earth, and the voice of your she-lions will be stopped for ever.

祸哉，这流人血的城，充满谎诈和强暴。抢夺的事，总不止息。
A curse is on the town of blood; it is full of deceit and violent acts; and there is no end to the taking of life.

鞭声响亮，车轮轰轰，马匹踢跳，车辆奔腾，
The noise of the whip, and the noise of thundering wheels; horses rushing and war-carriages jumping,

马兵争先，刀剑发光，枪矛闪烁，被杀的甚多，尸首成了大堆，尸骸无数，人碰着而跌倒。
Horsemen driving forward, and the shining sword and the bright spear: and a great number of wounded, and masses of dead bodies; they are falling over the bodies of the dead:

都因那美貌的妓女多有淫行，惯行邪术，借淫行诱惑列国，用邪术诱惑多族（诱惑原文作卖）。
Because of all the false ways of the loose woman, expert in attraction and wise in secret arts, who takes nations in the net of her false ways, and families through her secret arts.

万军之耶和华说，我与你为敌。我必揭起你的衣襟，蒙在你脸上，使列国看见你的赤体，使列邦观看你的丑陋。
See, I am against you, says the Lord of armies, and I will have your skirts pulled over your face, and let the nations see you unclothed, and the kingdoms your shame.

我必将可憎污秽之物抛在你身上，辱没你，为众目所观。
I will make you completely disgusting and full of shame, and will put you up to be looked at by all.

凡看见你的，都必逃跑离开你，说，尼尼微荒凉了。有谁为你悲伤呢？我何处寻得安慰你的人呢？
And it will come about that all who see you will go in flight from you and say, Nineveh is made waste: who will be weeping for her? where am I to get comforters for her?

你岂比挪亚们强呢？挪亚们坐落在众河之间，周围有水。海作她的濠沟（海指尼罗河），又作她的城墙。
Are you better than No-amon, seated on the Nile streams, with waters all round her; whose wall was the sea and her earthwork the waters?

古实和埃及是她无穷的力量。弗人和路比族是她的帮手。
Ethiopia was her strength and Egyptians without number; Put and Lubim were her helpers.

但她被迁移，被掳去。她的婴孩在各市口上也被摔死。人为她的尊贵人拈阄，她所有的大人都被链子锁着。
But even she has been taken away, she has gone away as a prisoner: even her young children are smashed to bits at the top of all the streets: the fate of her honoured men is put to the decision of chance, and all her great men are put in chains.

你也必喝醉，必被埋藏。并因仇敌的缘故寻求避难所。
And you will be overcome with wine, you will become feeble; you will be looking for a safe place from those who are fighting against you.

你一切保障，必像无花果树上初熟的无花果。若一摇撼，就落在想吃之人的口中。
All your walled places will be like fig-trees and your people like the first figs, falling at a shake into the mouth which is open for them.

你地上的人民，如同妇女。你国中的关口，向仇敌敞开。你的门闩被火焚烧。
See, the people who are in you are women; the doorways of your land are wide open to your attackers: the locks of your doors have been burned away in the fire.

你要打水预备受困。要坚固你的保障。踹土和泥，修补砖窑。
Get water for the time when you are shut in, make strong your towns: go into the potter's earth, stamping it down with your feet, make strong the brickworks.

在那里，火必烧灭你，刀必杀戮你，吞灭你如同蝻子。任你加增人数多如蝻子，多如蝗虫吧。
There the fire will make you waste; you will be cut off by the sword: make yourself as great in number as the worms, as great in number as the locusts.

你增添商贾，多过天上的星。蝻子吃尽而去。
Let your traders be increased more than the stars of heaven:

你的首领，多如蝗虫，你的军长，仿佛成群的蚂蚱，天凉的时候，齐落在篱笆上，日头一出便都飞去，人不知道落在何处。
Your crowned ones are like the locusts, and your scribes like the clouds of insects which take cover in the walls on a cold day, but when the sun comes up they go in flight, and are seen no longer in their place.

亚述王阿，你的牧人睡觉，你的贵胄安歇。你的人民散在山间，无人招聚。
Sorrow! how are the keepers of your flock sleeping, O king of Assyria! your strong men are at rest; your people are wandering on the mountains, and there is no one to get them together.

你的损伤无法医治，你的伤痕极其重大。凡听你信息的，必都因此向你拍掌。你所行的恶，谁没有时常遭遇呢？
Your pain may not be made better; you are wounded to death: all those hearing the news about you will be waving their hands in joy over you: for who has not undergone the weight of your evil-doing again and again?

