阿摩司书 Amos


当犹大王乌西雅，以色列王约阿施的儿子，耶罗波安在位的时候，大地震前二年，提哥亚牧人中的阿摩司得默示论以色列。
The words of Amos, who was among the herdsmen of Tekoa; what he saw about Israel in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel, two years before the earth-shock.

他说，耶和华必从锡安吼叫，从耶路撒冷发声。牧人的草场要悲哀，迦密的山顶要枯干。
And he said, The Lord will give a lion's cry from Zion, his voice will be sounding from Jerusalem; and the fields of the keepers of sheep will become dry, and the top of Carmel will be wasted away.

耶和华如此说，大马色三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去她的刑罚。因为她以打粮食的铁器打过基列。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Damascus, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because they have been crushing Gilead with iron grain-crushing instruments.

我却要降火在哈薛的家中，烧灭便哈达的宫殿。
And I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, burning up the great houses of Ben-hadad.

我必折断大马色的门闩，剪除亚文平原的居民，和伯伊甸掌权的。亚兰人必被掳到吉珥。这是耶和华说的。
And I will have the locks of the door of Damascus broken, and him who is seated in power cut off from the valley of Aven, and him in whose hand is the rod from the house of Eden; and the people of Aram will go away as prisoners into Kir, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，迦萨三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去她的刑罚。因为她掳掠众民交给以东。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Gaza, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because they took all the people away prisoners, to give them up to Edom.

我却要降火在迦萨的城内，烧灭其中的宫殿。
And I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, burning up its great houses:

我必剪除亚实突的居民，和亚实基伦掌权的。也必反手攻击以革伦。非利士人所余剩的必都灭亡。这是主耶和华说的。
Him who is seated in power I will have cut off from Ashdod, and him in whose hand is the rod from Ashkelon; and my hand will be turned against Ekron, and the rest of the Philistines will come to destruction, says the Lord God.

耶和华如此说，推罗三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去她的刑罚。因为她将众民交给以东，并不记念弟兄的盟约。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Tyre, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because they gave up all the people prisoners to Edom, without giving a thought to the brothers' agreement between them.

我却要降火在推罗的城内，烧灭其中的宫殿。
And I will send a fire on the wall of Tyre, burning up its great houses.

耶和华如此说，以东三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去她的刑罚。因为她拿刀追赶兄弟，毫无怜悯，发怒撕裂，永怀忿怒。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Edom, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because his sword was turned against his brother, without pity, and his wrath was burning at all times, and he was angry for ever.

我却要降火在提幔，烧灭波斯拉的宫殿。
And I will send a fire on Teman, burning up the great houses of Bozrah.

耶和华如此说，亚扪人三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去他们的刑罚。因为他们剖开基列的孕妇，扩张自己的境界。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because in Gilead they had women with child cut open, so that they might make wider the limits of their land.

我却要在争战呐喊的日子，旋风狂暴的时候，点火在拉巴的城内，烧灭其中的宫殿。
And I will make a fire in the wall of Rabbah, burning up its great houses, with loud cries in the days of war, with a storm in the day of the great wind:

他们的王和首领，必一同被掳去。这是耶和华说的。
And their king will be made prisoner, he and his captains together, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，摩押三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去她的刑罚。因为她将以东王的骸骨焚烧成灰。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Moab, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because he had the bones of the king of Edom burned to dust.

我却要降火在摩押，烧灭加略的宫殿。摩押必在哄嚷呐喊吹角之中死亡。
And I will send a fire on Moab, burning up the great houses of Kerioth: and death will come on Moab with noise and outcries and the sound of the horn:

我必剪除摩押中的审判者，将其中的一切首领，和他一同杀戮。这是耶和华说的。
And I will have the judge cut off from among them, and all their captains I will put to death with him, says the Lord.

耶和华如此说，犹大人三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去他们的刑罚。因为他们厌弃耶和华的训诲，不遵守他的律例。他们列祖所随从虚假的偶像，使他们走迷了。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Judah, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because they have given up the law of the Lord, and have not kept his rules; and their false ways, in which their fathers went, have made them go out of the right way.

我却要降火在犹大，烧灭耶路撒冷的宫殿。
And I will send a fire on Judah, burning up the great houses of Jerusalem.

耶和华如此说，以色列人三番四次地犯罪，我必不免去他们的刑罚。因他们为银子卖了义人，为一双鞋卖了穷人。
These are the words of the Lord: For three crimes of Israel, and for four, I will not let its fate be changed; because they have given the upright man for silver, and the poor for the price of two shoes;

他们见穷人头上所蒙的灰也都垂涎。阻碍谦卑人的道路。父子同一个女子行淫，亵渎我的圣名。
Crushing the head of the poor, and turning the steps of the gentle out of the way: and a man and his father go in to the same young woman, putting shame on my holy name:

他们在各坛旁，铺人所当的衣服，卧在其上。又在他们神的庙中，喝受罚之人的酒。
By every altar they are stretched on clothing taken from those who are in their debt, drinking in the house of their god the wine of those who have made payment for wrongdoing.

我从以色列人面前除灭亚摩利人。他虽高大如香柏树，坚固如橡树，我却上灭他的果子，下绝他的根本。
Though I sent destruction on the Amorite before them, who was tall as the cedar and strong as the oak-tree, cutting off his fruit from on high and his roots from under the earth.

我也将你们从埃及地领上来，在旷野引导你们四十年，使你们得亚摩利人之地为业。
And I took you up out of the land of Egypt, guiding you for forty years in the waste land, so that you might take for your heritage the land of the Amorite.

我从你们子弟中兴起先知，又从你们少年人中兴起拿细耳人。以色列人哪，不是这样吗？这是耶和华说的。
And some of your sons I made prophets, and some of your young men I made separate for myself. Is it not even so, O children of Israel? says the Lord.

你们却给拿细耳人酒喝，嘱咐先知说，不要说预言。
But to those who were separate you gave wine for drink; and to the prophets you said, Be prophets no longer.

看哪，在你们所住之地，我必压你们，如同装满禾捆的车压物一样。
See, I am crushing you down, as one is crushed under a cart full of grain.

快跑的不能逃脱，有力的不能用力，刚勇的也不能自救。
And flight will be impossible for the quick-footed, and the force of the strong will become feeble, and the man of war will not get away safely:

拿弓的不能站立，腿快的不能逃脱。骑马的也不能自救。
And the bowman will not keep his place; he who is quick-footed will not get away safely: and the horseman will not keep his life.

到那日，勇士中最有胆量的，必赤身逃跑。这是耶和华说的。
And he who is without fear among the fighting men will go in flight without his clothing in that day, says the Lord.

以色列人哪，你们全家是我从埃及地领上来的，当听耶和华攻击你们的话。
Give ear to this word which the Lord has said against you, O children of Israel, against all the family which I took up out of the land of Egypt, saying,

在地上万族中，我只认识你们。因此，我必追讨你们的一切罪孽。
You only of all the families of the earth have I taken care of: for this reason I will send punishment on you for all your sins.

二人若不同心，岂能同行呢？
Is it possible for two to go walking together, if not by agreement?

狮子若非抓食，岂能在林中咆哮呢？少壮狮子若无所得，岂能从洞中发声呢？
Will a lion give his loud cry in the woodland when no food is there? will the voice of the young lion be sounding from his hole if he has taken nothing?

若没有机槛，雀鸟岂能陷在网罗里呢？网罗若无所得，岂能从地上翻起呢？
Is it possible for a bird to be taken in a net on the earth where no net has been put for him? will the net come up from the earth if it has taken nothing at all?

城中若吹角，百姓岂不惊恐呢？灾祸若临到一城，岂非耶和华所降的吗？
If the horn is sounded in the town will the people not be full of fear? will evil come on a town if the Lord has not done it?

主耶和华若不将奥秘指示他的仆人众先知，就一无所行。
Certainly the Lord will do nothing without making clear his secret to his servants, the prophets.

狮子吼叫，谁不惧怕呢？主耶和华发命，谁能不说预言呢？
The cry of the lion is sounding; who will not have fear? The Lord God has said the word; is it possible for the prophet to keep quiet?

要在亚实突的宫殿中，和埃及地的宫殿里，传扬说，你们要聚集在撒玛利亚的山上，就看见城中有何等大的扰乱与欺压的事。
Give out the news in the great houses of Assyria and in the land of Egypt, and say, Come together on the mountains of Samaria, and see what great outcries are there, and what cruel acts are done in it.

那些以强暴抢夺财物，积蓄在自己家中的人，不知道行正直的事。这是耶和华说的。
For they have no knowledge of how to do what is right, says the Lord, who are storing up violent acts and destruction in their great houses.

所以主耶和华如此说，敌人必来围攻这地，使你的势力衰微，抢掠你的家宅。
For this reason, says the Lord, an attacker will come, shutting in the land on every side; and your strength will come down and your great houses will be made waste.

耶和华如此说，牧人怎样从狮子口中抢回两条羊腿或半个耳朵，住撒玛利亚的以色列人躺卧在床角上，或铺绣花毯的榻上，他们得救也不过如此。
These are the words of the Lord: As the keeper of sheep takes out of the mouth of the lion two legs or part of an ear; so will the children of Israel be made safe, who are resting in Samaria on seats of honour or on the silk cushions of a bed.

主耶和华万军之神说，当听这话，警戒雅各家。
Give ear now, and give witness against the family of Jacob, says the Lord God, the God of armies;

我讨以色列罪的日子，也要讨伯特利祭坛的罪。坛角必被砍下，坠落于地。
For in the day when I give Israel punishment for his sins, I will send punishment on the altars of Beth-el, and the horns of the altar will be cut off and come down to the earth.

我要拆毁过冬和过夏的房屋，象牙的房屋也必毁灭，高大的房屋都归无有。这是耶和华说的。
And I will send destruction on the winter house with the summer house; the ivory houses will be falling down and the great houses will come to an end, says the Lord.

你们住撒玛利亚山如巴珊母牛的阿，当听我的话，你们欺负贫寒的，压碎穷乏的，对家主说，拿酒来，我们喝吧。
Give ear to this word, you cows of Bashan, who are in the hill of Samaria, by whom the poor are kept down, and those in need are crushed; who say to their lords, Get out the wine and give us drink.

主耶和华指着自己的圣洁起誓说，日子快到，人必用钩子将你们钩去，用鱼钩将你们余剩的钩去。
The Lord God has taken an oath by his holy name, that the days are coming when they will take you away with hooks, and the rest of you with fish-hooks.

你们各人必从破口直往前行，投入哈门。这是耶和华说的。
And you will go out through the broken places, every one going straight before her, and you will be sent into Harmon, says the Lord.

以色列人哪，任你们往伯特利去犯罪，到吉甲加增罪过。每日早晨献上你们的祭物，每三日奉上你们的十分之一。
Come to Beth-el and do evil; to Gilgal, increasing the number of your sins; come with your offerings every morning and your tenths every three days:

任你们献有酵的感谢祭，把甘心祭宣传报告给众人，因为是你们所喜爱的。这是主耶和华说的。
Let that which is leavened be burned as a praise-offering, let the news of your free offerings be given out publicly; for this is pleasing to you, O children of Israel, says the Lord.

我使你们在一切城中牙齿干净，在你们各处粮食缺乏，你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
But in all your towns I have kept food from your teeth, and in all your places there has been need of bread: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

在收割的前三月，我使雨停止，不降在你们那里。我降雨在这城，不降雨在那城。这块地有雨，那块地无雨，无雨的就枯干了。
And I have kept back the rain from you, when it was still three months before the grain-cutting: I sent rain on one town and kept it back from another: one part was rained on, and the part where there was no rain became a waste.

这样，两三城的人凑到一城去找水，却喝不足。你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
So two or three towns went wandering to one town looking for water, and did not get enough: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

我以旱风，霉烂攻击你们。你们园中许多菜蔬，葡萄树，无花果树，橄榄树都被剪虫所吃。你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
I have sent destruction on your fields by burning and disease: the increase of your gardens and your vine-gardens, your fig-trees and your olive-trees, has been food for worms: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

我降瘟疫在你们中间，像在埃及一样。用刀杀戮你们的少年人，使你们的马匹被掳掠，营中尸首的臭气扑鼻。你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
I have sent disease among you, as it was in Egypt: I have put your young men to the sword, and have taken away your horses; I have made the evil smell from your tents come up to your noses: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

我倾覆你们中间的城邑，如同我从前倾覆所多玛，蛾摩拉一样，使你们好像从火中抽出来的一根柴。你们仍不归向我。这是耶和华说的。
And I have sent destruction among you, as when God sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah, and you were like a burning stick pulled out of the fire: and still you have not come back to me, says the Lord.

以色列阿，我必向你如此行。以色列阿，我既这样行，你当预备迎见你的神。
So this is what I will do to you, O Israel: and because I will do this to you, be ready for a meeting with your God, O Israel.

那创山，造风，将心意指示人，使晨光变为幽暗，脚踏在地之高处的。他的名是耶和华万军之神。
For see, he who gave form to the mountains and made the wind, giving knowledge of his purpose to man, who makes the morning dark, and is walking on the high places of the earth: the Lord, the God of armies, is his name.

以色列家阿，要听我为你们所作的哀歌。
Give ear to this word, my song of sorrow over you, O children of Israel.

以色列民（原文作处女）跌倒，不得再起，躺在地上，无人搀扶。
The virgin of Israel has been made low, never again to be lifted up: she is stretched out by herself on her land; there is no one to put her on her feet again.

主耶和华如此说，以色列家的城，发出一千兵的，只剩一百，发出一百的，只剩十个。
For these are the words of the Lord God: The town which was able to send out a thousand, will have only a hundred; and that which sent out a hundred, will have only ten, in Israel.

耶和华向以色列家如此说，你们要寻求我，就必存活。
For these are the words of the Lord to the children of Israel: Let your hearts be turned to me, so that you may have life:

不要往伯特利寻求，不要进入吉甲，不要过到别是巴。因为吉甲必被掳掠，伯特利也必归于无有。
Do not be looking for help to Beth-el, and do not go to Gilgal, or make your way to Beer-sheba: for Gilgal will certainly be taken prisoner, and Beth-el will come to nothing.

要寻求耶和华，就必存活。免得他在约瑟家像火发出，在伯特利焚烧，无人扑灭。
Go to the Lord for help so that you may have life; for fear that he may come like fire bursting out in the family of Joseph, causing destruction, and there will be no one to put it out in Beth-el.

你们这使公平变为茵陈，将公义丢弃于地的，
You who make the work of judging a bitter thing, crushing down righteousness to the earth;

要寻求那造昴星和参星，使死荫变为晨光，使白日变为黑夜，命海水来浇在地上的，（耶和华是他的名）
Go for help to him who makes Orion and the Pleiades, by whom the deep dark is turned into morning, who makes the day black with night; whose voice goes out to the waters of the sea, sending them out over the face of the earth: the Lord is his name;

他使力强的忽遭灭亡，以致保障遭遇毁坏。
Who sends sudden destruction on the strong, so that destruction comes on the walled town.

你们怨恨那在城门口责备人的，憎恶那说正直话的。
They have hate for him who makes protest against evil in the public place, and he whose words are upright is disgusting to them.

你们践踏贫民，向他们勒索麦子。你们用凿过的石头建造房屋，却不得住在其内，栽种美好的葡萄园，却不得喝所出的酒。
So because the poor man is crushed under your feet, and you take taxes from him of grain: you have made for yourselves houses of cut stone, but you will not take your rest in them; the fair vine-gardens planted by your hands will not give you wine.

我知道你们的罪过何等多，你们的罪恶何等大。你们苦待义人，收受贿赂，在城门口屈枉穷乏人。
For I have seen how your evil-doing is increased and how strong are your sins, you troublers of the upright, who take rewards and do wrong to the cause of the poor in the public place.

所以通达人见这样的时势，必静默不言。因为时势真恶。
So the wise will say nothing in that time; for it is an evil time.

你们要求善，不要求恶，就必存活。这样，耶和华万军之神，必照你们所说的，与你们同在。
Go after good and not evil, so that life may be yours: and so the Lord, the God of armies, will be with you, as you say.

要恶恶好善，在城门口秉公行义。或者耶和华万军之神，向约瑟的余民施恩。
Be haters of evil and lovers of good, and let right be done in the public place: it may be that the Lord, the God of armies, will have mercy on the rest of Joseph.

主耶和华万军之神如此说，在一切宽阔处必有哀号的声音。在各街市上必有人说，哀哉，哀哉。又必叫农夫来哭号，叫善唱哀歌的来举哀。
So these are the words of the Lord, the God of armies, the Lord: There will be weeping in all the open spaces; and in all the streets they will say, Sorrow! sorrow! and they will get in the farmer to the weeping, and the makers of sad songs to give cries of grief.

在各葡萄园，必有哀号的声音。因为我必从你中间经过。这是耶和华说的。
In all the vine-gardens there will be cries of grief: for I will go through among you, says the Lord.

想望耶和华日子来到的有祸了。你们为何想望耶和华的日子呢？那日黑暗没有光明，
Sorrow to you who are looking for the day of the Lord! what is the day of the Lord to you? it is dark and not light.

景况好像人躲避狮子又遇见熊。或是进房屋以手靠墙，就被蛇咬。
As if a man, running away from a lion, came face to face with a bear; or went into the house and put his hand on the wall and got a bite from a snake.

耶和华的日子，不是黑暗没有光明吗？不是幽暗毫无光辉吗？
Will not the day of the Lord be dark and not light? even very dark, with no light shining in it?

我厌恶你们的节期，也不喜悦你们的严肃会。
Your feasts are disgusting to me, I will have nothing to do with them; I will take no delight in your holy meetings.

你们虽然向我献燔祭，和素祭，我却不悦纳。也不顾你们用肥畜献的平安祭。
Even if you give me your burned offerings and your meal offerings, I will not take pleasure in them: I will have nothing to do with the peace-offerings of your fat beasts.

要使你们歌唱的声音远离我。因为我不听你们弹琴的响声。
Take away from me the noise of your songs; my ears are shut to the melody of your instruments.

惟愿公平如大水滚滚，使公义如江河滔滔。
But let the right go rolling on like waters, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.

以色列家阿，你们在旷野四十年，岂是将祭物和供物献给我呢？
Did you come to me with offerings of beasts and meal offerings in the waste land for forty years, O Israel?

你们抬着为自己所造之摩洛的帐幕，和偶像的龛，并你们的神星。
Truly, you will take up Saccuth your king and Kaiwan your images, the star of your god, which you made for yourselves.

所以我要把你们掳到大马色以外。这是耶和华，名为万军之神说的。
And I will send you away as prisoners farther than Damascus, says the Lord, whose name is the God of armies.

国为列国之首，人最著名，且为以色列家所归向，在锡安和撒玛利亚山安逸无虑的，有祸了。
Sorrow to those who are resting in comfort in Zion, and to those who have no fear of danger in the mountain of Samaria, the noted men of the chief of the nations, to whom the people of Israel come!

你们要过到甲尼察看，从那里往大城哈马去，又下到非利士人的迦特，看那些国比你们的国还强吗？境界比你们的境界还宽吗？
Go on to Calneh and see; and from there go to Hamath the great; then go down to Gath of the Philistines: are you better than these kingdoms? or is your land wider than theirs?

你们以为降祸的日子还远，坐在位上尽行强暴（或作行强暴使审判临近）。
You who put far away the evil day, causing the rule of the violent to come near;

你们躺卧在象牙床上，舒身在榻上，吃群中的羊羔，棚里的牛犊。
Who are resting on beds of ivory, stretched out on soft seats, feasting on lambs from the flock and young oxen from the cattle-house;

弹琴鼓瑟唱消闲的歌曲，为自己制造乐器，如同大卫所造的。
Making foolish songs to the sound of corded instruments, and designing for themselves instruments of music, like David;

以大碗喝酒，用上等的油抹身。却不为约瑟的苦难担忧。
Drinking wine in basins, rubbing themselves with the best oils; but they have no grief for the destruction of Joseph.

所以这些人必在被掳的人中首先被掳。舒身的人荒宴之乐必消灭了。
So now they will go away prisoners with the first of those who are made prisoners, and the loud cry of those who were stretched out will come to an end.

主耶和华万军之神指着自己起誓说，我憎恶雅各的荣华，厌弃他的宫殿。因此，我必将城和其中所有的，都交付敌人。
The Lord God has taken an oath by himself, says the Lord, the God of armies: the pride of Jacob is disgusting to me, and I have hate for his great houses: so I will give up the town with everything in it.

那时，若在一房之内剩下十个人，也都必死。
Then it will come about that if there are still ten men in a house, death will overtake them.

死人的伯叔，就是烧他尸首的，要将这尸首搬到房外，问房屋内间的人说，你那里还有人没有。他必说，没有。又说，不要作声，因为我们不可提耶和华的名。
And when a man's relation, even the one who is responsible for burning his body, lifting him up to take his bones out of the house, says to him who is in the inmost part of the house, Is there still anyone with you? and he says, No; then he will say, Keep quiet, for the name of the Lord may not be named.

看哪，耶和华出令，大房就被攻破，小屋就被打裂。
For see, at the order of the Lord the great house will be full of cracks and the little house will be broken.

马岂能在崖石上奔跑？人岂能在那里用牛耕种呢？你们却使公平变为苦胆，使公义的果子变为茵陈。
Is it possible for horses to go running on the rock? may the sea be ploughed with oxen? for the right to be turned by you into poison, and the fruit of righteousness into a bitter plant?

你们喜爱虚浮的事，自夸说，我们不是凭自己的力量取了角吗？
You whose joy is in a thing of no value, who say, Have we not taken for ourselves horns by the strength which is ours?

耶和华，万军之神说，以色列家阿，我必兴起一国攻击你们。他们必欺压你们，从哈马口直到亚拉巴的河。
For see, I will send against you a nation, O Israel, says the Lord, the God of armies, ruling you cruelly from the way into Hamath as far as the stream of the Arabah.

主耶和华指示我一件事。为王割菜之后（菜或作草），菜又发生，刚发生的时候，主造蝗虫。
This is what the Lord God let me see: and I saw that, when the growth of the late grass was starting, he made locusts; it was the late growth after the king's cutting was done.

蝗虫吃尽那地的青物，我就说，主耶和华阿，求你赦免。因为雅各微弱，他怎能站立得住呢？
And it came about that after they had taken all the grass of the land, I said, O Lord God, have mercy: how will Jacob be able to keep his place? for he is small.

耶和华就后悔说，这灾可以免了。
The Lord, changing his purpose about this, said, It will not be.

主耶和华又指示我一件事。他命火来惩罚以色列，火就吞灭深渊，险些将地烧灭。
This is what the Lord let me see: and I saw that the Lord God sent for a great fire to be the instrument of his punishment; and, after burning up the great deep, it was about to put an end to the Lord's heritage.

我就说，主耶和华阿，求你止息。因为雅各微弱。他怎能站立得住呢？
Then said I, O Lord God, let there be an end: how will Jacob be able to keep his place? for he is small.

耶和华就后悔说，这灾也可免了。
The Lord, changing his purpose about this, said, And this will not be.

他又指示我一件事。有一道墙是按准绳建筑的，主手拿准绳站在其上。
This is what he let me see: and I saw the Lord stationed by a wall made straight by a weighted line, and he had a weighted line in his hand.

耶和华对我说，阿摩司阿，你看见什么。我说，看见准绳。主说，我要吊起准绳在我民以色列中。我必不再宽恕他们。
And the Lord said to me, Amos, what do you see? And I said, A weighted line. Then the Lord said, See, I will let down a weighted line among my people Israel; never again will my eyes be shut to their sin:

以撒的丘坛必然凄凉，以色列的圣所必然荒废。我必兴起，用刀攻击耶罗波安的家。
And the high places of Isaac will be unpeopled, and the holy places of Israel will be made waste; and I will come up against the family of Jeroboam with the sword.

伯特利的祭司亚玛谢打发人，到以色列王耶罗波安那里，说，阿摩司在以色列家中图谋背叛你。他所说的一切话，这国担当不起。
Then Amaziah, the priest of Beth-el, sent to Jeroboam, king of Israel, saying, Amos has made designs against you among the people of Israel: the land is troubled by his words.

因为阿摩司如此说，耶罗波安必被刀杀，以色列民定被掳去离开本地。
For Amos has said, Jeroboam will be put to the sword, and Israel will certainly be taken away as a prisoner out of his land.

亚玛谢又对阿摩司说，你这先见哪，要逃往犹大地去，在那里糊口，在那里说预言。
And Amaziah said to Amos, O seer, go in flight into the land of Judah, and there get your living by working as a prophet:

却不要在伯特利再说预言，因为这里有王的圣所，有王的宫殿。
But be a prophet no longer at Beth-el: for it is the holy place of the king, and the king's house.

阿摩司对亚玛谢说，我原不是先知，也不是先知的门徒（原文作儿子）。我是牧人，又是修理桑树的。
Then Amos in answer said to Amaziah, I am no prophet, or one of the sons of the prophets; I am a herdman and one who takes care of sycamore-trees:

耶和华选召我，使我不跟从羊群，对我说，你去向我民以色列说预言。
And the Lord took me from the flock, and the Lord said to me, Go, be a prophet to my people Israel.

亚玛谢阿，现在你要听耶和华的话。你说，不要向以色列说预言，也不要向以撒家滴下预言。
Now then, give ear to the word of the Lord: You say, Be no prophet to Israel, and say not a word against the people of Isaac.

所以耶和华如此说，你的妻子必在城中作妓女，你的儿女必倒在刀下，你的地必有人用绳子量了分取，你自己必死在污秽之地，以色列民定被掳去离开本地。
So this is what the Lord has said: Your wife will be a loose woman in the town, and your sons and your daughters will be put to the sword, and your land will be cut up into parts by a line; and you yourself will come to your end in an unclean land, and Israel will certainly be taken away a prisoner out of his land.

主耶和华又指示我一件事。我看见一筐夏天的果子。
This is what the Lord God let me see: and I saw a basket of summer fruit.

他说，阿摩司阿，你看见什么。我说，看见一筐夏天的果子。耶和华说，我民以色列的结局到了。我必不再宽恕他们。
And he said, Amos, what do you see? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then the Lord said to me, The end has come to my people Israel; never again will my eyes be shut to their sin.

主耶和华说，那日，殿中的诗歌变为哀号。必有许多尸首在各处抛弃，无人作声。
And the songs of the king's house will be cries of pain in that day, says the Lord God: great will be the number of the dead bodies, and everywhere they will put them out without a word.

你们这些要吞吃穷乏人，使困苦人衰败的，当听我的话。
Give ear to this, you who are crushing the poor, and whose purpose is to put an end to those who are in need in the land,

你们说，月朔几时过去，我们好卖粮。安息日几时过去，我们好摆开麦子，卖出用小升斗，收银用大戥子，用诡诈的天平欺哄人。
Saying, When will the new moon be gone, so that we may do trade in grain? and the Sabbath, so that we may put out in the market the produce of our fields? making the measure small and the price great, and trading falsely with scales of deceit;

好用银子买贫寒人，用一双鞋换穷乏人，将坏了的麦子卖给人。
Getting the poor for silver, and him who is in need for the price of two shoes, and taking a price for the waste parts of the grain.

耶和华指着雅各的荣耀起誓说，他们的一切行为，我必永远不忘。
The Lord has taken an oath by the pride of Jacob, Truly I will ever keep in mind all their works.

地岂不因这事震动，其上的居民，不也悲哀吗？地必全然像尼罗河涨起，如同埃及河涌上落下。
Will not the land be shaking with fear because of this, and everyone in it have sorrow? and all of it will be overflowing like the River; and it will be troubled and go down again like the River of Egypt.

主耶和华说，到那日，我必使日头在午间落下，使地在白昼黑暗。
And it will come about in that day, says the Lord God, that I will make the sun go down in the middle of the day, and I will make the earth dark in daylight:

我必使你们的节期变为悲哀，歌曲变为哀歌。众人腰束麻布，头上光秃，使这场悲哀如丧独生子，至终如痛苦的日子一样。
Your feasts will be turned into sorrow and all your melody into songs of grief; everyone will be clothed with haircloth, and the hair of every head will be cut; I will make the weeping like that for an only son, and the end of it like a bitter day.

主耶和华说，日子将到，我必命饥荒降在地上。人饥饿非因无饼，干渴非因无水，乃因不听耶和华的话。
See, the days are coming, says the Lord God, when I will send times of great need on the land, not need of food or desire for water, but for hearing the words of the Lord.

他们必飘流，从这海到那海，从北边到东边，往来奔跑，寻求耶和华的话，却寻不着。
And they will go wandering from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, running here and there in search of the word of the Lord, and they will not get it.

当那日，美貌的处女，和少年的男子，必因干渴发昏。
In that day the fair virgins and the young men will be feeble from need of water.

那指着撒玛利亚牛犊（原文作罪）起誓的，说，但哪，我们指着你那里的活神起誓。又说，我们指着别是巴的神道（神原文作活）起誓。这些人都必仆倒，永不再起来。
Those who make their oaths by the sin of Samaria and say, By the life of your God, O Dan; and, By the living way of Beer-sheba; even they will go down, never again to be lifted up.

我看见主站在祭坛旁边。他说，你要击打柱顶，使门槛震动，打碎柱顶，落在众人头上。所剩下的人，我必用刀杀戮。无一人能逃避，无一人能逃脱。
I saw the Lord stationed by the side of the altar, giving blows to the tops of the pillars so that the doorsteps were shaking: and he said, I will let all of them be broken with earth-shocks; I will put the last of them to the sword: if any one of them goes in flight he will not get away, not one of them will be safe.

他们虽然挖透阴间，我的手必取出他们来。虽然爬上天去，我必拿下他们来。
Even if they go deep into the underworld, my hand will take them up from there; if they go up to heaven, I will get them down:

虽然藏在迦密山顶，我必搜寻，捉出他们来。虽然从我眼前藏在海底，我必命蛇咬他们。
Though they take cover on the top of Carmel, I will go in search of them and get them out; though they keep themselves from my eyes in the bed of the sea, I will give orders to the great snake there and he will give them a bite:

虽被仇敌掳去，我必命刀剑杀戮他们。我必向他们定住眼目。降祸不降福。
And though they are taken away as prisoners by their attackers, even there will I give orders to the sword to put them to death: my eyes will be fixed on them for evil and not for good.

主万军之耶和华摸地，地就消化，凡住在地上的，都必悲哀。地必全然像尼罗河涨起，如同埃及河落下。
For the Lord, the God of armies, is he at whose touch the land is turned to water, and everyone in it will be given up to sorrow; all of it will be overflowing like the River, and will go down again like the River of Egypt;

那在天上建造楼阁，在地上安定穹苍，命海水浇在地上的，耶和华是他的名。
It is he who makes his rooms in the heaven, basing his arch on the earth; whose voice goes out to the waters of the sea, and sends them flowing over the face of the earth; the Lord is his name.

耶和华说，以色列人哪，我岂不看你们如古实人吗？我岂不是领以色列人出埃及地，领非利士人出迦斐托，领亚兰人出吉珥吗？
Are you not as the children of the Ethiopians to me, O children of Israel? says the Lord. Have I not taken Israel up out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Aramaeans from Kir?

主耶和华的眼目察看这有罪的国。必将这国从地上灭绝，却不将雅各家灭绝净尽。这是耶和华说的。
See, the eyes of the Lord are on the evil kingdom, and I will put an end to it in all the earth; but I will not send complete destruction on Jacob, says the Lord.

我必出令，将以色列家分散在列国中，好像用筛子筛谷，连一粒也不落在地上。
For see, I will give orders, and I will have Israel moved about among all the nations, as grain is moved about by the shaking of the tray, but not the smallest seed will be dropped on the earth.

我民中的一切罪人说，灾祸必追不上我们，也迎不着我们。他们必死在刀下。
All those sinners among my people will be put to the sword who say, Evil will not overtake us or come face to face with us.

到那日，我必建立大卫倒塌的帐幕，堵住其中的破口，把那破坏的建立起来，重新修造，像古时一样。
In that day I will put up the tent of David which has come down, and make good its broken places; and I will put up again his damaged walls, building it up as in the past;

使以色列人得以东所余剩的，和所有称为我名下的国。此乃行这事的耶和华说的。
So that the rest of Edom may be their heritage, and all the nations who have been named by my name, says the Lord, who is doing this.

耶和华说，日子将到，耕种的必接续收割的，踹葡萄的必接续撒种的。大山要滴下甜酒，小山都必流奶（原文作消化，见约珥书第三章十八节）。
See, the days will come, says the Lord, when the ploughman will overtake him who is cutting the grain, and the crusher of the grapes him who is planting seed; and sweet wine will be dropping from the mountains, and the hills will be turned into streams of wine.

我必使我民以色列被掳的归回，他们必重修荒废的城邑居住，栽种葡萄园，喝其中所出的酒；修造果木园，吃其中的果子。
And I will let the fate of my people Israel be changed, and they will be building up again the waste towns and living in them; they will again be planting vine-gardens and taking the wine for their drink; and they will make gardens and get the fruit of them.

我要将他们栽于本地，他们不再从我所赐给他们的地上拔出来。这是耶和华你的神说的。
And I will have them planted in their land, and never again will they be uprooted from their land which I have given them, says the Lord your God.

