所罗门的歌，是歌中的雅歌。
The song of Songs, which is Solomon's.

愿他用口与我亲嘴。因你的爱情比酒更美。
Let him give me the kisses of his mouth: for his love is better than wine.

你的膏油馨香。你的名如同倒出来的香膏，所以众童女都爱你。
Sweet is the smell of your perfumes; your name is as perfume running out; so the young girls give you their love.

愿你吸引我，我们就快跑跟随你。王带我进了内室，我们必因你欢喜快乐。我们要称赞你的爱情，胜似称赞美酒。他们爱你是理所当然的。
Take me to you, and we will go after you: the king has taken me into his house. We will be glad and full of joy in you, we will give more thought to your love than to wine: rightly are they your lovers.

耶路撒冷的众女子阿，我虽然黑，却是秀美，如同基达的帐棚，好像所罗门的幔子。
I am dark, but fair of form, O daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

不要因日头把我晒黑了，就轻看我。我同母的弟兄向我发怒，他们使我看守葡萄园，我自己的葡萄园却没有看守。
Let not your eyes be turned on me, because I am dark, because I was looked on by the sun; my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the keeper of the vine-gardens; but my vine-garden I have not kept.

我心所爱的阿，求你告诉我，你在何处牧羊，晌午在何处使羊歇卧。我何必在你同伴的羊群旁边，好像蒙着脸的人呢？
Say, O love of my soul, where you give food to your flock, and where you make them take their rest in the heat of the day; why have I to be as one wandering by the flocks of your friends?

你这女子中极美丽的，你若不知道，只管跟随羊群的脚踪去，把你的山羊羔牧放在牧人帐棚的旁边。
If you have not knowledge, O most beautiful among women, go on your way in the footsteps of the flock, and give your young goats food by the tents of the keepers.

我的佳偶，我将你比法老车上套的骏马。
I have made a comparison of you, O my love, to a horse in Pharaoh's carriages.

你的两腮因发辫而秀美，你的颈项因珠串而华丽。
Your face is a delight with rings of hair, your neck with chains of jewels.

我们要为你编上金辫，镶上银钉。
We will make you chains of gold with ornaments of silver.

王正坐席的时候，我的哪哒香膏发出香味。
While the king is seated at his table, my spices send out their perfume.

我以我的良人为一袋没药，常在我怀中。
As a bag of myrrh is my well-loved one to me, when he is at rest all night between my breasts.

我以我的良人为一棵凤仙花，在隐基底葡萄园中。
My love is to me as a branch of the cypress-tree in the vine-gardens of En-gedi.

我的佳偶，你甚美丽，你甚美丽，你的眼好像鸽子眼。
See, you are fair, my love, you are fair; you have the eyes of a dove.

我的良人哪，你甚美丽可爱，我们以青草为床榻，
See, you are fair, my loved one, and a pleasure; our bed is green.

以香柏树为房屋的栋梁，以松树为椽子。
Cedar-trees are the pillars of our house; and our boards are made of fir-trees.

我是沙仑的玫瑰花（或作水仙花），是谷中的百合花。
I am a rose of Sharon, a flower of the valleys.

我的佳偶在女子中，好像百合花在荆棘内。
As the lily-flower among the thorns of the waste, so is my love among the daughters.

我的良人在男子中，如同苹果树在树林中。我欢欢喜喜坐在他的荫下，尝他果子的滋味，觉得甘甜。
As the apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my loved one among the sons. I took my rest under his shade with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

他带我入筵宴所，以爱为旗在我以上。
He took me to the house of wine, and his flag over me was love.

求你们给我葡萄干增补我力，给我苹果畅快我心，因我思爱成病。
Make me strong with wine-cakes, let me be comforted with apples; I am overcome with love.

他的左手在我头下，他的右手将我抱住。
His left hand is under my head, and his right hand is round about me.

耶路撒冷的众女子阿，我指着羚羊或田野的母鹿，嘱咐你们，不要惊动，不要叫醒我所亲爱的，等他自己情愿（不要叫醒云云或作不要激动爱情等它自发）。
I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes of the field, do not let love be moved till it is ready.

听阿，是我良人的声音。看哪，他蹿山越岭而来。
The voice of my loved one! See, he comes dancing on the mountains, stepping quickly on the hills.

我的良人好像羚羊，或像小鹿。他站在我们墙壁后，从窗户往里观看，从窗棂往里窥探。
My loved one is like a roe; see, he is on the other side of our wall, he is looking in at the windows, letting himself be seen through the spaces.

我良人对我说，我的佳偶，我的美人，起来，与我同去。
My loved one said to me, Get up, my love, my fair one, and come away.

因为冬天已往。雨水止住过去了。
For, see, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone;

地上百花开放。百鸟鸣叫的时候（或作修理葡萄树的时候）已经来到，斑鸠的声音在我们境内也听见了。
The flowers are come on the earth; the time of cutting the vines is come, and the voice of the dove is sounding in our land;

无花果树的果子渐渐成熟，葡萄树开花放香。我的佳偶，我的美人，起来，与我同去。
The fig-tree puts out her green fruit and the vines with their young fruit give a good smell. Get up from your bed, my beautiful one, and come away.

我的鸽子阿，你在磐石穴中，在陡岩的隐密处。求你容我得见你的面貌，得听你的声音。因为你的声音柔和，你的面貌秀美。
O my dove, you are in the holes of the mountain sides, in the cracks of the high hills; let me see your face, let your voice come to my ears; for sweet is your voice, and your face is fair.

要给我们擒拿狐狸，就是毁坏葡萄园的小狐狸。因为我们的葡萄正在开花。
Take for us the foxes, the little foxes, which do damage to the vines; our vines have young grapes.

良人属我，我也属他。他在百合花中牧放群羊
My loved one is mine, and I am his: he takes his food among the flowers.

我的良人哪，求你等到天起凉风，日影飞去的时候，你要转回，好像羚羊，或像小鹿在比特山上。
Till the evening comes, and the sky slowly becomes dark, come, my loved one, and be like a roe on the mountains of Bether.

我夜间躺卧在床上，寻找我心所爱的。我寻找他，却寻不见。
By night on my bed I was looking for him who is the love of my soul: I was looking for him, but I did not see him.

我说，我要起来，游行城中，在街市上，在宽阔处，寻找我心所爱的。我寻找他，却寻不见。
I will get up now and go about the town, in the streets and in the wide ways I will go after him who is the love of my soul: I went after him, but I did not see him.

城中巡逻看守的人遇见我。我问他们，你们看见我心所爱的没有。
The watchmen who go about the town came by me; to them I said, Have you seen him who is my heart's desire?

我刚离开他们，就遇见我心所爱的。我拉住他，不容他走，领他入我母家，到怀我者的内室。
I was but a little way from them, when I came face to face with him who is the love of my soul. I took him by the hands, and did not let him go, till I had taken him into my mother's house, and into the room of her who gave me birth.

耶路撒冷的众女子阿，我指着羚羊，或田野的母鹿嘱咐你们，不要惊动，不要叫醒我所亲爱的，等他自己情愿（不要叫醒云云或作不要激动爱情等它自发）。
I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes of the field, let not love be moved till it is ready.

那从旷野上来，形状如烟柱，以没药和乳香并商人各样香粉薰的是谁呢？
Who is this coming out of the waste places like pillars of smoke, perfumed with sweet spices, with all the spices of the trader?

看哪，是所罗门的轿。四围有六十个勇士，都是以色列中的勇士。
See, it is the bed of Solomon; sixty men of war are about it, of the army of Israel,

手都持刀，善于争战，腰间佩刀，防备夜间有惊慌。
All of them armed with swords, trained in war; every man has his sword at his side, because of fear in the night.

所罗门王用利巴嫩木，为自己制造一乘华轿。
King Solomon made himself a bed of the wood of Lebanon.

轿柱是用银做的，轿底是用金做的。坐垫是紫色的，其中所铺的乃耶路撒冷众女子的爱情。
He made its pillars of silver, its base of gold, its seat of purple, the middle of it of ebony.

锡安的众女子阿，你们出去观看所罗门王，头戴冠冕，就是在他婚筵的日子，心中喜乐的时候，他母亲给他戴上的。
Go out, O daughters of Jerusalem, and see King Solomon, with the crown which his mother put on his head on the day when he was married, and on the day of the joy of his heart.

我的佳偶，你甚美丽，你甚美丽。你的眼在帕子内好像鸽子眼。你的头发如同山羊群卧在基列山旁。
See, you are fair, my love, you are fair; you have the eyes of a dove; your hair is as a flock of goats, which take their rest on the side of Gilead.

你的牙齿如新剪毛的一群母羊，洗净上来，个个都有双生，没有一只丧掉子的。
Your teeth are like a flock of sheep whose wool is newly cut, which come up from the washing; every one has two lambs, and there is not one without young.

你的唇好像一条朱红线，你的嘴也秀美。你的两太阳在帕子内，如同一块石榴。
Your red lips are like a bright thread, and your mouth is fair of form; the sides of your head are like pomegranate fruit under your veil.

你的颈项好像大卫建造收藏军器的高台，其上悬挂一千盾牌，都是勇士的藤牌。
Your neck is like the tower of David made for a store-house of arms, in which a thousand breastplates are hanging, breastplates for fighting-men.

你的两乳好像百合花中吃草的一对小鹿，就是母鹿双生的。
Your two breasts are like two young roes of the same birth, which take their food among the lilies.

我要往没药山和乳香冈去，直等到天起凉风，日影飞去的时候回来。
Till the evening comes, and the sky slowly becomes dark, I will go to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

我的佳偶，你全然美丽，毫无瑕疵。
You are all fair, my love; there is no mark on you.

我的新妇，求你与我一同离开利巴嫩，与我一同离开利巴嫩。从亚玛拿顶，从示尼珥与黑门顶，从有狮子的洞，从有豹子的山往下观看。
Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with me from Lebanon; see from the top of Amana, from the top of Senir and Hermon, from the places of the lions, from the mountains of the leopards.

我妹子，我新妇，你夺了我的心。你用眼一看，用你项上的一条金链，夺了我的心。
You have taken away my heart, my sister, my bride; you have taken away my heart, with one look you have taken it, with one chain of your neck!

我妹子，我新妇，你的爱情何其美。你的爱情比酒更美。你膏油的香气胜过一切香品。
How fair is your love, my sister! How much better is your love than wine, and the smell of your oils than any perfume!

我新妇，你的嘴唇滴蜜。好像蜂房滴蜜。你的舌下有蜜，有奶。你衣服的香气如利巴嫩的香气。
Your lips are dropping honey; honey and milk are under your tongue; and the smell of your clothing is like the smell of Lebanon.

我妹子，我新妇，乃是关锁的园，禁闭的井，封闭的泉源。
A garden walled-in is my sister, my bride; a garden shut up, a spring of water stopped.

你园内所种的结了石榴，有佳美的果子，并凤仙花与哪哒树。
The produce of the garden is pomegranates; with all the best fruits, henna and spikenard,

有哪哒和番红花，菖蒲和桂树，并各样乳香木，没药，沉香，与一切上等的果品。
Spikenard and safron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.

你是园中的泉，活水的井，从利巴嫩流下来的溪水。
You are a fountain of gardens, a spring of living waters, and flowing waters from Lebanon.

北风阿，兴起。南风阿，吹来。吹在我的园内，使其中的香气发出来。愿我的良人进入自己园里，吃他佳美的果子。
Be awake, O north wind; and come, O south, blowing on my garden, so that its spices may come out. Let my loved one come into his garden, and take of his good fruits.

我妹子，我新妇，我进了我的园中，采了我的没药和香料，吃了我的蜜房和蜂蜜。喝了我的酒和奶。我的朋友们，请吃，我所亲爱的，请喝，且多多地喝。
I have come into my garden, my sister, my bride; to take my myrrh with my spice; my wax with my honey; my wine with my milk. Take meat, O friends; take wine, yes, be overcome with love.

我身睡卧，我心却醒。这是我良人的声音。他敲门，说，我的妹子，我的佳偶，我的鸽子，我的完全人，求你给我开门，因我的头满了露水，我的头发被夜露滴湿。
I am sleeping, but my heart is awake; it is the sound of my loved one at the door, saying, Be open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my very beautiful one; my head is wet with dew, and my hair with the drops of the night.

我回答说，我脱了衣裳，怎能再穿上呢？我洗了脚，怎能再玷污呢？
I have put off my coat; how may I put it on? My feet are washed; how may I make them unclean?

我的良人从门孔里伸进手来，我便因他动了心。
My loved one put his hand on the door, and my heart was moved for him.

我起来，要给我良人开门。我的两手滴下没药，我的指头有没药汁滴在门闩上。
I got up to let my loved one in; and my hands were dropping with myrrh, and my fingers with liquid myrrh, on the lock of the door.

我给我的良人开了门。我的良人却已转身走了。他说话的时候，我神不守舍。我寻找他，竟寻不见。我呼叫他，他却不回答。
I made the door open to my loved one; but my loved one had taken himself away, and was gone, my soul was feeble when his back was turned on me; I went after him, but I did not come near him; I said his name, but he gave me no answer.

城中巡逻看守的人遇见我，打了我，伤了我。看守城墙的人夺去我的披肩。
The keepers who go about the town overtook me; they gave me blows and wounds; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

耶路撒冷的众女子阿，我嘱咐你们。若遇见我的良人，要告诉他，我因思爱成病。
I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you see my loved one, what will you say to him? That I am overcome with love.

你这女子中极美丽的，你的良人，比别人的良人有何强处。你的良人，比别人的良人有何强处，你就这样嘱咐我们。
What is your loved one more than another, O fairest among women? What is your loved one more than another, that you say this to us?

我的良人，白而且红，超乎万人之上。
My loved one is white and red, the chief among ten thousand.

他的头像至精的金子。他的头发厚密累垂，黑如乌鸦。
His head is as the most delicate gold; his hair is thick, and black as a raven.

他的眼如溪水旁的鸽子眼，用奶洗净，安得合式。
His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the water streams, washed with milk, and rightly placed.

他的两腮如香花畦，如香草台。他的嘴唇像百合花，且滴下没药汁。
His face is as beds of spices, giving out perfumes of every sort; his lips like lilies, dropping liquid myrrh.

他的两手好像金管，镶嵌水苍玉。他的身体如同雕刻的象牙，周围镶嵌蓝宝石。
His hands are as rings of gold ornamented with beryl-stones; his body is as a smooth plate of ivory covered with sapphires.

他的腿好像白玉石柱，安在精金座上。他的形状如利巴嫩，且佳美如香柏树。
His legs are as pillars of stone on a base of delicate gold; his looks are as Lebanon, beautiful as the cedar-tree.

他的口极其甘甜。他全然可爱。耶路撒冷的众女子阿，这是我的良人，这是我的朋友。
His mouth is most sweet; yes, he is all beautiful. This is my loved one, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

你这女子中极美丽的，你的良人往何处去了。你的良人转向何处去了，我们好与你同去寻找他。
Where is your loved one gone, O most fair among women? Where is your loved one turned away, that we may go looking for him with you?

我的良人下入自己园中，到香花畦，在园内牧放群羊，采百合花。
My loved one is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to take food in the gardens, and to get lilies.

我属我的良人，我的良人也属我。他在百合花中牧放群羊。
I am for my loved one, and my loved one is for me; he takes food among the lilies.

我的佳偶阿，你美丽如得撒，秀美如耶路撒冷，威武如展开旌旗的军队。
You are beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, as fair as Jerusalem; you are to be feared like an army with flags.

求你掉转眼目不看我，因你的眼目使我惊乱。你的头发如同山羊群卧在基列山旁。
Let your eyes be turned away from me; see, they have overcome me; your hair is as a flock of goats which take their rest on the side of Gilead.

你的牙齿如一群母羊，洗净上来。个个都有双生，没有一只丧掉子的。
Your teeth are like a flock of sheep which come up from the washing; every one has two lambs, and there is not one without young.

你的两太阳在帕子内，如同一块石榴。
Like pomegranate fruit are the sides of your head under your veil.

有六十王后八十妃嫔，并有无数的童女。
There are sixty queens, and eighty servant-wives, and young girls without number.

我的鸽子，我的完全人，只有这一个是她母亲独生的。是生养她者所宝爱的。众女子见了，就称她有福。王后妃嫔见了，也赞美她。
My dove, my very beautiful one, is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the dearest one of her who gave her birth. The daughters saw her, and gave her a blessing; yes, the queens and the servant-wives, and they gave her praises.

那向外观看，如晨光发现，美丽如月亮，皎洁如日头，威武如展开旌旗军队的是谁呢？
Who is she, looking down as the morning light, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, who is to be feared like an army with flags?

我下入核桃园，要看谷中青绿的植物，要看葡萄发芽没有，石榴开花没有。
I went down into the garden of nuts to see the green plants of the valley, and to see if the vine was in bud, and the pomegranate-trees were in flower.

不知不觉，我的心将我安置在我尊长的车中。
Before I was conscious of it, ...

回来，回来，书拉密女。你回来，你回来，使我们得观看你。你们为何要观看书拉密女，像观看玛哈念跳舞的呢？
Come back, come back, O Shulammite; come back, come back, so that our eyes may see you. What will you see in the Shulammite? A sword-dance.

王女阿，你的脚在鞋中何其美好。你的大腿圆润，好像美玉，是巧匠的手做成的。
How beautiful are your feet in their shoes, O king's daughter! The curves of your legs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a good workman:

你的肚脐如圆杯，不缺调和的酒。你的腰如一堆麦子，周围有百合花。
Your stomach is a store of grain with lilies round it, and in the middle a round cup full of wine.

你的两乳好像一对小鹿，就是母鹿双生的。
Your two breasts are like two young roes of the same birth.

你的颈项如象牙台。你的眼目像希实本，巴特拉并门旁的水池。你的鼻子仿佛朝大马色的利巴嫩塔。
Your neck is as a tower of ivory; your eyes like the waters in Heshbon, by the doorway of Bath-rabbim; your nose is as the tower on Lebanon looking over Damascus:

你的头在你身上好像迦密山。你头上的发是紫黑色。王的心因这下垂的发绺系住了。
Your head is like Carmel, and the hair of your head is like purple, in whose net the king is prisoner.

我所爱的，你何其美好。何其可悦，使人欢畅喜乐。
How beautiful and how sweet you are, O love, for delight.

你的身量好像棕树。你的两乳如同其上的果子，累累下垂。
You are tall like a palm-tree, and your breasts are like the fruit of the vine.

我说，我要上这棕树，抓住枝子。愿你的两乳好像葡萄累累下垂，你鼻子的气味香如苹果。
I said, Let me go up the palm-tree, and let me take its branches in my hands: your breasts will be as the fruit of the vine, and the smell of your breath like apples;

你的口如上好的酒，女子说，为我的良人下咽舒畅，流入睡觉人的嘴中。
And the roof of your mouth like good wine flowing down smoothly for my loved one, moving gently over my lips and my teeth.

我属我的良人，他也恋慕我。
I am for my loved one, and his desire is for me.

我的良人，来吧，你我可以往田间去。你我可以在村庄住宿。
Come, my loved one, let us go out into the field; let us take rest among the cypress-trees.

我们早晨起来往葡萄园去，看看葡萄发芽开花没有，石榴放蕊没有。我在那里要将我的爱情给你。
Let us go out early to the vine-gardens; let us see if the vine is in bud, if it has put out its young fruit, and the pomegranate is in flower. There I will give you my love.

风茄放香，在我们的门内有各样新陈佳美的果子。我的良人，这都是我为你存留的。
The mandrakes give out a sweet smell, and at our doors are all sorts of good fruits, new and old, which I have kept for my loved one.

巴不得你像我的兄弟，像吃我母亲奶的兄弟。我在外头遇见你就与你亲嘴，谁也不轻看我。
Oh that you were my brother, who took milk from my mother's breasts! When I came to you in the street, I would give you kisses; yes, I would not be looked down on.

我必引导你，领你进我母亲的家。我可以领受教训，也就使你喝石榴汁酿的香酒。
I would take you by the hand into my mother's house, and she would be my teacher. I would give you drink of spiced wine, drink of the pomegranate.

他的左手必在我头下，他的右手必将我抱住。
His left hand would be under my head, and his right hand about me.

耶路撒冷的众女子阿，我嘱咐你们，不要惊动，不要叫醒我所亲爱的，等他自己情愿（不要叫醒云云或作不要激动爱情等它自发）。
I say to you, O daughters of Jerusalem, do not let love be moved till it is ready.

那靠着良人从旷野上来的，是谁呢？我在苹果树下叫醒你。你母亲在那里为你劬劳，生养你的在那里为你劬劳。
Who is this, who comes up from the waste places, resting on her loved one? It was I who made you awake under the apple-tree, where your mother gave you birth; there she was in pain at your birth.

求你将我放在你心上如印记，带在你臂上如戳记。因为爱情如死之坚强。嫉恨如阴间之残忍。所发的电光，是火焰的电光，是耶和华的烈焰。
Put me as a sign on your heart, as a sign on your arm; love is strong as death, and wrath bitter as the underworld: its coals are coals of fire; violent are its flames.

爱情众水不能息灭，大水也不能淹没。若有人拿家中所有的财宝要换爱情，就全被藐视。
Much water may not put out love, or the deep waters overcome it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would be judged a price not great enough.

我们有一小妹，她的两乳尚未长成。人来提亲的日子，我们当为她怎样办理。
We have a young sister, and she has no breasts; what are we to do for our sister in the day when she is given to a man?

她若是墙，我们要在其上建造银塔。她若是门，我们要用香柏木板围护她。
If she is a wall, we will make on her a strong base of silver; and if she is a door, we will let her be shut up with cedar-wood.

我是墙，我两乳像其上的楼。那时，我在他眼中像得平安的人。
I am a wall, and my breasts are like towers; then was I in his eyes as one to whom good chance had come.

所罗门在巴力哈们有一葡萄园。他将这葡萄园交给看守的人，为其中的果子，必交一千舍客勒银子。
Solomon had a vine-garden at Baal-hamon; he let out the vine-garden to keepers; every one had to give a thousand bits of silver for its fruit.

我自己的葡萄园在我面前。所罗门哪，一千舍客勒归你，二百舍客勒归看守果子的人。
My vine-garden, which is mine, is before me: you, O Solomon, will have the thousand, and those who keep the fruit of them two hundred.

你这住在园中的，同伴都要听你的声音，求你使我也得听见。
You who have your resting-place in the gardens, the friends give ear to your voice; make me give ear to it.

我的良人哪，求你快来。如羚羊或小鹿在香草山上。
Come quickly, my loved one, and be like a roe on the mountains of spice.