共产党宣言

[P]Manifesto of the Communist Party

A spectre is haunting Europe – the spectre of communism. All the powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise this spectre： Pope and Tsar， Metternich and Guizot，French Radicals and German police-spies.

一个幽灵正在欧洲游荡——共产主义的幽灵。旧欧洲的所有国家，包括教皇和沙皇、梅特涅和基佐、法国的激进分子和德国的间谍警察，都结成了一个神圣同盟来驱散这个幽灵。

Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as communistic（共产主义的） by its opponents in power? Where is the opposition that has not hurled back the branding reproach of communism， against the more advanced opposition parties， as well as against its reactionary adversaries?

有哪一个反对党不被它那正掌权的敌人说成是共产主义的呢？又有哪一个反对党不拿共产主义这种烙印式的谴责去击退更进步的反对党人和自己的反动敌人呢？

Two things result from this fact：

这一事实产生了两个后果：

I. Communism is already acknowledged by all European powers to be itself a power.

II. It is high time that Communists should openly， in the face of the whole world， publish their views， their aims， their tendencies， and meet（回敬） this nursery tale of the Spectre of Communism with a manifesto of the party itself.

I. 共产主义已经被所有欧洲势力承认为一种力量。

II. 现在正是共产党人应该在全世界面前公开发表他们的观点、目标和倾向的时候了，用共产党本身的宣言来回敬这个共产主义幽灵的神话。

To this end， Communists of various nationalities（侧重指不同国籍的） have assembled in London and sketched the following manifesto， to be published in the English， French， German， Italian， Flemish and Danish languages.

为此目的，不同国籍的共产党人聚集在伦敦，草拟了以下宣言，并将以英语、法语、德语、意大利语、佛兰德语和丹麦语发表。

I. Bourgeois and Proletarians

I. 资产阶级和无产阶级

The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.

迄今存在的一切社会历史都是阶级斗争的历史。

Freeman and slave， patrician and plebeian， lord and serf， guild-master and journeyman， in a word， oppressor and oppressed， stood in constant opposition to one another， carried on an uninterrupted， now hidden， now open fight， （同位语）a fight that（指代fight） each time ended， either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large， or in the common ruin of the contending classes.

自由民和奴隶、贵族和平民、领主和农奴、行会师傅和帮工，总而言之，压迫者和被压迫者，站在互相对立的地位上，进行不间断的，或隐蔽或公开的斗争。每一次斗争的结局，要么是整个社会受到革命的重构，不然就是斗争的各阶级的同归于尽。

In the earlier（此前的） epochs of history， we find almost everywhere a complicated arrangement of society into various orders， a（单数，不可能对应orders） manifold gradation（a complicated arrangement的同位语）of social rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians， knights， plebeians， slaves； in the Middle Ages， （we have）feudal lords， vassals， guild-masters， journeymen， apprentices， serfs； in almost all of these classes， again，（we have）subordinate gradations.

在此前的不同历史时期，我们几乎到处都可以看到社会被复杂地划分成为各个不同的等级，即把社会划分成多重等级。在古罗马，有贵族、骑士、平民、奴隶；在中世纪，有封建领主、臣仆、行会师傅、学徒、帮工、农奴；同时，几乎在每一个阶级内部又有一些亚层次。

The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but established new classes， new conditions of oppression， new forms of struggle in place of the old ones.

在封建社会废墟上发展起来的现代资产阶级社会，并没有消除阶级对立。它不过用新的阶级、新的压迫条件、新的斗争形式代替了那些旧的。

Our epoch， the epoch of the bourgeoisie， possesses， however， this distinct feature： it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps，（前后两个into为并列关系） into two great classes directly facing each other – Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.

然而在我们的时代，即资产阶级的时代却拥有这种截然不同的特征：它简化了阶级对立。整个社会越来越分裂成两大敌对的阵营，分裂为两大互相直接对立的阶级——资产阶级和无产阶级。

From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of the earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the bourgeoisie were developed.

Burghers sprang from…… elements were developed from……

中世纪的农奴中出现了最早城镇的特许市民。资产阶级的最初成员便从这些市民中产生。

The discovery of America， the rounding of the Cape， opened up fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets， the colonization (对美洲的殖民，即“美洲的殖民化”；又如：Kennedy’s killer 意指“杀害肯尼迪的凶手”而非“肯尼迪雇来的杀手”) of America， trade with the colonies， the increase in the means of exchange and in commodities generally， gave to commerce， to navigation， to industry， an impulse（give impulse to ……） never before known， and thereby， / (give a rapid development) to the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society， a rapid development.

美洲的发现和绕过好望角的航行，给新兴的资产阶级开辟了新大陆。东印度和中国的市场、对美洲的殖民统治、对殖民地的贸易、交换手段和商品的普遍增加，使商业、航海和工业前所未有地高涨，因此也使正在崩溃的封建社会内部的革命因素急速发展。

The feudal system of industry（不同意向：工业（界）、行业、产业、勤劳）， in which industrial production was monopolised by closed guilds， now no longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took its（system of industry） place. The guild-masters were pushed on one side by the manufacturing middle class； division of labour between the different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of labour in each single workshop.

工业生产被封闭公会所垄断的那种封建的产业体系，现在已经不再能满足新市场不断增加的需求了。工场手工业取代了它的地位。行会师傅被手工业的中产阶级排挤掉了；不同行业协会之间的劳动分工随着各个作坊内部的劳动分工的出现而消失了。

Meantime the markets kept ever growing， the demand ever rising. Even manufacturer no longer sufficed. Thereupon， steam and machinery revolutionised industrial production. The place of manufacture was taken by the giant， Modern Industry； the place of the industrial middle class（was taken） by industrial millionaires， the leaders of the whole industrial armies， the modern bourgeois.

注意不同时代和实践条件下industry的翻译，工业、产业的区别。

同时，市场一直在扩大，需求也一直在增加。甚至工场手工业也不再能满足需要了。于是，蒸汽和机械引致了工业生产的革命。现代大工业代替了工场手工业。工业百万富翁，一整支工业大军的领导者，也即现代资产阶级，代替了产业中产阶级。

Modern industry has established the world market， for which the discovery of America paved the way（for the world market）. This market has given an immense development to commerce， to navigation， to communication by land. This development has， in its turn， reacted on the extension of industry； and in proportion as industry， commerce， navigation， railways extended， / in the same proportion （固定搭配：依着……程度变化，即随着……变化，……也变化）the bourgeoisie developed， increased its capital， and pushed into the background every class handed down from the Middle Ages.

现代大工业建立了由美洲的发现所准备好的世界市场。这个市场为商业、航海业和陆路交通带来了巨大的进展。这种发展又反过来促进了工业的发展。同时，随着工业、商业、航海业和铁路的发展，资产阶级也同样发展、增殖资本，并把从中世纪遗留下来的每一个阶级都排挤到后台去。

We see， therefore， how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of a long course of development， of a series of revolutions in the modes of production and of exchange.

因此我们发现，现代资产阶级本身是一个长期发展过程的产物，是生产和交换方式的一系列变革的产物。

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a corresponding political advance of that class. An oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility， an armed and self-governing association in the medieval commune： here independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany)； there taxable “third estate” of the monarchy (as in France)； afterwards， in the period of manufacturing proper， serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise against the nobility， and， in fact， cornerstone of the great monarchies in general，/ the bourgeoisie has at last， since the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market， conquered for itself， in the modern representative State， exclusive political sway. The executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie， historically， has played a most revolutionary part.

资产阶级发展的每一步，都伴随着其相应的政治进步。在封建统治下是被压迫的等级，在公社里是武装的和自治的团体：在这里是独立的城市共和国（像在意大利和德国），在别的地方是君主国中纳税的第三等级（像在法国）。后来，在工场手工业时期，它是半封建或绝对君主制国家中同贵族抗衡的势力，而且事实上是大君主国的主要基础。最后，从现代工业和世界市场建立时起，资产阶级在现代的代议制国家里夺得了独占鳌头的政治影响力。现代的国家政权不过是管理整个资产阶级的共同事务的委员会罢了。资产阶级历史上曾起过非常革命的作用。

The bourgeoisie， wherever it has got the upper hand（占据统治地位）， has put an end to （使……结束）all feudal， patriarchal（宗法的）， idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his “natural superiors”， and has left remaining no other（固定搭配，除……不剩） nexus between man and man than naked self-interest， than callous “cash payment”. It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour， of chivalrous enthusiasm， of philistine sentimentalism， in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worth into exchange value， and in place of the numberless indefeasible chartered freedoms， has set up that single， unconscionable freedom – Free Trade. In one word， for exploitation， veiled by religious and political illusions， it has substituted naked， shameless， direct， brutal exploitation. In one word ，it has substituted naked， shameless， direct， brutal exploitation for exploitation， which is veiled by religious and political illusions.

substitute A for B，用A代替B；而replace A with B 则表示“用B代替A”。

资产阶级在它业已握于掌中的地方把一切封建的、宗法的和田园关系都终结了。它无情地粉碎了把人们束缚于“自然尊长”的各种封建羁绊，它使人和人之间除了赤裸裸的利害关系和冷酷无情的“金钱交易”，就再也不剩别的关系了。它把宗教虔诚、骑士热忱、小市民伤感这些情感的神圣的陶醉，浸没在利己钻营的冰水之中。它把个人价值变成了交换价值，并用单一的、没有良心的贸易自由代替了无数不容废除的特许自由。总而言之，它用公开的、无耻的、直接的、露骨的剥削代替了由宗教和政治假象掩盖着的剥削。

The bourgeoisie has stripped （every occupation） of its halo / every occupation hitherto honoured and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physician， the lawyer， the priest， the poet， the man of science， into its paid wage labourers.

strip …… of 同 deprive …… of 拿走、剥离

资产阶级抹去了一切迄今一直受人尊崇和令人以敬畏之心仰视的职业的神圣光环。它把医生、律师、教士、诗人和科学家都变成了由它支付薪资的受雇劳动力。

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil， and has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation.

资产阶级扯下了家庭关系之上那温情脉脉的面纱，并使这种关系弱化为纯粹的金钱关系。

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass（……如何发生） that the brutal display of vigour in the Middle Ages， which reactionaries so much admire， found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. It has been the first to show what man’s activity can bring about. It has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids， Roman aqueducts， and Gothic cathedrals； it has conducted expeditions that put（all former Exoduses of nations and crusades）in the shade all former Exoduses（《出埃及记》） of nations and crusades（十字军东征）.

Exoduses of nations和crusades并列。

资产阶级揭示了，在中世纪深受反动派称许的那种人力劳动的残酷使用，是以极端怠惰作为补充的。它第一个阐明了人类活动能够取得什么样的成就。它创造了完全不同于埃及金字塔、罗马水道和哥特式教堂的奇迹；它完成的远征让很多国家的“出埃及记”和十字军东征都黯然失色。

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising（革命化） the instruments of production， and thereby the relations of production， and with them（指代随之而来的整个社会关系） the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modes of production in unaltered form， was， on the contrary， the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of production， uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions， everlasting uncertainty and agitation （前面所有做主语）distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed， fast-frozen（快速冻结的） relations， with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions， are swept away， all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air， all that is holy is profaned， and man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life， and his relations with his kind.

资产阶级除非对生产工具、生产关系和全部社会关系不断地进行革命，否则就不能生存下去。反之，原封不动地保持旧的生产方式，却是此前一切工业阶级生存的首要条件。生产的不断革命化，一切社会状况不停的动荡，永恒的不安定和变动，这就是资产阶级时代不同于此前一切时代的地方。一切固定的快速冻结的的关系，以及与之相适应的素被尊崇的观念和见解都被消除了，一切新形成的关系等不到固定下来就陈旧了。一切固定的东西都烟消云散了，一切神圣的东西都被亵渎了，因而人们终于不得不用冷静的眼光来审视他们的生活状况及他与他同类的相互关系。

The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere， settle everywhere， establish connexions everywhere.

不断扩大产品销路的需要，驱使资产阶级奔走于全球各地。它必须在各处安营扎寨，在各处生根落户，在各处建立联系。

The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists， it has drawn from（抽掉） under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries， whose introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised nations， by industries that no longer work up indigenous raw material， but raw material drawn from the remotest zones； industries whose products are consumed， not only at home， but in every quarter of the globe. In place of the old wants， satisfied（前置） by the production of the country， we find new wants， requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency（自给自足和闭关自守）， we have intercourse in every direction， universal inter-dependence of nations. And as in material， so also in intellectual production. The intellectual creations of individual nations become common property. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and more impossible， and （前置）from the numerous national and local literatures， there arises a world literature（from the numerous national and local literatures）.

The bourgeoisie has given a character to …… 

资产阶级，由于开拓了世界市场，使一切国家的生产和消费都成为世界性的了。使反动派大为懊恼的是，资产阶级抽掉了产业下的民族国家基础。古老的民族产业被消灭了，并且每天都还在被消灭着。它们被新工业取代，这种新工业建立已经成为一切文明民族生死攸关的问题；这些工业所加工的，已经不是本地的原料，而是来自极其遥远的地区的原料；它们的产品不仅供本国消费，而且同时供世界各地消费。旧的、靠本国产品来满足的需要，被新的、要靠遥远的国家和地区的产品来满足的需要所取代。过去那种地方的和民族的自给自足和闭关自守的状态，被各民族的各方面的交往和互相依赖所代替了。物质生产如此，精神生产亦如此。各民族的精神产品成了公共的财产。民族的片面性和局限性日益变得不可能，于是由许多种民族的和地方的文学形成了一种世界的文学。

The bourgeoisie， by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production， by the immensely facilitated means of communication， draws all， even the most barbarian， nations into civilization（资本主义的文明，指资本主义社会；应注意此类语境的引申含义，如卢梭的civil society 指的就是一种私有制产生的意义下的文明社会、公民社会）. The cheap prices of commodities are the heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls， with which it forces the barbarians’ intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate（认输，屈从，停止反抗；此处应表示“使排外心理停止反抗”，也即折服这种排外心理）. It compels all nations， on pain of extinction， to adopt the bourgeois mode of production； it compels them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst， i.e.， to become bourgeois themselves. In one word， it creates a world after its own image.

资产阶级，由于一切生产工具的迅速改进和交通方式的极端便利，把一切民族甚至最野蛮的民族都卷到资本主义社会中来了。它的商品的低廉价格，是它用来摧毁一切万里长城、折服野蛮人最顽固的排外心理的重炮。它迫使一切民族，若不想灭亡，就采用资产阶级的生产方式；它迫使它们在自己那里推行所谓的文明，即成为资产阶级。简言之，它按照自己的面貌创造出一个世界。

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country（农村） to the rule of the towns. It has created enormous cities， has greatly increased the urban population as compared with the rural， and has thus rescued a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the country dependent on the towns， so it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on（依赖于，从属于） the civilised ones，省略（made） nations of peasants （dependent） on nations of bourgeois，（made） the East （dependent） on the West.

资产阶级使农村处于城市的统治之下。它创立了巨大的城市，使城市人口比农村人口大大增加，因而使很大一部分人脱离了农村生活的愚昧状态。正像它使农村从属于城市一样，它使未开化和半开化的国家从属于文明的国家，使农业国家从属于资产阶级国家，使东方从属于西方。  

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state of the population， of the means of production， and of property. It has agglomerated population， centralised the means of production， and has concentrated property in a few hands. The necessary consequence of this was political centralisation. Independent， or but loosely connected provinces， with separate interests，（改变以前的，定语前置） laws， governments， and systems of taxation， became lumped together into one nation， with one government， one code of laws， one national class-interest， one frontier， and one customs-tariff.

资产阶级日甚一日地消灭生产资料、财产和人口的分散状态。它使人口密集起来，使生产资料集中起来，使财产聚集在少数人的手里。由此必然产生的结果就是政治的集中。各自独立的、几乎只有同盟关系的、各有不同利益、不同法律、不同政府、不同关税的各个地区，现在已经结合为一个拥有统一的政府、统一的法律、统一的民族阶级利益和统一的关税的统一的国族。

此处nation意指 国家意义上的民族，也即“国族”

The bourgeoisie， during its rule of scarce one hundred years， has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have（谓） all preceding generations（主） together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man， machinery， application of chemistry to industry and agriculture， steam-navigation， railways， electric telegraphs， clearing of whole continents for cultivation， canalisation of rivers， whole populations conjured out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap（在这一圈子里）of social labour?

资产阶级在它的不到一百年的统治中所创造的生产力，比过去一切世代创造的全部生产力还要多，还要大。自然力的征服，机器的采用，化学在工业和农业中的应用，轮船的行驶，铁路的通行，电报的使用，整片大陆的开垦，河川的通航，仿佛用法术从地下呼唤出来的全部人口——此前哪一个世纪料想到在社会劳动里潜藏着这样的生产力呢？

We see then： the means of production and of exchange， on whose foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up， were generated in feudal society. At a certain stage in the development of these means of production and of exchange， the conditions under which feudal society produced and exchanged， the feudal organisation of agriculture and manufacturing industry， in one word， the feudal relations of property became no longer compatible with the already developed productive forces； they became so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder； they were burst asunder.

由此可见，资产阶级赖以形成生产资料和交换手段的基础，是在封建社会里造成的。在这些生产资料和交换手段发展的一定阶段上，封建社会的生产和交换在其中进行的关系，封建的农业和工场手工业组织，一句话，封建的所有制关系，不再适应已经发展的生产力了。这些关系已经在阻碍而不是促进生产了，它们变成了束缚生产的桎梏。它们必须也确实被摧毁了。

Into their place stepped free competition， accompanied by a social and political constitution adapted in it， and the economic and political sway of the bourgeois class.

取而代之的是自由竞争以及与自由竞争相适应的社会制度和政治制度、资产阶级的经济统治和政治统治。

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bourgeois society， with its relations of production， of exchange and of property， a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of production and of exchange， is like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom（things he called up） he has called up by his spells. For many a decade past the history of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern conditions of production，（A即B同位语，说明关系） against the property relations that are the conditions for the existence of the bourgeois and of its rule. It （形式主语）is enough to mention the commercial crises that（说明crises，定它） by their periodical return put the existence of the entire bourgeois society on its trial， each time more threateningly. In these crises， a great part not only of the existing products， but also of the previously created productive forces， are periodically destroyed. In these crises， there breaks out an epidemic that， in all earlier epochs， would have seemed an absurdity – the epidemic of over-production. Society suddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism； it appears as if a famine， a universal war of devastation， had cut off the supply of every means of subsistence； industry and commerce seem to be destroyed； and why? Because there is too much civilisation， too much means of subsistence， too much industry， too much commerce. The productive forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the development of the conditions of bourgeois property； on the contrary， they have become too powerful for these conditions， by which they are fettered， and so soon as they overcome these fetters， they bring disorder into the whole of bourgeois society， endanger the existence of bourgeois property. The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises? On the one hand by enforced destruction of a mass of productive forces； on the other， by the conquest of new markets， and by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones. That is to say， by paving the way for more extensive and more destructive crises， and by diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.

现在，我们眼前又进行着类似的运动。资产阶级的生产关系和交换关系，资产阶级的所有制关系，这个曾经仿佛用法术创造了如此庞大的生产资料和交换手段的现代资产阶级社会，现在像一个魔法师一样不能再支配自己用法术呼唤出来的魔鬼了。几十年来的工业和商业的历史，只不过是现代生产力反抗现代生产关系、反抗作为资产阶级及其统治的存在条件的所有制关系的历史。只要指出在周期性的重复中越来越危及整个资产阶级社会生存的商业危机就够了。在商业危机期间，总是不仅有很大一部分制成的产品被毁灭掉，而且有很大一部分已经造成的生产力周期性地被毁灭掉。在危机期间，发生了一种在此前一切时代看来都好像是荒唐现象的社会瘟疫，即生产过剩的瘟疫。社会突然发现自己回到了暂时的野蛮状态；仿佛是一次饥荒、一场普遍的毁灭性战争，使社会失去了全部生活资料；仿佛是工业和商业全被毁灭了，——这是什么缘故呢？因为社会上文明过度，生活资料太多，工业和商业太发达。社会所拥有的生产力已经不能再促进资产阶级文明和资产阶级所有制关系的发展；相反，生产力已经强大到这种关系所不能适应的地步，它已经受到这种关系的阻碍；而它一着手克服这种障碍，就使整个资产阶级社会陷入混乱，就使资产阶级所有制的存在受到威胁。资产阶级的关系已经太狭窄了，以至于再容纳不了它本身所造成的财富了。——资产阶级用什么办法来克服这种危机呢？一方面不得不消灭大量生产力，另一方面夺取新的市场，更加彻底地开发旧的市场。也就是说，是资产阶级准备更全面更猛烈的危机的办法，是使防止危机的手段越来越少的办法。

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

资产阶级用来推翻封建制度的武器，现在却反过来对准资产阶级自己了。

But not only has the bourgeoisie（has not only） forged the weapons that bring death to itself； it has also called （the men）into existence the men who are to wield those weapons – the modern working class – the proletarians.

但是，资产阶级不仅创造了置自身于死地的武器；而且它还催生了未来将要运用这种武器的人——现代工人，也即无产者的存在。

In proportion as the bourgeoisie， i.e.， capital， is developed， in the same proportion is the proletariat， the modern working class， developed – a class of labourers， who live only so long as they find work， and who find work only so long as their labour increases capital. These labourers， who must sell themselves piecemeal， are a commodity， like every other article of commerce， and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of competition， to all the fluctuations of the market.

随着资产阶级即资本的发展，无产阶级即现代工人阶级也在同一程度上得到发展；现代的工人只有当他们找到工作的时候才能生存，而且只有当他们的劳动增殖资本的时候才能找到工作。这些不得不把自己零零碎碎地出卖的工人，像其他任何商品一样，也是一种商品，结果他们也同样地受到竞争的所有变化、市场的所有波动的影响。

² be exposed to：暴露于、面临、暴露在、受到、接触到、遭受

(1) This experience provided me with the opportunity to be exposed to lots of new ideas of modern fashion design and professional training.

我不仅有机会接触现代服装设计的新观念.而且还因此接受了职业训练。

(2) During the course of a transaction, the intermediate (possibly inconsistent) state of the data should not be exposed to other transactions.

在事务的执行过程中，数据的中间（可能不一致）状态不应对其他事务公开。

(3) As it is, the public has continued to be exposed to the potential, though extremely rare, hazard of HIV in donor blood.

由此，人们还要继续面对在供体血液中尽管极其稀少，但仍存在潜在HIV病毒的危机。

(4) In a nuclear power plant accident, the general population is not likely to be exposed to doses high enough to cause such effects.

在核电厂事故中，一般民众不太可能暴露在足以造成这样的影响的高剂量辐射下。

² be subject to 与 be subjected to

显然,第一个subject是作为动词,第二个是作为形容词.

subject vt. 使服从, 使隶属(to) ，使受到, 使遭到(to)

adj. 易受... 影响的 ，受...支配的, 附属的 ，以...为条件[转移]的; 须经[有待于] ...的(to)

be subject to：

(1) 可能受……的影响：Flights are subject to delay because of the fog.

(2) 取决于,视……而定：The article is ready to publish, subject to your approval.

(3) 受……支配,服从于：All nuclear installations are subject to international safeguards.

(4) 在法律英语中，subject to之后多跟随agreement, section, contract等词，通常可以翻译成“以……为条件”、“在符合……的情况下”、“据……规定”、“除……另有规定外”以及“在不抵触……下”等意象。

be subjected to：

(1) 被纳入，服从于，顺从于：Most of the Europe was subjected to the Roman Empire in history.

(2) 遭受：The city was subjected to heavy bombing.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery， and （owing）to the division of labour， the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character， and， consequently， all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of the machine， and it （形式主语）is only the most simple， most monotonous， and most easily acquired knack， that is required of him. Hence， the cost of production of a workman is restricted， almost entirely， to the means of subsistence that he requires for maintenance， and for the propagation of his race. But the price of a commodity， and therefore also of labour， is equal to its cost of production. In proportion， therefore， as the repulsiveness of the work increases， the wage decreases. Nay more， in proportion as the use of machinery and division of labour increases， in the same proportion the burden of toil also increases， whether by prolongation of the working hours， by the increase of the work exacted in a given time or by increased speed of machinery， etc. Modern Industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of labourers， crowded into the factory， are organised like soldiers. As privates of the industrial army they are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class， and of the bourgeois State； they are daily and hourly enslaved by the machine， by the overlooker， and， above all， by the individual bourgeois manufacturer himself. The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end and aim， the more petty， the more hateful and the more embittering it is.

由于机器的广泛使用和分工，无产者的劳动已经失去了任何独立的性质，因而对工人也失去了全部吸引力。工人变成了机器的附属品，而这要求他做的只是极其简单、极其单调和极容易学会的操作。因此，花在工人身上的费用，几乎只限于维持工人生活和延续其后代所必需的生活资料。但是，商品的价格，从而劳动的价格，是同它的生产费用相等的。因此，劳动越使人感到厌恶，工资也就越少。不仅如此，机器越推广，分工越细致，劳动负担就越增加，这或者是通过工作时间的延长，或者是通过在一定时间内所要求的劳动的增加，机器运转的加速，等等。现代工业已经把家长式小作坊变成了工业资本家的大工厂。挤在工厂里的工人就像士兵一样被组织起来。他们是工业军的普通士兵，受着各级军士和军官的层层监视。他们不仅仅是资产阶级的、资产阶级国家的奴隶，他们每日每时都受机器、受监工、最重要是受各个经营工厂的资产者本人的奴役。这种专制制度越是公开地把营利宣布为自己的最终目的，它就越是可鄙、可恨和可恶。

The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual labour， in other words， the more modern industry becomes developed， the more is the labour of men superseded by that of women. Differences of age and sex have no longer any distinctive social validity for the working class. All are instruments of labour， more or less expensive to use， according to their age and sex. No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer， so far， at an end， that he receives his wages in cash， than he is set upon by the other portions of the bourgeoisie， the landlord， the shopkeeper， the pawnbroker， etc.

体力劳动所要求的技巧和气力越少，换句话说，现代工业越发达，男工也就越受到女工的排挤。对工人阶级来说，性别和年龄的差别再没有社会意义了。他们都只是劳动工具，不过因为年龄和性别的不同而需要或多或少的使用费用罢了。当产业主对工人的剥削刚告结束，工人领到了用现钱支付的工资的时候，马上就有资产阶级中的另一部分人——房东、小店主、当铺老板等等向他们袭来。

The lower strata of the middle class – the small tradespeople， shopkeepers， and retired tradesmen generally定前面三者， the handicraftsmen and peasants – all these sink gradually into the proletariat， partly because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on which Modern Industry is carried on， and is swamped in the competition with the large capitalists， partly because their specialised skill is rendered worthless by new methods of production. Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes of the population.

以前的中间等级的下层，一般是小工业者、小商人和退休商人的人，以及手工业者和农民——所有这些阶级都沦落到无产阶级中来了，有的是因为他们的小资本不足以经营大工业，经不起较大的资本家的竞争；有的是因为他们的手艺已经被新的生产方法弄得不值钱了。无产阶级就是这样从所有的市民阶级中得到补充的。

The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With its birth begins its struggle（begins） with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest is carried on by individual labourers， then by the workpeople of a factory， then by the operative of one trade， in one locality， against the individual bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their attacks not against the bourgeois conditions of production， but against the instruments of production themselves； they destroy imported wares that compete with their labour， they smash to pieces machinery， they set factories ablaze， they seek to restore by force the vanished status of the workman of the Middle Ages.

无产阶级经历了各个不同的发展阶段。它反对资产阶级的斗争是和它的存在同时开始的。最初是单个的劳动者，然后是某一工厂的工人，再接着是某一行业的从业者，同直接剥削他们的单个资产者作斗争。他们并非攻击资产阶级的生产关系，而是攻击生产工具本身；他们破坏那些带来竞争的外国商品，捣毁机器，烧毁工厂，寻求凭借暴力以恢复业已消失的中世纪工人的地位。

At this stage, the labourers still form an incoherent mass scattered over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. If （虽然）anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies, this（unit to form） is not yet the consequence of their own active union, but（the consequence）of the union of the bourgeoisie, which class（特殊表达，which做class的定语）, in order to attain its own political ends, is compelled to set the whole proletariat in motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies, but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeois. Thus, the whole historical movement is concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a victory for the bourgeoisie.

the labourers form mass and broken up

class is compelled to set ……in order to……and is able to do so

在这一阶段，劳工们仍然只是散布全国的支离破碎的平民大众，并因他们的相互竞争而破产。虽然他们在某些地方联合起来以形成更加紧密的团体，也仍然不是他们自己主动联合，而是资产阶级联合的结果。正是资产阶级为了实现它自身的政治目标而不得不将全体无产者整合进行动中。此外，资产阶级也一度有能力这样去做。因此在这一阶段，无产阶级并不是与他们的敌人斗争，而是与他们敌人的敌人——绝对君主的余孽，地主，非工业资产阶级，小资产阶级斗争。因而，整个历史运动都集中掌握在资产阶级手中，每一次这样获得的胜利，都是资产阶级的胜利。

But with the development of industry, the proletariat not only increases in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels that strength more. The various interests and conditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat are more and more equalised, in proportion as machinery obliterates all distinctions of labour, and nearly everywhere reduces wages to the same low level. The growing competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercial crises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating. The increasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing, makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and more the character of collisions between two classes. Thereupon, the workers begin to form combinations (Trades’ Unions) against the bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent associations in order to make provision beforehand for these occasional revolts. Here and there, the contest breaks out into riots. machinery obliterates and reduces competition and crises make the wages more fluctuating improvement makes livelihood more precarious collisions take character

但随着工业的发展，无产阶级不仅在数量上增多；而且更多在质量上增加，并且它也能更多地感受到自身力增长的力量。无产阶级内部的各种利益和生活条件随着机器消除了劳动的所有差别并几乎处处都把工资降低到同一个低水平而变得越来越平等。资本家之间日渐激烈的竞争，以及由此产生的经济危机，使得工人工资的波动愈加剧烈。机械化的进展，前所未有的急剧发展，使得人们的生活越来越不稳定；工人与资本家的个体间冲突愈加具有阶级间冲突的特征。于是，工人们开始组成反对资产阶级的联合会（工会）；他们联合起来以保持工资水平不再降低；他们建立起永久性的联合会，以便预先为偶尔的暴动做好准备。这种角逐时不时地爆发成为骚乱。

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the ever expanding union of the workers. This union is helped on by the improved means of communication that are created by modern industry, and that place the workers of different localities in contact with one another. It was just this contact（强调contact） that（指代contact） was needed to centralise the numerous local struggles, all of the same character, into one national struggle between classes. But every class struggle is a political struggle.

C. German or “True” Socialism

C. 德国的，或“真正的”社会主义

The Socialist and Communist literature of France, （同位语）a literature that originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and that was the expressions of the struggle against this power, was introduced into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that country, had just begun its contest with feudal absolutism.

The Socialist and Communist literature of France was introduced into Germany at a time when German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits (men of letters), eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when these writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social conditions had not immigrated along with them. In contact with German social conditions, this French literature lost all its immediate practical significance and assumed a purely literary aspect. Thus, to the German philosophers of the Eighteenth Century, the demands of the first French Revolution were nothing more than the demands of “Practical Reason” in general, and the utterance of the will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified, in their eyes, the laws of pure Will, of Will as it was bound to be, of true human Will generally.

法国的社会主义和共产主义文学，是在资产阶级当权的压力下产生的，是反对这一权力斗争的表现形式，是在该国资产阶级刚刚开始与封建专制主义斗争的时候传入德国的。德国哲学家、准哲学家和美文学家热切地抓住这一文学形式，却忘了，当这些作品从法国移植到德国时，法国的社会条件并没有随之被移植。在德国的社会条件下，法国的文学完全失去了直接的实践意义，而只具有纯粹文学的形式。因此，第一次法国革命的要求，在18世纪的德国哲学家看来，不过是一般“实践理性”的要求，而革命的法国资产阶级的意志的表现，在他们眼中就是纯粹的意志、本来的意志、真正人的意志的普遍规律。

The work of the German literati consisted solely in bringing the new French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical conscience, or rather, in annexing the French ideas without deserting their own philosophic point of view. This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign language is appropriated, namely, by translation.

德国文人的工作仅仅是把新的法国思想与他们古老的哲学良心融为一体，或者更确切地说，是在吸收法国思想的同时不抛弃自己的哲学观点。这种吸收的发生方式与掌握一门外语的方式是相同的，即通过翻译。

It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saints over the manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient heathendom had been written. The German literati reversed this process with the profane French literature. They wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath the French original. For instance, beneath the French criticism of the economic functions of money, they wrote “Alienation of Humanity”, and beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois state they wrote “Dethronement of the Category of the General”, and so forth.

ü 众所周知，僧侣们曾经怎样在古代异教经典的手抄本上面写下荒唐的天主教圣徒生活。德国文人用世俗的法国文学扭转了这一进程。他们在法国原著下面写下自己的哲学梦呓。例如，在法国对货币经济功能的批评之下，他们写了“人性的异化”；在法国对资产阶级国家的批评之下，他们写了“普遍范畴的扬弃”，等等。

ü The introduction（将这种引入称为哲学或社会主义的科学实际上存在一定问题） of these philosophical phrases at the back of the French historical criticisms, they dubbed “Philosophy of Action”, “True Socialism”, “German Science of Socialism”,  “Philosophical Foundation of Socialism”, and so on.

ü 这种法国历史批评背后对这类哲学性短语的引入，他们称之为“行动哲学”、“真正社会主义”、“德国社会主义科学”、“社会主义哲学基础”等等。

The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely emasculated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express the struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having overcome “French one-sidedness” and of representing, not true requirements, but the requirements of Truth; not the interests of the proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in general, who belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm of philosophical fantasy.

因此，法国的社会主义和共产主义文学被彻底削弱了。而且，既然它在德国人手中停止表现为一个阶级同另一个的斗争，他就体会到已经克服“法国人的片面性”的感受，他们意识到自己代表的不是真实的要求，而是真理的要求；代表的不是无产者的利益，而是人本质的利益，即一般人的利益。这种人不属任何阶级，不具实体，只存在于哲学幻想的云山雾罩当中。

This German socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously and solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such a mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic innocence.

这种曾郑重其事地看待自己那小学生作业并以那样一种江湖骗子的方式赞颂其贫瘠的惯用伎俩的德国社会主义，同时逐渐地失去了它那卖弄学问的幼稚。

The fight of the Germans, and especially of the Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, the liberal movement, became more earnest.

德国人，特别是普鲁士资产阶级对抗封建贵族制和绝对君主制的斗争，也就是说，自由运动，变得更加激烈了。

ü By this, the long-wished for opportunity was offered to “True” Socialism of confronting the political movement with the Socialist demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas against liberalism, against representative government, against bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and of preaching to the masses that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by this bourgeois movement. German Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposed the existence of modern bourgeois society, 

ü with its corresponding economic conditions of existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the very things those attainment was the object of the pending struggle in Germany.

本句为被动语态的分割结构，of作定语置于谓语动词之后，修饰的是前面的名词opportunity而非直接相邻的Socialism. 另外，从上下文的语义关系判断，by this 也即“通过上文提到的那种方式”，“真正的”社会主义得到了一个机会，如果句子中断在此，of用来修饰后面的“Socialism”表意为“一种……的社会主义得到了一个机会”；而这是一个怎样的机会，得到机会去做什么却中断了，文意就此残缺，而这种“社会主义”的特征却被过分定义。因此，为构成上下文完整逻辑，of的定语结构应对opportunity做出进一步阐释，而非修饰Socialism.

于是，“真正的”社会主义就得到了一个梦寐以求的机会，去把政治运动与社会主义的要求对立起来，用传统的天主教革出教门的方式去对抗自由主义、代议制政府、资产阶级竞争、资产阶级的新闻自由和立法，以及资产阶级的自由和平等；并向大众宣称，在这场资产阶级运动中，他们不光一无所获，而且还会失去一切。德国社会主义在关键时刻忘记了，法国的批判（它也正是这一批判的愚蠢回应）是以现代资产阶级社会及与它相对应的经济条件，还有与之相适应的政治制度的存在为先决条件的，而这些成就本身也正是在德国即将发生的斗争的产物。

To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, professors, country squires, and officials, it served as a welcome scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie.

ü It（“True” Socialism） was a sweet finish（装饰，抛光）, after the bitter pills of flogging and bullets, with which these same governments, just at that time, dosed the German working-class risings.

对于绝对政府，连同他们的牧师、教授、乡绅和官员来说，它是一个受他们欢迎的，对抗资产阶级威胁的稻草人。

ü 这种真正的社会主义是那时，政府用鞭笞和子弹镇压德国工人阶级起义的苦药外的一层甜蜜的糖衣。

While this “True” Socialism thus served the government as a weapon for fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, directly represented a reactionary interest, the interest of German Philistines. In Germany, the petty-bourgeois class, a relic of the sixteenth century, and since then constantly cropping up again under the various forms, is the real social basis of the existing state of things.

虽然这种“真正的”社会主义为政府提供了对抗德国资产阶级的武器，但它同时也直接代表了一种反动的利益，即德国小市民的利益。在德国，16世纪遗留下来的，并且从那时起持续以不同形式重新出现的小资产阶级，是事物存在状态的真正社会基础。

To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in Germany. The industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisie threatens it with certain destruction – on the one hand, from the concentration of capital; on the other, from the rise of a revolutionary proletariat. “True” Socialism appeared to kill these two birds with one stone. It spread like an epidemic.

保护这个阶级就是保护德国现存的事物状态。资产阶级的工业和政治霸权，一方面由于资本的集中，另一方面由于革命无产阶级的兴起，以一定的破坏性威胁着它。“真正的”社会主义看起来是一石二鸟的。它就像流行病一样传播。

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe in which the German Socialists wrapped their sorry “eternal truths”, all skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of their goods amongst such a public.

这件由思辨的蛛丝制成、渲染以华丽的花边词藻、浸透了病态情感的露水的礼服，就是德国社会主义者用以包装他们那低等的“永恒真理”的超验礼服，它的所有皮肉和骨骼都服务于他们的商品在这样一个公共环境中销量的极大增长。

And on its part German Socialism recognised, more and more, its own calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bourgeois Philistine.

进而，就其自身而言，德国社会主义越来越认识到自己的使命就是作为小资产阶级市民的夸夸其谈的代言人。

It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the German petty Philistine to be the typical man. To every villainous meanness of this model man, it gave a hidden, higher, Socialistic interpretation, the exact contrary of its real character. It went to the extreme length of directly opposing the “brutally destructive” tendency of Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of all class struggles. With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist and Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in Germany belong to the domain of this foul and enervating literature. 

它宣称德意志民族是模范民族，德国小市民是模范的人。它给这个模范的人的每一种可憎的恶行都赋予隐秘的、高尚的、社会主义的理解，使之变得与其真实特性相反。它直截了当地反对共产主义的“残暴的破坏性”倾向，并宣布它对所有阶级斗争的至高且公正的蔑视。除了极少数例外，现在（1847年）在德国流行的所有所谓的社会主义和共产主义出版物，都属于这一肮脏而令人萎靡的文学领域。

2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism

2. 保守的或资产阶级的社会主义

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois society.

资产阶级的一部分人，为了保证资产阶级社会的持续存在，而渴望纠正社会中的种种不平。

To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every imaginable kind. This form of socialism has, moreover, been worked out into complete systems.

这一部分人包括：经济学家、博爱主义者、人道主义者、工人阶级状况改善派、慈善事业组织者、动物保护协会会员、戒酒协会发起人以及各类可想到的边边角角的小改良家。而且，这种社会主义形式已经形成了完整的体系。

We may cite Proudhon’s Philosophie de la Misère as an example of this form.

我们可以引用蒲鲁东的《贫困的哲学》作为这种形式的一个例子。

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social conditions without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting therefrom. They desire the existing state of society, minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to be the best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable conception into various more or less complete systems. In requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby to march straightway into the social New Jerusalem, it but requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain within the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

社会主义的资产者想要现代社会条件下的一切优势，而不想要由此必然产生的斗争和险境。他们渴望社会的现存状态，而不想要社会的革命和解体因素。他们想要资产阶级，但不要无产阶级。资产阶级自然设想它所统治的世界是最好的，资产阶级的社会主义把这种使人愉悦的概念发展成为各种或多或少是完整的体系。这要求无产阶级实施那样一种制度，并由此直接进入新耶路撒冷社会，但实际上不过是要求无产阶级停留在现有社会的范围内，但要抛弃它们关于资产阶级的一切可憎的观念。

A second, and more practical, but less systematic, form of this Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working class by showing that no mere political reform, but only a change in the material conditions of existence, in economical relations, could be of any advantage to them. By changes in the material conditions of existence, this form of Socialism, however, by no means understands abolition of the bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that can be affected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the continued existence of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect affect the relations between capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and simplify the administrative work, of bourgeois government.

第二种更实际、更不系统的社会主义形式，试图贬低工人阶级眼中的每一次革命运动，因为它表明，不是政治改革，而且只有经济关系中的物质条件的变化，对工人阶级来说，才是有好处的。然而，这种形式的社会主义，由于物质条件的变化，绝无法理解资产阶级生产关系的废除是只有革命才能影响的废除，而只能理解基于这些关系的继续存在而进行的行政改革；因此，那种改革完全不能影响资本和雇佣劳动的关系，最多只能降低资产阶级政府的运作成本并简化它的行政事务。

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression when, and only when, it becomes a mere figure of speech.

当且只有当资产阶级的社会主义成为一种纯粹的言论形式时，才能得到充分的表达。

Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties: for the benefit of the working class. Prison Reform: for the benefit of the working class. This is the last word and the only seriously meant word of bourgeois socialism. It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois – for the benefit of the working class.

自由贸易：为了工人阶级的利益。关税保护：为了工人阶级的利益。监狱改革：为了工人阶级的利益。这是资产阶级社会主义的最后一句话，也是唯一一句严肃意义上的话。

用一句话来总结：资产阶级之所以是资产阶级——就是为了工人阶级的利益。

3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism

3. 批判-空想的社会主义和共产主义

We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great modern revolution, has always given voice to the demands of the proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others.

我们这里所指的文学作品，不是在每一次伟大的现代革命中总是为无产阶级的要求发声的那些，例如巴贝夫和其他一些人的著作。

The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends, made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society was being overthrown, necessarily failed, owing to the then undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the absence of the economic conditions for its emancipation, conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be produced by the impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary literature that accompanied these first movements of the proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character. It inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its crudest form.

无产阶级在普遍激动的时代、在推翻封建社会的时期直接实现自己目的的最初尝试，都不可避免地失败了。这是由于当时无产阶级本身还不够发展，同时无产阶级解放的经济条件还没有具备，这些条件是由且只能由即将到来的资产阶级时代去生成。随着这些早期的无产阶级运动而出现的革命文献必然有其反动的特征。它以最粗陋的形式极力主张普遍的禁欲主义和社会平等。

The Socialist and Communist systems, properly so called, those of Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen, and others, spring into existence in the early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section I. Bourgeois and Proletarians).

所谓的社会主义和共产主义制度，即圣西蒙、傅立叶、欧文等人的社会主义和共产主义制度，如上所述，是在无产阶级和资产阶级斗争的早期不发达时期出现的（见第一部分，资产阶级和无产阶级）。

The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as well as the action of the decomposing elements in the prevailing form of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any independent political movement.

这些制度的创立者的确看到了阶级对立，以及社会主流形式中瓦解元素的作用。但无产阶级在其幼年时期，给他们提供了一个没有任何历史主动性和独立政治运动的阶级形象。

Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with the development of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat. They therefore search after a new social science, after new social laws, that are to create these conditions.

由于阶级对立的发展与工业的发展是同步的，经济形势在他们看来还没能为无产阶级的解放提供物质条件。因此，他们就去寻找某种能够创造这些条件的社会科学和社会法则。

Historical action is to yield to（让步于；屈服于；使自己受到…的支配; 陷入; 接替；替换） their personal inventive action; historically created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones; and the gradual, spontaneous class organization of the proletariat to an organization of society especially contrived by these inventors. Future history resolves itself, in their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out of their social plans.

历史性的活动将（不定式做谓语，表示将来时）由他们个人的创造活动来代替，解放的历史条件将由幻想的条件来代替；无产阶级逐渐形成的自发阶级组织将由这些创造者特别创造的社会组织来代替。在他们看来，未来的历史决定于宣传和实际执行他们的社会计划。

In the formation of their plans, they are conscious of caring chiefly for the interests of the working class, as being the most suffering class. Only from the point of view of being the most suffering class does the proletariat exist for them.

他们在制定计划时，主要关心工人阶级的利益，因为其是最受苦难的阶级。无产阶级之存在在他们看来只是作为一个受苦难最深重的阶级。对他们来说

The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve the condition of every member of society, even that of the most favoured. Hence, they habitually appeal to society at large, without the distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people, when once they understand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the best possible state of society?

阶级斗争的欠发达状态及其所处的环境，使这种社会主义者认为自己是远远出离于所有阶级对立之上的。他们想改善每个社会成员的状况，甚至那些最称心如意的成员的状况。因此，他们一贯不分阶级地向全社会进行呼吁，不但如此，更偏爱向统治阶级呼吁。因为当人们一旦理解了他们的体制，又怎么会认识不到这是社会最好的可能状态的最好的可能计划呢？

Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, necessarily doomed to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.

因此，他们拒绝一切政治行动，特别是一切革命行动；他们想通过注定必然失败的和平方式达到自己的目的，并且通过示范的力量来为新的社会福音铺平道路。

Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when the proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has but a fantastic conception of its own position, correspond with the first instinctive yearnings of that class for a general reconstruction of society.

这种对未来社会的幻想描绘，是无产阶级在仍处于一段极不发达时期，并且对自身位置只有一种幻想概念之时做出的；是与无产阶级对重塑整个社会的最初的、本能的渴望相一致的。

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a critical element. They attack every principle of existing society. Hence, they are full of the most valuable materials for the enlightenment of the working class. The practical measures proposed in them – such as the abolition of the distinction between town and country, of the family, of the carrying on of industries for the account of private individuals, and of the wage system, the proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of the function of the state into a more superintendence of production – all these proposals point solely to the disappearance of class antagonisms which were, at that time, only just cropping up, and which, in these publications, are recognized in their earliest indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals, therefore, are of a purely Utopian character.

但是，这些社会主义和共产主义的出版物也包含着批判的成分。它们攻击现有社会的每一项原则。因此，它们中满是使工人阶级得到启蒙的最有价值的材料。其中提到的实际措施，如取消城乡差别、家庭、为个人盈利进行工业生产、工资制度、宣布社会和谐，以及将国家职能转变成更具生产监督权的——所有这些建议都只指向阶级对立的消除，而阶级对立在当时只是刚刚出现，并且在这些出版物中，它们只是以其最早的那种模糊而不明确的形式被认识。因此，这些建议具有一种纯粹的空想性质。

The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism bears an inverse relation to historical development. In proportion as the modern class struggle develops and takes definite shape, this fantastic standing apart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical value and all theoretical justification. Therefore, although the originators of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary, their disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects. They hold fast（彻底地） by the original views of their masters, in opposition to the progressive historical development of the proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently, to deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms. They still dream of experimental realization of their social Utopias, of founding isolated “phalansteres”, of establishing “Home Colonies”, or setting up a “Little Icaria” – duodecimo editions of the New Jerusalem – and to realise all these castles in the air, they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By degrees, they sink into the category of the reactionary [or] conservative Socialists depicted above, differing from these only by more systematic pedantry, and by their fanatical and superstitious belief in the miraculous effects of their social science.

批判的—空想的社会主义和共产主义的意义具有一种和历史进程相背反的关系。随着现代阶级斗争的发展和形式的明确，这种立于阶级斗争之外的幻想，这种反对阶级斗争的幻想，也就随之失去了一切实践意义和理论正当性。因此，虽然这些制度的创始者在许多方面都是革命的，但他们的信徒在每一种情况下都只变成了反动派。他们彻底地坚持自己主子的原始观点，反对无产阶级进步的历史发展。因此，他们一贯竭力去平息阶级斗争，以调和阶级间的对立。他们仍然梦想以试验的办法来实现自己的社会空想，创办孤立的法伦斯泰尔，建立国内聚居区，创立小伊加利亚——袖珍版的新耶路撒冷——而为了实现所有这些空中楼阁，他们被迫诉诸资产阶级的同情和资助。在某种程度上，他们堕落到了上述反动的（或）保守的社会主义者的范畴，与之不同的只是，他们更加系统地卖弄学问，狂热而迷信地信仰他们那社会科学的不可思议的功效。

They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of the working class; such action, according to them, can only result from blind unbelief in the new Gospel.

因此，他们强烈反对工人阶级的一切政治行动；根据他们的说法，这种行动只能是盲目不信新福音的结果。

The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively, oppose the Chartists and the Réformistes.

英国的欧文主义者和法国的傅里叶主义者分别反对宪章主义者和改良主义者。

IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition Parties

IV. 共产党人对现存各反对党的态度

Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists in England and the Agrarian Reformers in America.

第二部分明确了共产党人与现存的工人阶级诸政党的关系，譬如英国的宪章主义者和美国的土地改革者。

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the movement of the present, they also represent and take care of the future of that movement. In France, the Communists ally with the Social-Democrats against the conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to take up a critical position in regard to phrases and illusions traditionally handed down from the great Revolution.

共产党人为实现当前的目标而斗争，为实现工人阶级的暂时利益而斗争；但在当前的运动中，他们也代表和关心这一运动的未来。在法国，共产党人同社会民主党联合起来反对保守的和激进的资产阶级，但是仍保留了对那些从大革命的传统中承袭下来的陈词滥调和幻想采取批判态度的权利。

In Switzerland, they support the Radicals, without losing sight of the fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical bourgeois.

在瑞士，他们支持激进派，但并未忽略这个政党是由相对立的成分组成的这一事实，其中一部分是法国式的民主社会主义者，另一部分是激进的资产者。

In Poland, they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolution as the prime condition for national emancipation, that party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.

在波兰，他们支持坚持把土地革命作为国家解放的首要条件的政党，即在1846年煽动克拉科夫暴动的那个党。

In Germany, they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

在德国，每当资产阶级以革命的方式行动时，他们都与资产阶级一同进行斗争，反对绝对君主制、封建地主阶级和小资产阶级。

But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against the bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin.

use …… as ……

但是，共产党一刻也不停息地向工人阶级灌输资产阶级和无产阶级敌对对立的可能的最清晰的认识，以便德国工人能够立刻利用资产阶级统治所必然带来的社会的和政治的条件作为反对资产阶级的武器，以便在推翻德国的反动阶级之后立即开始反对资产阶级本身的斗争。

ü The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions of European civilization and with a much more developed proletariat than that of England was in the seventeenth, and France in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution.

共产党人把他们的注意力主要集中在德国，因为德国正处在资产阶级革命的前夜，因为同17世纪的英国和18世纪的法国相比，德国将在整个欧洲文明更进步的条件下，拥有发展得多的无产阶级去实现这个变革，也因为德国的资产阶级革命只是无产阶级革命的直接序章。

In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary movement against the existing social and political order of things. In all these movements, they bring to the front, as the leading question in each, the property question, no matter what its degree of development at the time. Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of the democratic parties of all countries.

简言之，共产党人处处支持一切反对现存社会和政治秩序的革命运动。在所有这些运动中，他们把财产所有制问题作为各方面的首要问题带到台前，不管当时的发展程度如何。最后，他们到处为所有国家的民主党派的联合和协议而努力。

The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.

共产党人不屑于隐瞒自己的观点和目标。他们公开宣称，只有通过用暴力推翻一切现存的社会条件，才能达到他们的目的。让统治阶级为共产主义革命而战栗吧。无产阶级除了他们的锁链没有什么可失去的。他们赢得的是这个世界。

Working Men of All Countries, Unite! 全世界的工人们，联合起来！

[T]附补充：

社会主义从空想到科学的发展

科学社会主义是与空想社会主义相对而言的、关于社会主义的科学的理论体系、理论模型与实践模式。科学社会主义是人类一切文明成果的结晶。科学社会主义是关于社会主义的本质、性质、特征和发展规律的科学理论，是由科学的哲学、经济学、社会管理学、行为科学等科学理论组成的完整严密的理论体系，是人类关于社会发展理论的最新成果。科学社会主义与其他社会科学的区别在于它的综合性，与社会科学之王经济学的区别在于它的操作性与制度设计，与经济学中的制度经济学的区别在于对政府行为的制度设计。

科学社会主义不是否定空想社会主义的价值理念，它批评的是空想社会主义纯粹主观的美好想象，不根据现实基础空谈理想价值。对恩格斯来说，重要的不是嘲笑空想社会主义的空想性，而是看到其“突破幻想的外壳而显露出来的天才的思想萌芽和天才的思想”。空想社会主义对资产阶级社会的批判以及对未来社会的大胆预测，为科学社会主义的基本理念提供了重要启发，不能简单地将其界定为胡思乱想的空谈完全抛弃。

空想社会主义要想真正改变世界，必须从空想走向科学，必须转化成科学的社会主义理论，对人类社会历史的发展规律作出科学的解释。社会主义从空想走向科学的转变，依靠的是唯物辩证法、唯物史观、剩余价值学说的创立。社会主义不是人们主观想象出来的理想社会，而是人类社会发展的必然阶段，它不可能是对原来社会形态的全盘否定，而是有所扬有所弃的发展形态。

这种历史观是唯物的，就体现在它把生产方式、交换方式、分配方式看作为社会制度的基础，看作社会变迁和政治变革的根本推动力，认为要把握人类社会的发展，应该从这个基础中去分析，而不是依靠一种所谓的永恒真理与普遍正义的认识。

科学社会主义理论要求客观分析资本主义生产方式的内在机理。社会主义是作为资本主义反题出现的，是诊治资本主义无法解决的病症而取而代之的阶段，但是如果仅仅停留在批判资本主义生产方式及其后果的层面，无法揭示这种生产方式的秘密，根本不能明白无误地揭示出资本主义剥削的秘密，就很难变成科学的理论，也就很难动员起新兴的无产阶级力量来改变资本主义社会。

科学社会主义之所以是科学的理论，就在于它摆脱了对美好社会的主观想象，不再致力于设想理想的社会体系，它立足于客观的历史经济过程来考察无产阶级和资产阶级的经济状况，并力图从这种经济状况中找到解决阶级斗争的方式和手段。

恩格斯精辟简洁地指出了资本主义生产方式最基本的矛盾——社会的生产和资本主义私人占有之间的矛盾。一方面表现为无产阶级和资产阶级的对立。另一方面表现为个别工厂中生产的组织性和整个社会中生产的无政府状态之间的对立。社会主义找到了这些线索，来解决资本主义无法解决的矛盾和冲突，那就是让生产力的属性不再归属资本，而是归属社会，社会掌控资本，使资本的生产力服务于社会，服务于社会中的人，从而最终解决矛盾。

1. 科学社会主义：社会主义之所以能实现从空想社会主义到科学社会主义的发展，就在于以科学的哲学、经济学理论为基础。从矛盾辩证法到对称辩证法是哲学科学化的必然结果，从物质经济学、知识经济学到对称经济学是经济学科学化的必然产物。

2. 空想社会主义：空想社会主义是现代社会主义思想的来源之一，准确的译法为乌托邦社会主义，流行于19世纪初期的西欧，著名代表人物为：莫尔、康帕内拉、欧文、圣西门和傅立叶，主张建立一个没有阶级压迫和剥削以及没有资本主义弊端的理想社会。它是科学社会主义以前的共产主义学说。常与“空想共产主义”通用。广义的空想社会主义包括空想共产主义。但在某些场合，马克思和恩格斯也曾将二者加以区别，其原则是：把主张实行公有制的早期社会主义学说称为空想共产主义；如康帕内拉、摩莱里、马布利、巴贝夫、欧文、卡贝、魏特林等人的学说。把主张仍然保留私有制的早期社会主义者的学说称为空想社会主义。如圣西门、傅立叶等人的学说。 

3. 科学社会主义同空想社会主义的区别与联系：

Ø 科学社会主义和空想社会主义的联系主要有：

第一、都对资本主义进行了深刻的批判。

资本主义的发展史是一部罪恶的历史，正如马克思所言，资本班主义的发展从头到脚都是用鲜血和血泪发展起来的，它是建立在对人民残酷的剥削和压迫基础之上建立起来的。英国的圈地运动，使英国的资本主义获得了前所未有的发展，

但是广大的英国人民却被迫失去了土地，成为无产者，他们没有生活来源，被迫进入资本家的工厂做工，成了英国资本发展史上廉价的劳动力，它们付出了大量的劳动却得到了连基本生活都不能维持的工资。

他们对拉丁美洲人民的屠杀和剥削使当地土著居民几乎灭绝，他们对拉丁美洲黄金和白银的掠夺，所以的这一切为资本主义的发展积累了大量的原始资本，但是对世界人民来讲却是一场空前的灾难。所以空想社会主义和初学社会主义都对资本主义这个不合理的社会进行了无情的批判，表达了对资本主义社会现状强烈的不满。

第二、都对人类未来社会有优秀的构想。

科学社会主义和空想社会主义都对不合理的社会现实提出了不满，希望能通过某种方式改变不合理的社会现实，各自提出了一些富于创造性的设想，在这一点上，两者是相同的。

空想社会主义希望能通过和平的在资本主义内部进入某些方面的尝试建立一种理想的没有剥削也没有压迫的理想社会；而空想社会主义则希望通过具体的社会革命，以实际行动，去推翻不合理的资本主义社会现实。

第三、在社会历史观上有共同的思想。

空想社会主义和科学社会主义在具体奋斗目标上，都以实现共产主义社会为共同的理想，并为此进行着不断的努力的实践着。

在此目标的指导下各自进行了一系列的社会实践，都取得了一定的历史成果，为人类历史的进步都做出过不同程度的贡献，都是人类发展史上的优秀的文体成果，在一定程度上代表了世界的发展趋势。当然空想社会主义不是科学社会主义，科学社会主义是在对空想社会主义批判和继承的基础之上的，它吸取了空想社会主义中的合理成分。

Ø 二者之间存在着本质的上的区别：

第一、对待无产阶级的历史作用和态度不同。

空想社会主义看不到人民群众特别是广大无产阶级群众的力量，因而始终没能找到改造现代社会的物质力量。所以只能在资本主义内部的体系中寻求实现共产主义的理想，不敢对资本主义社会进行彻底的否定，更不敢去发动广大的无产阶级去推翻资本主义的暴力统治，还对资本主义抱有一定的幻想。

而科学社会主义是在吸收人类一切优秀文化成果基础上创立的科学体系，它充分肯定了无产阶级的主力军地位，认为他们是实现社会变革的中坚力量，这也就在一定程度上人民群众历史创造作用，是变革社会的决定力量。

第二、在实现理想社会的历史道路上存在着区别。

空想社会主义者比如英国的欧文的建立了所谓的共产主义社区，希望通过某种和平的渐进式的资本主义内部了变革，进入到共产主义社会，空想社会主义“不成熟的理论，是同不成熟的资本主义生产状况、不成熟的阶级状况相适应的”，缺少科学理论的指导。

而科学社会主义意识到资本主义为了维护自己在经济和政治上的利益不是轻易的放弃自己的既得利益，所以无产阶级只有通过暴力革命推翻资本主义的统治，打破旧的不合理的社会秩序才能实现无产阶级的革命理想，建立起无产阶级专政的社会主义国家，最终实现共产主义社会。

第三、建立的理论基础不同。

空想社会主义是科学社会主义的重要思想来源。对未来社会的设想，包含着趋向历史唯物主义的合理因素和许多精辟的思想及论证，但其在历史观上总的来讲就是唯心的否认历史发展的必然性、崇拜幸运的偶然性，宣扬天才论和英雄史观。

另外在空想社会主义有许多消极的成分：如保留奴隶与奴隶劳动、殖民地、宗教神秘主义因素、劳动偏见、政治极端主义和最高领导人职务终身制等。而科学社会主义建立在彻底的唯物主义基础之上，有了科学的理论作为指导，能够适应社会发展和人类历史发展的规律。

洛克对私人产权的论述

“自然理性”与财产权的起源。洛克政治学理论的逻辑起点是“自然理性”概念，他从人的“自然理性”出发推导财产权之起源。在《政府论·下篇》第五章“论财产”的开头，洛克首先指出，人的自然理性赋予人以“生存权利”，这种权利使每个人对自己的人身具有所有权；其次，自然状态里的人，一开始面对大自然时，对任何外在物品并不具备私人所有权，万物平等地属于全体人类，而非某一个体。基于此，人如何在大自然中获得维持自身生存所必需的物品，以行使理性的自然法所赋予人的生存权利呢？洛克引入了“劳动”概念。他指出，自然状态下的人既然对自己的人身享有所有权，那么他们对基于自己人身的劳动和所得物，也就同样享有合法的所有权，私有财产权由此产生。②这是洛克对财产权之起源的“正面论述”。洛克又从“反面”论证了人为何可以将添加进了自身劳动的自然物视为自己的私有财产这一问题。如果人对自己的劳动所得物不具备所有权，那么，人自然就没有权利去享用或消费这些所得物。显然，这一结果与自然法赋予人的“生存权利”是相悖的。所以，为了行使和维护人的生存权，自然法必然使人对自己的劳动所得物拥有财产权。但是，这种财产权是不是一种毫无限制或约束的权利呢？如果问题的答案是否定的，那么人通过劳动所获得的财产之界限是什么？洛克接下来仍从“自然理性”的理论前提出发，对财产权提出了两条限制。

“自然法”对财产权的两大限制要件。自然法使人通过劳动而对劳动对象和劳动产品具有所有权。同时自然法对这种财产权的成立提出两大限制要件，它们分别是，“要件A”：个体通过劳动而加工或改造自然物时，必须保证自己留给了其他人足够多的同类自然物；③“要件B”：个体经劳动所得之产品，必须得到个体的充分和有效利用，对那些因不能充分使用而最终会导致腐败或浪费的那部分产品，个体并不具有财产权。④洛克以饮水为例，对“要件A”做了生动阐释。一个人有权利趴在河边“牛饮地喝”很多水，而不会“损害”到其他任何人，原因是他除了自己喝进肚子的水之外，尚留了一整条河流给他人“解渴”。⑤这个限制条件是至关重要的。而针对“要件B”，洛克则花了较多的篇幅去分析和论述。“上帝创造的东西不是供人们糟蹋或败坏的。”⑥所以，该要件中的一个关键因素是“个人的利用限度”。在随后的分析中，洛克提到了两种“利用”方式。

劳动者对劳动产品的两种“利用方式”。这两种利用方式分别是，“利用方式Ａ”：个体为满足自身生存之必需而自己消费掉；“利用方式Ｂ”：个体自愿赠与他人或与他人的产品相交换。这两种利用方式的应用由此推导出了以金银为代表的货币产生的逻辑，他认为，以货币为中介的交换行为的产生，极大提高了人们扩大生产、创造财富的热情，从而加速促进了人们的商业贸易往来和经济的迅猛发展。相反，以金银为代表的可以持久保存的货币在人与人之间的交往行为中出现之前，过多地创造易于腐烂的消费品的行为既无意义，也不明智。如果没有“产品的交换”，如果洛克的财产权理论仅仅允许人对财产的第一种“利用”方式，那么，人类就只能停留在“自给自足”的原始生产模式中。这显然不是洛克的理想社会形态，更不符合洛克要为当时的资本主义生产方式的合法性做辩护的理论初衷。显然，洛克希望通过引入“利用方式Ｂ”以及建立在该利用方式基础上的“货币”理论，来阐释人类扩大生产和积累财富的历史与原因。